
VOL .
I .


HON SOIT Q [ ... ] MAL Y PENSE


DIEU ET MON DROIT


London : Printed for J. Newberry in St Paul 's Church-Yard , and J. Coote in Pater Noster Row .


 THE LADY 's MUSEUM .


AS I do not set out with great promises to the public of the wit , humour , and morality , which this pamphlet is to contain , so I expect no reproaches to fall on me , if I should happen to fail in any , or all of these articles .


My readers may depend upon it , I will always be as witty as I can , as humorous as I can , as moral as I can , and upon the whole as entertaining as I can .
However , as I have but too much reason to distrust my own powers of pleasing , I shall usher in my pamphlet with the performance of a lady , who possibly would never have suffered it to appear in print , if this opportunity had not offered .


If her sprightly paper meets with encouragement enough to dispel the diffidence natural to a young writer , she will be prevailed upon , I hope , to continue it in this Museum  I shall therefore , without any farther preface , present it to my readers .


1 .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER I. ]


 CAST your eyes upon paper , madam  there you may lock innocently , said a polite old gentleman of my acquaintance to me , one day , in the words of a wit to a fine lady .
A compliment is no unpleasing way of conveying advice to a young woman , and when that advice may be so construed , as to become perfectly agreeable to her own inclinations , it is certain to be well received , and quickly complied with .
It is indeed very clear to me , that my friend in this borrowed admonition recommended reading to eyes which he probably thought were too intent upon pleasing  but I , with a small deviation from the sense , applied it , to what is I freely own my predominant passion  and therefore resolved to write , still pursuing the same darling end , though by different means .


So frankly to acknowledge the desire of pleasing to be my predominant passion , is in other words , to confess myself , one of that ridiculous species of beings , called a coquet .
- This will be said by some , and thought by others , for all do not say what they think on such occasions .


Yet to that laudable principle , in women mistaken for coquetry , we owe the thunder of eloquence in the senate , as well as the glitter of dress in the  drawing-room .
An animated speech , and a well-chosen silk , are equally the effects of a desire to please , both in the patriot and the beauty : and if the one is ever observed to be silent , and the other without ornaments , it is because he is persuaded , that silence is most expressive  and she , that negligence is most becoming .


But for this active principle , the statesman would be no politician , and the general no warrior .
The desire of fame , or the desire of pleasing , which , in my opinion , are synonimous terms , produces application in one and courage in the other .
It is the poet 's inspiration , the patriot 's zeal , the courtier 's loyalty , and the orator 's eloquence .
All are coquets , if that be coquetry , and those grave personages and the fine lady are alike liable to be charged with it .


But it will be objected , that the distinguishing characteristic of a coquet is to use her powers of pleasing to the ungenerous purpose of giving pain  the same may be said of each of the others .
All human excellence , as well as human happiness , is comparative .
We are admired but in proportion as we excel others , and whoever excels is sure to give pain , to his inferiors in merit , either from envy or emulation  passions which produce sensations nearly alike , although their consequences are very different .


I hope I have now fully proved , that I , tho ' a woman , young , single , gay , and ambitious of pleasing , deserve not the odious appellation of coquet  I say , I hope , I have proved it , for I am  but eighteen , and not used to be contradicted in an argument .


`` If seldom your opinions err  `` Your eyes are always in the right , '' says the gallant Prior .
Hence it follows that we always triumph in a dispute , though I can not help allowing , that we often triumph without victory .
Universally as I could wish to please in this paper , yet I shall be contented , if it finds only a favourable acceptance with my own sex , to whose amusement it is chiefly designed to contribute .


To introduce it to them under the denomination of a trifle may be thought an affront to their understandings .
But in the choice of my title , I remembered the fable of the mountain that brought forth a mouse .
That I have promised little is my security from censure  if I give more it will be my best claim to praise .
I should indeed have thought some apology necessary for an undertaking of this kind , had I not been persuaded , it was a mighty easy one , from its being so frequently attempted , and by persons too of my own sex .


The subjects I propose to treat of will be such as reading and observation shall furnish me with  for , with a strong passion for intellectual pleasures , I have likewise a taste for many of the fashionable amusements , and in the disposition of my time , I have contrived to gratify both these inclinations  one I thought too laudable to be restrained , the other I found too pleasing to be wholly subdued .


 I am already aware that I have talked too much of myself : it is indeed a subject one can not easily quit , and perhaps I am not sorry , that in introductory papers of this sort , the writers have generally given some account of themselves .
Every one knows that long custom has the force of a law  and , in obedience to this , I shall fill up my first paper with a short history of myself .


I am the daughter of a gentleman remarkable only in this , that during the course of a pretty long life , he never lost a friend , or made an enemy .
From which singular circumstance I leave the reader to collect his character .
My mother was generally allowed to be a well bred-woman , and an excellent economist .
In her youth she was extremely indulged by her parents , who , on account of a slight disorder in her eyes , would not suffer her to use her needle , or look into a book , except on Sundays or holidays , when she was permitted to read two or three verses of a chapter in the Bible .


My mother therefore grew up , not only without any taste , but with a high contempt for reading  and those of her female acquaintance who had made any proficiency that way were sure to be distinguished by her , with the opprobrious term of being book-learned , which my mother always pronounced with a look and accent of ineffable scorn .


My sister , who is a year younger than myself , so entirely engrossed her affection , that I was wholly neglected by her .
My fondness for reading , which I discovered very early , encreased her dislike of me .
As she seldom chose to have me in her sight ,  I had opportunities sufficient to indulge myself in this favourite amusement , for I had taken possession of all the books my brother left behind him , when he went to the university  but having great sensibility of soul , I was so affected with my mother 's partial fondness for my sister , and neglect of me , that young as I then was , I often past whole nights in tears , lamenting my misfortune .


But this sensibility entirely ruined me with my mother  for , being one day excessively shocked at some new instance of her partiality , I went up sobbing to the nursery , and had recourse to a book for my relief .
It happened to be Aesop 's Fables : I opened it at the following one , which striking my imagination , then full of the preference given by my mother to my sister , I followed a sudden impulse , and sent it to my mother , desiring she would be pleased to read it  for I did not doubt but she would make a proper application of it .


` An ape had twins : she doated upon one of them , and did not much care for the other .
She took a sudden fright one day , and in a hurry whips up her darling under her arm , and took no heed of the other , which therefore leaped astride upon her shoulders .
In this haste down she comes , and beats out her favourite 's brains upon a stone , while that which she had on her back came off safe and sound . '
My mother , surprised at the novelty of the request , read the fable , and immediately afterwards came up to the nursery in great wrath , and corrected me severely , for calling her an ape , prophetically declaring that a girl who at nine years old  could be so wicked , as to compare her mother to an ape , would never come to good .


Every one who came to the house was told the horrid crime I had been guilty of , the servants held me in the utmost detestation for comparing my mother to an ape , never mentioning it , without lifted up hands and eyes , in abhorrence of such early undutifulness .


My father , who had loved me with great tenderness , was dead when this incident happened  and the most effectual way of paying court to my mamma being to caress my sister , and take no notice of me , I met with very few friends , either at home or abroad .


In this state of humiliation and disgrace my brother found me , at his return from the university .
When my sister and I were presented to him , my mother did not fail to relate the crime for which I had suffered so much , shewing him the book , which she had kept carefully ever after , with the leaf doubled down , at the fatal fable , declaring she thought herself very unhappy in having given birth to a child who was likely to prove so great an affliction to her  ` for may not every thing that is bad , said she , be expected from a girl who at her years could compare her mother to an ape ? '


My brother read the fable , and my mother leaving the room to give some necessary orders , he ran eagerly to me , snatched me up in his arms , and gave me a hundred kisses .
My little heart was so sensibly affected with a tenderness to which I had not been accustomed , that I burst into tears .


 My mother at her return found me sobbing , with the violence of my emotions , and did not doubt but my brother had been chiding me .
He told her gravely , that since I was so fond of reading , he would regulate my studies himself , and take care I should read no books which might teach me to be undutiful .


To this dear brother I owe the advantage of a right education , which I had like to have missed .
After my mother 's death he took me entirely under his own care .
My sister chose to reside with an aunt , whose heir she expects to be  and while she is a slave to the caprices of an old woman , I have the pleasure of being the mistress of a well-ordered family , for I keep my brother 's house  and by endeavouring to make him an useful as well as agreeable companion , enjoy the sweet satisfaction of shewing every day my gratitude for obligations it can never be in my power to return .


2 .
OF THE STUDIES proper for WOMEN .
Translated from the French .


 TO prohibit women entirely from learning is treating them with the same indignity that Mahomet did , who , to render them voluptuous , denied them souls  and indeed the greatest part of women act as if they had really adopted a tenet so injurious to the sex , and appear to set no value upon that lively imagination , that sprightly wit which makes them more admired than beauty itself .


When we consider the happy talents which women in general possess , and how successfully some have cultivated them , we can not without indignation observe the little esteem they have for the endowments of their minds which it is so easy for them to improve .
They are , as Montaigne says , flowers of quick growth , and by the delicacy of their conception , catch readily and without trouble the relation of things to each other .
It is a melancholy consideration that the most precious gifts of nature should be stifled , or obscured by a shameful neglect .


The charms of their persons , how powerful soever , may attract , but can not fix us  something  more than beauty is necessary to rivet the lover 's chain .
By often beholding a beautiful face , the impression it first made on us soon wears away .
When the woman whose person we admire is incapable of pleasing us by her conversation , languor and satiety , soon triumph over the taste we had for her charms : hence arises the inconstancy with which we are so often reproached  it is that barrenness of ideas which we find in women that renders men unfaithful .


The ladies may judge of the difference there is among them , by that which they themselves make between a fool who teases them with his impertinence , and a man of letters who entertains them agreeably  a very little labour would equal them to the last , and perhaps give them the advantage .
This is a kind of victory which we wish to yield them .
We would , without envy , see them dividing with us a good , whose value is always greater than the labour by which it is acquired .


The more they shall enlarge their notions , the more subjects of conversation will be found between them and us , and the more sprightly and affecting will that conversation be .
How many delicate sentiments , how many nice sensibilities are lost by not being communicable , and in which we should feel an increase of satisfaction could we meet with women disposed to taste them !


But what are the studies to which women may with propriety apply themselves ?
This question I take upon myself to answer  and I intreat the ladies to pardon me , if among all the sciences which exercise the wonderful activity of the human mind ,  I pronounce that only some are fit to be cultivated by them .
I would particularly recommend to them to avoid all abstract learning , all thorny researches , which may blunt the finer edge of their wit , and change the delicacy in which they excel into pedantic coarseness .


If their sex has produced Daciers * and Chatelets † , these are examples rarely found , and fitter to be admired than imitated : for who would wish to see assemblies made up of doctors in petticoats , who will regale us with Greek and the systems of Leibnitz .
The learning proper for women is such as best suits the soft elegance of their form , such as may add to their natural beauties , and qualify them for the several duties of life .
There is nothing more disgustful than those female theologians , who , adopting all the animosity of the party they have thought fit to join , assemble ridiculous synods in their houses , and form extravagant sects .
A Bourignon á a virgin of Venice ß , a madame  Guyon * , are characters more detestable than libertines , like Ninon † .


It is in such parts of learning only as afford the highest improvement that we invite women to share with us .
All that may awaken curiosity , and lend graces to the imagination , suits them still better than us .
This is a vast field where we may together exercise the mind  and here they may even excel us without mortifying our pride .


History and natural philosophy are alone sufficient to furnish women with an agreeable kind of study .
The latter , in a series of useful observations and interesting experiments , offers a spectacle well worthy the consideration of a reasonable being .
But in vain does nature present her miracles to the generality of women , who have no attention but to trifles : she is dumb to those who know not how to interrogate her .


Yet surely it requires but a small degree of attention to be struck with that wonderful harmony which reigns throughout the universe , and to be ambitious of investigating its secret springs .
This is a large volume which is open to all  here a pair of beautiful eyes may employ themselves without being fatigued .
This amiable study will banish languor from the sober amusements of the country , and repair that waste of intellect which is caused by the dissipations of the town .
Women can not  be too much excited to raise their eyes to objects like these , which they but too often debase to such as are unworthy of them .


The sex is more capable of attention than we imagine : what they chiefly want is a well directed application .
There is scarcely a young girl who has not read with eagerness a great number of idle romances , and puerile tales , sufficient to corrupt her imagination and cloud her understanding .
If she had devoted the same time to the study of history , she would in those varied scenes which the world offers to view , have found facts more interesting , and instruction which only truth can give .


Those striking pictures , that are displayed in the annals of the human race , are highly proper to direct the judgment , and form the heart .
Women have at all times had so great a share in events , and have acted so many different parts , that they may with reason consider our archives as their own : nay , there are many of them who have written memoirs of the several events of which they had been eye-witnesses .
Mademoiselle de Montpensier , Madame de Némours , Madame de Motteville , are of this number .
Christina of Pisan , daughter to the astronomer , patronised by the Emperor Charles the fifth , has given us the life of that prince  and long before her , the princess Anna Comnenus wrote the history of her own times .
We call upon the ladies to assert their rights , and from the study of history to extract useful lessons for the conduct of life .


 This study , alike pleasing and instructive , will naturally lead to that of the fine arts , which it is fit the ladies should have a less superficial knowledge of .
The arts are in themselves too amiable to need any recommendation to the sex : all the objects they offer to their view have some analogy with women , and are like them adorned with the brightest colours .
The mind is agreeably soothed by those images which poetry , painting , and musick trace out to it , especially if they are found to agree with purity of manners .
It was these three charming arts , which , in the last reign , rendered Mademoiselle Chéron so celebrated  a lady in whom the talents of Sappho , of M - , and of Rosalba were united .


To familiarize ourselves with the arts is in some degree to create a new sense .
So agreeably have they imitated nature , nay , so often have they embellished it , that whoever cultivates them , will in them always find a fruitful source of new pleasures .
We ought to provide against the encroachments of languor and weariness by this addition to our natural riches  and surely when we may so easily transfer to ourselves the possession of that multitude of pleasing ideas which they have created , it would be the highest stupidity to neglect such an advantage .


There is no reason to fear that the ladies , by applying themselves to these studies , will throw a shade over the natural graces of their wit .
No  on the contrary , those graces will be placed in a more conspicuous point of view : what can equal the pleasure we receive from the conversation of a woman who is  more solicitous to adorn her mind than her person ?
In the company of such women there can be no satiety  every thing becomes interesting , and has a secret charm which only they can give .
The delightful art of saying the most ingenious things with a graceful simplicity is peculiar to them : it is they who call forth the powers of wit in men , and communicate to them that easy elegance which is never to be acquired in the closet .


But what preservative is there against weariness and disgust in the society of women of weak and unimproved understanding ?
In vain do they endeavour to fill the void of their conversation with insipid gaiety : they soon exhaust the barren funds of fashionable trifles , the news of the day , and hackneyed compliments  they are at length obliged to have recourse to scandal , and it is well if they stop there : a commerce in which there is nothing solid must be either mean or criminal .


There is but one way to make it more varied and more interesting .
If ladies of the first rank would condescend to form their taste upon our best authors , and collect ideas from their useful writings , conversation would take another cast : their acknowledged merit would banish that swarm of noisy impertinents who flutter about them , and who endeavour to render them as contemptible as themselves : men of sense and learning would then frequent their assemblies , and form a circle more worthy of the name of good company


In this new circle gaiety would not be banished , but refined by delicacy and wit .
Merit is not austere in its nature  there is a calm and uniform  chearfulness that runs through the conversation of persons of real understanding , which is far preferable to the noisy mirth of ignorance and folly .
Those societies formed by the Sevignes , the Fayetts , the Sabliéres , with the Vivonnes , the La Fares , and Rochefoucaults , were surely more pleasing than the assemblies of our days .
Among them learning was not pedantic , nor wisdom severe  and subjects of the highest importance were treated with all the sprightliness of wit .


The ladies must allow me once more to repeat to them that the only means of charming , and of charming long , is to improve their minds  good sense gives beauties which are not subject to fade like the lillies and roses of their cheeks , but will prolong the power of an agreeable woman to the autumn of her life * .
If the sex would not have their influence confined to the short triumph of a day , they must endeavour to improve their natural talents by study , and the conversation of men of letters .
Neglect will not then steal upon them in proportion as their bloom decays  but they will unite in themselves all the advantages of both sexes .


We live no longer in an age when prejudice condemned women as well as the nobility , to a shameful ignorance .
The ridicule with which pedantry  was treated had so much discredited every kind of knowledge , that there were many ladies who thought it graceful to murder the words of their native language  but some were still found , who , shaking off the yoke of fashion , ventured to think justly , and speak with propriety  and even at this time there are a small number who are not ashamed of being more learned than the idle man of fashion , and the fluttering courtier .


3 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA .


HARRIOT and Sophia were the daughters of a gentleman , who , having spent a good paternal inheritance before he was five and thirty , was reduced to live upon the moderate salary of a place at court , which his friends procured him to get rid of his importunities .
The same imprudence by which he had been governed in affairs of lesser importance directed him likewise in the choice of a wife : the woman he married had no  merit but beauty , and brought with her to the house of a man whose fortune was already ruined nothing but a taste for luxury and expence , without the means of gratifying it .


Harriot , the eldest daughter of this couple , was , like her mother , a beauty , and upon that account , as well as the conformity of her temper and inclinations to hers , engrossed all her affection .


Sophia she affected to despise , because she wanted in an equal degree those personal attractions , which in her opinion constituted the whole of female perfection .
Meer common judges however allowed her person to be agreeable  people of discernment and taste pronounced her something more .
The striking sensibility of her countenance , the soft elegance of her shape and motion , a melodious voice in speaking , whose varied accents enforced the sensible things she always said , were beauties not capable of striking vulgar minds , and which were sure to be eclipsed by the dazzling lustre of her sister 's complexion , and the fire of two bright eyes , whose motions were as quick and unsettled as her thoughts .


While Harriot was receiving the improvement of a polite education , Sophia was left to form herself as well as she could  happily for her a just taste and solid judgment supplied the place of teachers , precept , and example .
The hours that Harriot wasted in dress , company , and gay amusements , were by Sophia , devoted to reading .


A good old gentleman , who was nearly related to her father , perceiving this taste in her , encouraged  it by his praises , and furnished her with the means of gratifying it , by constantly supplying her with such books as were best calculated to improve her morals and understanding .
His admiration encreasing in proportion as he had opportunities of observing her merit , he undertook to teach her the French and Italian languages , in which she soon made a surprising progress  and by the time she had reached her fifteenth year , she had read all the best authors in them , as well as in her own .


By this unwearied application to reading , her mind became a beautiful store-house of ideas : hence she derived the power and the habit of constant reflection , which at once enlarged her understanding , and confirmed her in the principles of piety and virtue .


As she grew older the management of the family entirely devolved upon her  for her mother had no taste for any thing but pleasure , and her sister was taught to consider herself as a fine lady , whose beauty could not fail to make her fortune , and whose sole care it ought to be to dress to the greatest advantage , and make her appearance in every place where she might encrease the number of her admirers .


Sophia , in acquitting herself of the duties of a house-keeper to her mother , shewed that the highest intellectual improvements were not incompatible with the humbler cares of domestic life : every thing that went through her hands received a grace and propriety from the good sense by which she was directed  nor did her attention to family-affairs  break in upon her darling amusement reading .


People who know how to employ their time well are always good economists of it .
Sophia laid out hers in such exact proportions , that she had always sufficient for the several employments she was engaged in : the business of her life , like that of nature , was performed without noise , hurry , or confusion .


The death of Mr. Darnley threw this little family into a deplorable state of indigence , which was felt the more severely , as they had hitherto lived in an affluence of all things , and the debts which an expence so ill proportioned to their income had obliged Mr. Darnley to contract , left the unhappy widow and her children without any resource .
The plate , furniture , and every thing valuable were seized by the creditors .
Mrs. Darnley and her daughters retired to a private lodging , where the first days were passed in weak despondence on the part of the mother , in passionate repinings on that of the eldest daughter , and by Sophia in decent sorrow and pious resignation .


Mrs. Darnley however , by a natural consequence of her thoughtless temper , soon recovered her former gaiety .
Present evils only were capable of affecting her  reflection and forecast never disturbed the settled calm of her mind .
If the wants of one day were supplied , she did not consider what inconveniences the next might produce .
As for Harriot she found resources of comfort in the exalted ideas she had of her own charms  and having already laid it  down as a maxim , that poverty was the most shameful thing in the world , she formed her resolutions accordingly .


Sophia , as soon as her grief for the loss of her father had subsided , began to consider of some plan for their future subsistence .
She forbore however to communicate her thoughts on this subject to her mother and sister , who had always affected to treat every thing she said with contempt , the mean disguise which envy had assumed to hide their consciousness of her superior merit  but she opened her mind to the good old gentleman , to whom she had been obliged for many of her improvements .
She told him that being by his generous cares qualified to undertake the education of a young lady , she was desirous of being received into the family of some person of distinction in the quality of governess to the daughters of it , that she might at once secure to herself a decent establishment , and be enabled to assist her mother .
She hinted that if her sister could be also prevailed upon to enter into the service of a lady of quality , they might jointly contribute their endeavours to make their mother 's life comfortable .


Mr. Herbert praised her design , and promised to mention it to Mrs. Darnley , to whom he conceived he might speak with the greater freedom , as his near relation to her husband , and the long friendship which had subsisted between them , gave him a right to interest himself in their affairs .
The first words he uttered produced such an emotion in Mrs. Darnley 's countenance , as convinced him that what he had farther to say would not be favourably received .
She coloured , drew herself up with an  air of dignity , looking at the same time at her eldest daughter with a scornful smile .


Mr. Herbert , however , continued his discourse , when Harriot , with a pertness which she took for wit , interrupted him with a loud laugh , and asked him , if going to service was the best provision he could think of for Mr. Darnley 's daughters ?


Mr. Herbert , turning hastily to her , replied with a look of great gravity , and in a calm accent , ` Have you , miss , thought of any thing better ? '


Harriot , without being disconcerted , retorted very briskly , ` People who have nothing but advice to offer to their friends in distress , ought to be silent till they are asked for it . '


` Good advice , miss , replied the old gentleman with the same composure , is what every body can not , and many will not give  and it is at least an instance of friendship to hazard it , where one may be almost sure of its giving offence . '
But , continued he , turning to Sophia , ` my young pupil here has I hope not profited so little by her reading as not to know the value of good counsel  and I promise her she shall not only command the best that I am capable of giving , but every other assistance she may stand in need of . '
Saying this , he bowed and went away , without any attempts from Mrs. Darnley to detain him .


Poor Sophia , who was supposed by her silence to have acquiesced in the old gentleman 's proposal , was exposed to a thousand reproaches for her meanness of spirit .
She attempted to shew the utility , and even the necessity of following his advice  but she found on this occasion , as she had on many  others , that with some persons it is not safe to be too reasonable .
Her arguments were answered with rage and invective , which soon silenced her , and increased the triumph of her imperious sister .


Mr. Herbert , apprehensive of the ill treatment she was likely to be exposed to , offered to place her in the family of a country clergyman , and to pay for her board till such a settlement as she desired could be procured for her  but the tender Sophia , not willing to leave her mother while she could be of any use to her , gratefully declined his offer , still expecting that the increasing perplexity of their circumstances might bring her to relish his reasonable counsels , and that she might have the sanction of her consent to a step which prudence made necessary to be taken .


A legacy of a hundred pounds being left her by a young lady who tenderly loved her , and who died in her arms , she immediately presented it to her mother , by whom it was received it with a transport of joy , but without any reflection upon the filial piety of her who gave it .


Sophia 's good friend , though he did not absolutely approve of this exalted strain of tenderness , yet did not fail to place the merit of it in the fullest light  but Harriot , who never heard any praises of her sister without a visible emotion , interrupted him , by saying , that Sophia had only done what she ought  and that she herself would have acted in the same manner , if the sum had been twenty times larger .


The same delicacy which induced Sophia to divest herself of any particular right to this small  legacy , made her see the misapplication of it without discovering the least mark of dislike .
Harriot , who governed her mother absolutely , having represented to her , that the obscurity in which they lived was not the means to preserve their old friends , or to acquire new ones  and that it was their business to appear again in the world , and put themselves in the way of fortune , which could not be done without making a decent appearance at least  Mrs. Darnley , who thought this reasoning unanswerable , consented to their changing their present lodgings for others more genteel , and to whatever expences her eldest daughter judged necessary to secure the success of her scheme .


Sophia lamented in secret this excess of imprudence  and to avoid being a witness of it , as well as to free her mother from the expence of her maintenance , she resolved to accept of the first genteel place that offered  but the natural softness and timidity of her temper made her delay as long as possible mentioning this design to her mother and sister , lest it should be construed into a tacit reproach of them for a conduct so very different .


Indeed her condition was greatly altered for the worse , since the present she had made of her legacy .
Her mother and sister had never loved her much , and their tenderness for her was now entirely lost in the uneasy consciousness of having owed an obligation to her , for which they could not resolve to be grateful .
They no longer considered her as an insignificant person whose approbation or dislike was of no sort of consequence , but as a saucy censurer of their actions , who assumed to herself a superiority ,  on account of the paultry assistance she had offered them : every thing she said was construed into upbraidings of the benefit she had conferred upon them .
If she offered her opinion upon any occasion , Harriot would say to her with a malicious sneer , ` To be sure you think you have a right to give us laws , because we have had the misfortune to be obliged to you . '
And Mrs. Darnley , working herself up to an agony of grief and resentment for the fancied insult , would lift up her eyes and cry , ` How much is that mother be pitied who lives to receive alms from her child ! '


Poor Sophia used to answer no oftherwise than by tears : but this was sure to aggravate her fault  for it was supposed that she wept and appeared afflicted only to shew people what ungrateful returns she met with for her goodness .


Thus did the unhappy Sophia , with the softest sensibility of heart and tendered affections , see herself excluded from the endearing expressions of a mother 's fondness , only by being too worthy of it , and exposed to shocking suspicions of undutifulness for an action that shewed the highest filial affection : so true it is , that great virtues can not be understood by mean and little minds , and with such , not only lose all their lustre , but are too often mistaken for the contrary vices .


While Sophia passed her time in melancholy reflections , Harriot , being by her generous gift enabled to make as shewy an appearance as her mourning habit would permit , again mixed in company , and laid baits for admiration .
Her beauty soon  procured her a geat number of lovers  her poverty made their approaches easy  and the weakness of her understanding , her insipid gaiety , and pert affectation of wit , encouraged the most licentious hopes , and exposed her to the most impertinent addresses .


Among those who looking upon her as a conquest of no great difficulty formed the mortifying design of making a mistress of her , was Sir Charles Stanley , a young baronet of a large estate , a most agreeable person , and engaging address : his fine qualities made him the delight of all who knew him , and even envy itself allowed him to be a man of the strictest honour and unblemished integrity .


Persons who connect the idea of virtue and goodness with such a character , would find it hard to conceive how a man who lives in a constant course of dissimulation with one part of his species , and who abuses the advantages he has received from nature and fortune in subduing chastity , and ensnaring innocence , can possibly deserve , and establish a reputation for honour !
but such are the illusions of prejudice , and such the tyranny of custom , that he who is called a man of gallantry shall be at the same time esteemed a man of honour , though gallantry comprehends the worst kind of fraud , cruelty , and injustice .


Sir Charles Stanley had been but too successful in his attempts upon beauty , to fear being rejected by Miss Darnley  and knowing her situation , he resolved to engage her gratitude at least before he declared his designs .
He had interest enough to  procure the place her father enjoyed for a gentleman who thought himself happy in obtaining it , though charged with an annuity of fourscore pounds a year for the widow of his predecessor .


Sir Charles , in acquainting Miss Darnley with what he had done in favour of her mother , found himself under no necessity of insinuating his motive for the extraordinary interest he took in the affairs of this distrest family .
Harriot 's vanity anticipated any declaration of this sort , and the thanks she gave him were accompanied with such an apparent consciousness of the power of her charms as convinced him his work was already more than half done .


He was now received at Mrs. Darnley 's in the quality of a declared lover of Harriot 's  and although amidst all his assiduities he never mentioned marriage , either the mother and daughter did not penetrate into his real designs , or were but too much disposed to favour them .


The innocent heart of Sophia was at first overwhelmed with joy for the happy provision that had been made for her mother , and the prospect of such an advantageous match for her sister , when Mr. Herbert , who knew the world too well to be imposed upon by these fine appearances , gently hinted to his young favourite , his apprehensions of the baronet 's dishonourable views .


Her delicacy was so shocked by this suspicion , that she could scarce forbear expressing some little resentment of it  but reflecting that this ardent lover of Harriot 's had not yet made any proposals of marriage , her good sense immediately suggested to her that such affected delays in a man who was  absolutely independent , and with a woman whose situation made it a point of delicacy to be early explicit on that head , could only proceed from intentions which he had not yet dared to own .


Chance had so ordered it , that hitherto she had never seen Sir Charles Stanley  whenever he came , she was either employed in the family-affairs , or engaged with her books , which it was no easy matter to make her quit .
Besides , as she had no share in his visits , and as her sister never shewed any inclination to introduce her to him , she thought it did not become her to intrude herself upon his acquaintance .
Sir Charles indeed , knowing that Mrs. Darnley had another daughter , used sometimes to enquire for her , but was neither surprised nor disappointed that she never made her appearance .


Sophia , however , was determined to be in the way when he came next , that she might have an opportunity of observing his behaviour to her sister  and fondly flattered herself that she should discover nothing to the disadvantage of a person whom her grateful heart had taught itself to love and esteem as their common benefactor .


Sir Charles at the next visit found Sophia in the room with her sister .
He instantly saw something in her looks and person which inspired him with more respect than he had been used to feel for Mrs. Darnley and Harriot  a dignity which she derived from innate virtue , and an exalted understanding .
Struck with the uncommon sensibility of her countenance , he began to consider her with an attention which greatly disgusted Harriot , who  could not conceive that where she was present any other object was worthy notice .


Sophia herself was a little disconcerted by the young baronet 's so earnestly gazing on her  and in order to divert his looks , opened a conversation in which her sister might bear a part .
Then it was , that without designing it , she displayed her whole power of charming : that flow of wit which was so natural to her , the elegant propriety of her language , the delicacy of her sentiments , the animated look which gave them new force , and sent them directly to the heart , and the moving graces of the most harmonious voice in the world , were attractions , which though generally lost on fools , seldom fail of their effect on the heart of a man of sense .


Sir Charles was wrapt in wonder and delight  he had no eyes , no ears , but for Sophia : he scarce perceived that Harriot was in the room .


The insolent beauty , astonished at such unusual neglect , varied her attitude and her charms a thousand different ways to draw his attention  but found all was to no purpose .
Had she been capable of serious reflection , she might now have discovered what advantages her sister , though far inferior to her in beauty , gained over her , by the force of her understanding : she might now have seen ,


`` How beauty is excelled by modest grace , `` And wisdom , which alone is truly fair . ''
But too ignorant to know her own wants , and too conceited to imagine she had any , she was strangely perplexed how to account for so sudden an alteration in Sir Charles .
 Her uneasiness , however , grew so great , that she was not able to conceal it .
She shifted her seat two or three times in a minute , bit her lips almost through , and frowned so intelligibly , that Sophia at last perceiving her agitation , suddenly recollected herself , and quitted the room upon pretence of business .


When she was gone , Harriot drawing herself up , and assuming a look which expressed her confidence in the irresistible power of her charms , seemed resolved to make her lover repent the little notice he had taken of her in this visit by playing off a thousand scornful airs upon him  but she was more mortified than ever when upon turning her eyes towards him , in full expectation of finding his fixed upon her , she saw them bent upon the ground , and such a pensiveness in his countenance as all her rigors could never yet occasion .


She was considering what to say to him to draw him out of this reverie , when Sir Charles , on a sudden raising his eyes , turned them towards the door with a look of mingled anxiety and impatience , and then , as if disappointed , sighed and addressed some indifferent conversation to Harriot .


The lady , now quite provoked , had recourse to an artifice which her shallow understanding suggested to her , as an infallible method of awakening his tenderness , and this was to make him jealous .
Without any preparation therefore , she introduced the name of Lord L - , a young nobleman who was just returned from his travels , and lavishing a thousand encomiums upon his person , and his elegant taste in dress , added , ` That he was the best bred man in the world , and had entertained her  so agreeably one night at the play , when happening to come into a box where she was with a lady of her acquaintance , that they did not mind a word the players said , he was so diverting . '


Sir Charles coldly answered , ` That Lord L. was a very pretty youth , and that he was intimately acquainted with him . '


` Oh then , cried Harriot , with a great deal of affected joy , I vow and protest you shall bring him to see me . '


` Indeed you must excuse me madam , ' said Sir Charles , with some quickness .


Harriot , concluding her stratagem had taken effect , was quite transported , and renewed her attacks , determined to make him suffer as much as possible  but the young baronet , whose thoughts were full of Sophia , and whose emotion at the request Harriot had made him , was occasioned by fears very different from those she suspected , took no further notice of what she said , but interrupted her to ask how old her sister Sophia was ?


' I dare engage , replied Harriot , you would never have supposed her to be younger than I am . '


The baronet smiled , and looking at his watch , seemed surprised that it was so late , and took his leave .


Miss Darnley following him to the door of the room , cried , ` Remember I lay my commands upon you to bring my Lord L. to see me . '


Sir Charles answered her no otherwise than by a low bow , and she returned , delighted at the parting pang which she supposed she had given him .
 Vanity is extremely ingenious in procuring gratifications for itself .
Harriot did not doubt but that she had tormented Sir Charles sufficiently  and it was the unshaken confidence which she had in the power of her charms , that hindered her from discovering the true cause of the new disgust she had conceived for her sister .
However , it was so great that she could scarcely speak to her civilly , or endure her in her sight : yet she found an increase of pleasure in talking to her mother when she was present of the violent passion Sir Charles Stanley had for her , and in giving an exaggerated account of the professions he made her .


Sophia did not listen to this sort of discourse with her usual complaisance .
Her mind became insensibly more disposed to suspect the sincerity of the baronet 's passion for her sister : she grew pensive and melancholy , sought solitude more than ever , and loved reading less .


This change , which her own innocence hid from herself , was quickly perceived by Mr. Herbert , who loved her with a parent 's fondness , and thought nothing indifferent which concerned her .
He took occasion one day to mention Sir Charles Stanley to her , and asked her opinion of his person and understanding , keeping his eyes fixed upon her at the same time , which disconcerted her so much that she blushed  and though she commended him greatly , yet it was easy to discover that she forbore to say all the good she thought of him , for fear of saying too much .


Mr. Herbert no longer doubted but this dangerous youth had made an impression on the innocent  heart of Sophia , which was still ignorant of its own emotions .


He had perceived for some time that Sir Charles had changed the object of his pursuits : his visits now were always short , unless Sophia was in the way : he brought her all the new books and pamphlets that came out which were worth her reading : he adopted the purity and delicacy of her sentiments , declared himself always of the side she espoused : he talked of virtue like a man who loved and practised it , and set all his good qualities in the fairest light : he presented Harriot from time to time with fashionable trifles , and sent Sophia books enough to furnish out a little library , consisting of the best authors , in English , French , and Italian , all elegantly bound , with proper cases for their reception : he praised whatever she approved , and appeared to have great respect and consideration for Mr. Herbert , because he observed she loved and esteemed him .


That faithful friend of the virtuous Sophia trembled for her danger , when he considered that by this artful management the baronet was strengthening himself every day in her good opinion , and seducing her affections under the appearance of meriting her friendship  yet he did not think it proper to give her even a hint of her situation .
A young maid has passed over the first bounds of reservedness who allows herself to think she is in love .


Mr. Herbert would not familiarize her with so dangerous an idea : he knew her extreme modesty , her solid virtue  he was under no apprehensions  that she would ever act unworthy of her character  but a heart so nicely sensible , so delicately tender as hers , he knew must suffer greatly from a disappointed passion  and this was what he wanted to prevent , not by wounding her delicacy with suggesting to her that she was in love , but by preserving her from the encroachments of that passion .


He reminded her of the design she had formerly mentioned to him of entering into the service of a lady , and was rejoiced to find that she still continued her resolution .
Harriot 's natural insolence and ill temper , irritated by the change she now plainly saw in Sir Charles , made home so disagreeable to Sophia , that she wished impatiently for an opportunity of providing for herself , that she might no longer live upon the bounty of her sister , who often insinuated that their mother 's annuity was her gift .


Mr. Herbert , who had other reasons besides those she urged , from freeing her from so uneasy a dependance , promised to be diligent in his enquiries for something that would suit her .


Neither Mrs. Darnley nor Harriot opposed this design , which soon came to the knowledge of Sir Charles , who had bribed a servant of the family to give him intelligence of every thing that passed in it .


Impatient to prevent the execution of it , and tortured by the bare apprehension of Sophia 's absence , he resolved to break through that constraint he had so long laid upon himself , and acquaint her with his passion .


 But it was not easy to find an opportunity of speaking to her alone .
At length having contrived to get Harriot engaged to a play , and prevailed upon a maiden kinswoman of his to invite Mrs. Darnley to a party of whist , he went to the house at his usual hour of visiting this little family , and found Sophia at home , and without any company .


Not all the confidence he derived from his rank and fortune , his fine understanding  and those personal graces which gave him but too much merit in the eyes of many women , could hinder him from trembling at the thought of that declaration he was about to make .
As soon as he came into Sophia 's presence he was awed , disconcerted , and unable to speak  such was the power of virtue , and such the force of a real passion !
Two or three times he resolved to begin , but when he looked upon Sophia , and saw in her charming eyes that sparkling intelligence which displayed the treasures of the soul that animated them  when he observed the sweet severity of her modest countenance , the composed dignity of her behaviour , he durst not own a passion which had views less pure than the perfect creature that inspired it .


His conversation for near an hour was so confused , so disjointed , and interrupted by such frequent musings , that Sophia was amazed , and thought it so disagreeable , and unlike what it used to be , that she was not sorry when he seemed disposed to put an end to his visit .


Sir Charles indeed rose up to be gone , but with so deep a concern in his eyes as increased Sophia 's  perplexity .
She attended him respectfully to the door of the room , when he suddenly turning back , and taking her hand , ` Do not hate me , said he , nor think ill of me , if I tell you that I love and adore you . '


Sophia , in the utmost confusion at such a speech , disengaged her hand from his , and retiring a few steps back , bent her eyes on the ground , and continued silent .


Sir Charles , emboldened by her confusion , made a tender , and at the same time respectful declaration of the passion he had long felt for her .


Sophia , not willing to hear him enlarge upon this subject , raised her eyes from the ground , her cheeks were indeed overspread with blushes , but there was a grave composure in her looks that seemed a bad omen to Sir Charles .


' I have hitherto flattered myself , sir , said she , that you entertained a favourable opinion of me , how happens it then that I see myself to-day exposed to your raillery ? '


The baronet was beginning a thousand protestations , but Sophia stopt him short .
` If your professions to me are sincere , said she , what am I to think of those you made to my sister ? '


Sir Charles expected this retort , and was the less perplexed by it , as he needed only to follow the dictates of truth to form such an answer as was proper to be given . '
I acknowledge , said he , that I admired your sister , and her beauty made as strong an impression upon me as mere beauty can make upon a man who has a taste for higher excellencies .
I sought Miss Darnley 's acquaintance .
 I was so happy as to do her some little service .
I wished to find in her those qualities that were necessary to fix my heart - Pardon my freedom , Miss Sophia , the occasion requires that I should speak freely .
Miss Darnley , upon a nearer acquaintance , did not answer the idea I had formed to myself of a woman whom I could love for life  and the professions I made her , as you are pleased to call them , were no more than expressions of gallantry  a sort of homage which beauty , even when it does not touch the heart , exacts from the tongue .
My heart was not so easy a conquest - tell me not of raillery , when I declare that none but yourself was ever capable of inspiring me with a real passion . '


The arrival of Mr. Herbert proved a grateful interuption to Sophia , in whose innocent breast the tenderness and apparent sincerity of this declaration raised emotions which she knew not how to disguise .


Sir Charles , though grieved at this unseasonable visit , yet withdrew , not wholly desparing of success .
He had heedfully observed the changes in Sophia 's face while he was speaking , and thought he had reason to hope that he was not indifferent to her .
Loving her as he did with excessive tenderness , what pure and unmixed satisfaction would this thought have given him , had he not been conscious that his designs were unworthy of her !
The secret upbraidings of his conscience disquieted him amidst all his flattering hopes of success  but custom , prejudice , the insolence of fortune , and the force of example , all conspired to  suppress the pleadings of honour and justice in favour of the amiable Sophia , and fixed him in the barbarous resolution of attempting to corrupt that virtue which made her so worthy of his love .


Mr. Herbert having , as has been already mentioned , interrupted the conversation between Sir Charles and Sophia , was not surprised at the young baronet 's abrupt departure , as he seemed preparing to go when he came in  but upon looking at Sophia , he perceived so many signs of confusion and perplexity in her countenance , that he did not doubt but the discourse which his entrance had put an end to , was a very interesting one .
He waited a moment , in expectation that she would open herself to him , but finding that she continued silent and abashed , he gently took her hand , and looking tenderly upon her , ` Tell me , my child , said he , has not something extraordinary happened , which occasions this confusion I see you in ? '


` Sir Charles has indeed been talking to me , replied Sophia blushing , in a very extraordinary manner , and such as I little expected . '


Mr. Herbert pressed her to explain herself , and she gave him an exact account of Sir Charles 's discourse to her , without losing a word  so faithful had her memory been to all he said .


Mr. Herbert listened to her attentively , and found something so like candor and sincerity in the baronet 's declaration , that he could not help being pleased with it .
He had never indeed judged favourably of his views upon Harriot , but here the case was very different .


 Harriot 's ignorance , vanity , and eager desire of being admired , exposed her to the attacks of libertinism , and excited presumptuous hopes .


Sophia 's good sense , modesty , and virtue , placed her out of the reach of temptation .
No one could think it surprising that a man of sense should make the fortune of a woman who would do honour to his choice , and where there was such exalted merit as in Sophia , overlook the disparity of circumstances .


But justly might it be called infatuation and folly , to raise to rank and affluence a woman of Harriot 's despicable turn  to make a companion for life of a handsome ideot , who thought the highest excellencies of the female character were to know how to dress , to dance , to sing , to flutter in a drawing-room , or coquet at a play  who mistook pertness for wit , confidence for knowledge , and insolence for dignity .


While he was revolving these thoughts in his mind , Sophia looked earnestly at him , pleased to observe that what the baronet had said seemed worthy his consideration .


Mr. Herbert , who read in her looks that she wished to have his advice on this occasion , but would not ask it , lest she should seem to lay any stress upon Sir Charles 's declaration , told her it was very possible the baronet was sincere in what he had said to her  that his manner of accounting for his quitting her sister , was both sensible and candid  that she ought not to be surprised at the preference he gave her over Miss Darnley , since she deserved it by the care she had taken to improve  her mind , and to acquire qualities which might procure her the esteem of all wise and virtuous persons .


He warned her , however , not to trust too much to favourable appearances , nor to suffer her inclinations to be so far engaged by the agreeable person and specious behaviour of Sir Charles Stanley , as to find it painful to renounce him , if he should hereafter shew himself unworthy of her good opinion .


He advised her , when he talked to her in the same strain again , to refer him to her mother and to him for an answer  and told her that he would save her the confusion and perplexity of acquainting her mother and sister with what had happened , by taking that task upon himself .


` You will , no doubt , added he , be exposed to some sallies of ill temper from Miss Darnley , for robbing her of a lover  for envy is more irreconcileable than hatred : but let not your sensibility suffer much on her account : if you deprive her of a lover , you do not deprive her of one she loves : she is too vain , too volatile , and too greedy of general admiration , to be affected with the loss of Sir Charles , any farther than as her pride is wounded by it : and one would imagine she had foreseen this desertion , by the pains she has taken about a new conquest lately . '
Mr. Herbert was going on , when Mrs. Darnley knocked at the door .
Sophia , in extreme agitation , begged him to say nothing concerning Sir Charles that evening .
He promised her he would not , and  they all three conversed together upon indifferent things , till Harriot returned from the play .


Mr , Herbert then took leave of them , after inviting himself to breakfast the next morning  which threw Sophia into such terror and confusion , that she retired hastily to her own room , to conceal her disorder .


Mr. Herbert came the next morning , according to his promise  and Sophia , all trembling with her apprehensions , retired immediately after breakfast .
He entered upon the business that had brought him thither  but sensible that what he had to say would prove extremely mortifying to miss Harriot , he thought it not amiss to sweeten the bitter pill he was preparing for her , by sacrificing a little flattery to her pride .


` You fine ladies , said he , addressing himself to her with a smile , are never weary of extending your conquests  but you use your power with so much tyranny , that it is not surprising some of your slaves should assume courage , at last , to break your chains .
Do you know , my pretty cousin , that you have lost Sir Charles Stanley  and that he has offered that heart , which you no doubt have despised , to your sister Sophia ? '
Miss Darnley , who had bridled up at the beginning of this speech , lost all her assumed dignity towards the end of it : her face grew pale and red by turns  she fixed her eyes on the ground , her bosom heaved with the violence of her agitations , and tears , in spite of her , were ready to force their way .


 Sir Charles had indeed for a long time discontinued his addresses to her , and had suffered his inclination for her sister to appear plainly enough  but still her vanity suggested to her , that this might be all a feint , and acted only with a view to alarm her fears , and oblige her to sacrifice all her other admirers to him .


What Mr. Herbert had said therefore , struck her at first with astonishment and grief  but solicitous to maintain the fancied superiority of her character , she endeavoured to repress her emotions  and taking the hint which he had designedly thrown out to her to save her confusion ,


` Sir Charles has acted very wisely , said she , putting on a scornful look , to quit me , who always despised him , for one who has been so little used to have lovers , that she will be ready to run mad with joy at the thoughts of such a conquest : but after all , she has only my leavings . '
Mr. Herbert , though a little shocked at the grossness of her language , replied gravely , ` However that may be , Miss , it is certain that he has made a very open , and to all appearance , sincere declaration of love to Miss Sophia , who , not knowing how to mention this affair to her mother herself , commissioned me to acquaint her with it , that she may have her directions how to behave to Sir Charles , and what to say to him . '


` One would have imagined , interrupted Miss Darnley eagerly , that she who sets up for so much wit , and reads so many books , might have known what to say to him . '


 ` Pray , Miss , said Mr. Herbert , what would you have had her say to Sir Charles ? '


` Why truly , replied she , I think she ought to have told him that he was very impertinent , and have shewn him the door . '


` Sure , Harriot , said Mrs. Darnley , who had been silent all this time , You forget that Sir Charles is our benefactor , and that I am obliged to him for all the little support I have . '


` It is not likely I should forget it , retorted Miss Darnley , since I am the person who am most obliged to him for what he has done  if I mistake not , it was upon my account that he interested himself in our affairs . '


` Well , well , Harriot , replied Mrs. Darnley , I have been told this often enough  but why should you be angry at this prospect of your sister 's advancement ? '


' I angry at her advancement , madam !
exclaimed Miss Harriot , not I really : I wish the girl was provided for by a suitable match with all my heart  but as for Sir Charles , I would not have her set her foolish heart upon him  he is only laughing at her . '


` It may be so , said Mr. Herbert , though I think Miss Sophia the last woman in the world whom a man would chuse to laugh at .
However , this affair is worth a little consideration - Miss Sophia , madam , pursued he , addressing himself to Mrs. Darnley , intends to refer Sir Charles entirely to you .
You will be the best judge whether the passion he professes is sincere , and his intentions honourable  and I can answer for my  young cousin , that she will be wholly governed by your advice , since it is impossible that you can give her any but what is most advantageous to her honour and happiness . '


Harriot , no longer able to suppress her rage and envy , was thrown so far off her guard as to burst into tears . '
I can not bear to be thus insulted , cried she  and I declare if Sir Charles is permitted to go on with his foolery with that vain girl , I will quit the house . '


` Was there ever any one so unreasonable as you are , Miss , said Mr. Herbert , have you not owned that you despised Sir Charles  and if your sister is a vain girl , will she not be sufficiently mortified by accepting your leavings , as you said just now ? '


' I am speaking to my mother , sir , replied Harriot , with a contemptuous frown  depend upon it , Madam , pursued she , that I will not stay to be sacrificed to Mr. Herbert 's favourite - either she shall be forbid to give Sir Charles any encouragement , who after all , is only laughing at her , or I will leave the house . '


Saying this , she flung out of the room , leaving her mother divided between anger and grief , and Mr. Herbert motionless with astonishment .


[ To be continued . ]
 4 .
A SONG , in PHILANDER .
A Dramatic Pastoral .


 Set by Mr. OSWALD .


[ ... ] Think what the hapless virgin proves , who loves in vain , yet [ ... ] fondly loves  While modesty and female pride , The [ ... ] slighted passion seek to hide .
[ ... ] II .
For oh !
in vain the sigh 's represt That struggling heaves her anxious breast .
In vain the falling tear 's with-held , The conscious wish in vain repell'd .
III .
Her faded cheeks , and air forlorn , Coarse jests invite , and cruel scorn .
To hopeless love she falls a prey , And wastes in silent grief away .
5 .
On reading a POEM written by a Lady of Quality .


 I. AFRAID to be pleas'd , and with envy half fir'd , Still wishing to blame , while by force I admir'd , New beauties appearing as farther I read , At last in a rage to Apollo I said : II .
Oh thou whom the lean tribe of authors adore !
And proud of thy gifts , are content to be poor  Say , why must a peeress thus put in her claim , For the poet 's poor airy inheritance , fame ?
III .
Needs that brow which a coronet circles be bound With the wreath that your glorious starv'd fav ` rites have crown'd .
Why should she who at ease in gilt chariots may ride , Our tir'd Pegasus mount , and so skilfully guide ?
IV .
With Gallia 's rich vintage , her thirst she may slake , Then why such large draughts from our Helicon take ?
And blest here with corn-fields , and meadows , and pastures , Has she need of grants in the realm of Parnassus ?
V. Thus I : nor to answer Apollo disdain'd , My Stella from fortune those trifles obtain'd  In wit I decreed her supremely to shine , When were titles and riches suppos'd gifts of mine ?
But your clamours to stop , and your anger to tame , She shall smile on your works , and her praise shall be fame .
6 .
An ODE


 I .
HOW long from thy inchanting sway Shall I my freedom , Love , maintain !
The young , the beauteous , and the gay Still spread the pleasing snare in vain .
II .
The study'd air , the borrow'd grace , All affectation 's numerous wiles , Send blunted darts from ev'ry face , Conceal'd in blushes , sighs , and smiles .
III .
For these my heart feels no alarms , Whose honest wish is but to prove The genuine force of artless charms , The soft simplicity of love .
IV .
The heaving bosom 's fall and rise , Compassion only should display .
The glance that can my soul surprise To wit must owe the pointed ray .
V .
The smile that would my soul inflame , Good nature only must bestow .
Sweet modesty , ingen ` ous shame , Must give the kindling cheek to glow .
 VI .
Mere outward charms the mind delude To own a short compulsive reign , By wit , and virtue when subdu'd , She forges for herself her chain .
7 .
To DEATH .
An irregular ODE .


I. OH death , thou gentle end of human pain , Why is thy stroke so long delay'd ?
Why to a wretch , who breathes but to complain , Dost thou refuse thy welcome aid ?
Still wilt thou fly the plaintive voice of woe , And where thou ` rt dreaded , only aim the blow .
II .
Oh leave , fantastick tyrant , leave , The young , the gay , the happy , and the free : On them bestow a short reprieve , And bend thy fatal shafts at me .
The beauteous bride , or blooming heir , Let thy resistless power spare , And aim at this grief-wounded heart That springs half way to meet the welcome dart .
III .
Still must I view with streaming eyes , Another , and another morn arise  Are my days length ` ned to prolong my pain ?
Do grief and sickness waste this frame in vain ?
A finish'd wretch e'er youth has ceas'd to bloom , By early sorrow ripen'd for the tomb .
8 .
Gabriella D'Etrees , Dutchess of Beaufort , Mistress to Henry the Great of France .


Figure 1 .
Engraved for the Lady 's Museum


 THE HISTORY OF THE DUTCHESS of BEAUFORT .


 IT has been asserted by the enemies of our sex , that it is the fear of shame which keeps many women virtuous .
Had those detractors lived in an age when vice ceased to incur blame in proportion as it appeared in splendor , when riches procured guilt the distinction due to virtue , and indigence drew on virtue the contempt merited by guilt , when licentiousness of conduct was the road to grandeur , and every courtezan expected to be a peeress  they would be forced to confess that she who in such corrupt times preserved a purity of manners was virtuous upon principle , since shame was no longer to be dreaded as the attendant on vice .


To such of my fair readers as love virtue for her own sake , I present the history of the dutchess of Beaufort , mistress to Henry IV .
of France .
Here they will see grandeur purchased by crimes , and possessed with anxiety  schemes of ambition carried far into futurity , suddenly defeated by an immature and horrible death  and hence they may learn to rejoice in that innocence which is at once their merit and  their reward .
The amours of Henry the Great have been recorded by many writers , who , altho ' they indeed abound with facts , yet are they adorned and embellished with so many circumstances as have the appearance of being imaginary , that the whole seems either a tale invented to amuse than a real and interesting narrative :


To avoid being misled by those lively authors , I shall extract the history of the dutchess of Beaufort solely from the Memoirs of the Duke de Sully , prime-minister to Henry the Great , one of the wisest and most virtuous men of his age  and the reader will have the pleasure to see many passages in the words of that admirable writer .


Gabriella D'Etrees , afterwards so famous under the name of Dutchess of Beaufort , was descended from an ancient family in Picardy , to which the honourable post of grand-master of the artillery had been in a manner hereditary .


This young lady was so exquisitely beautiful , that she obtained the surname of Fair , to express the pre-eminence of her charms over all those of her sex and time .
Henry IV .
who was born a hero , and who at the most early age was called by fortune to the exertion of those qualities which so deservedly procured him the epithet of Great , had also the weakness of heroes , that alloy in his character otherwise so truly noble which serves to shew us that nothing is perfect here below .
Glory was not more his passion than love  and if on certain occasions he was capable of sacrificing his tenderness to his fame , on others he made no scruple to hazard his fame to gratify his tenderness .
At the time that Henry fell in love with mademoiselle  D' Etrees , he was at war with his own subjects .
Rebellion , sanctified by the name of religion , had given rise to the League , in which all the princes and great men of France were engaged .


The design of this formidable party was to exclude him from the succession on account of his being a protestant , and Henry III .
his immediate predecessor , lost his life by the hands of an assassin , for maintaining the rights of his injured kinsman .
Henry , when fighting for a kingdom , found love a stronger passion than ambition .
An accidental sight of mademoiselle D' Etrees inspired him with so violent a passion for her , that he often risqued his crown , his honour , and his life , for the satisfaction of talking to her a few moments .
Once in particular , when he was in a manner besieged in his camp by the duke of Parma , he disguised himself in the habit of a peasant , and passed through the enemy 's guards to make her a short visit .


It is not certain whether the fair Gabriella repaid this excessive tenderness with equal sincerity .
In such attachments few women separate the lover from the king .
Mademoiselle D'Etrees had not understanding enough to be capable of the refinements of a delicate passion .
She was interested , vain , and ambitious : she raised her hopes to the throne , and not only practised upon the weakness of Henry for this purpose , but formed cabals and intrigues to secure the success of her designs , which would in all probability have reduced her royal lover once more to the condition of an exile : yet she had the address to persuade him that she really loved him  or rather this thought was so necessary to his happipiness ,  that he assisted the crafty mistress in deceiving himself .


The Duke de Sully mentions , a sum of money which she lent the king in his distresses .
How great those distresses were the reader may conceive by the humorous representation which Henry himself gave of them in the following billet to the duke of Sully * .


' I am very near my enemies , and scarcely a horse to carry me into the battle , nor a complete suit of armour to put on  my shirts are all ragged , my doublets out at elbow , my kettle is seldom on the fire , and these two last days I have been obliged to dine where I could , for my purveyors have informed me , that they have not wherewithal to furnish my table . '
The king 's passion for mademoiselle D'Etrees was at first so far discountenanced by her parents , that they kept her in a severe confinement  and although Henry in his impatience to be with her would sometimes neglect to reap the fruits of a dear bought victory , and quitting the pursuit of the enemy , turn aside to the road that led to her house , yet a distant sight of her was all he could obtain .
Monsieur D'Etrees , supposing his daughter would be more secure from the king 's attempts when she was married , peremptorily insisted upon her giving her hand to Nicholas D'Amerval , lord of Liancourt .


Gabriella continued obstinate in her disobedience , till the king , who had made sure of monsieur de Liancourt , sent her word to comply , as  the only means of freeing herself from her present restraint .


It was certainly no proof of Henry 's understanding , though a great one of that blind passion which tyrannised over his heart , that he so securely relied upon the honour of a man who , to serve his designs , could consent to be a nominal husband , and upon the fidelity of a woman who entered into the most solemn engagement with a fixed purpose to break through it : however , an accident happened which awakened his suspicions .
It is thus related by the duke de Sully .


His majesty having sent Alibour , his first physician , to visit Madame de Liancourt , who was indisposed , ( this was in the beginning of his addresses to that lady . )
At his return he told the king , that she was indeed a little disordered  but that he need not be uneasy , for the consequence would be very good .
But will you not bleed and purge her ?
said the king to him .
I shall be very careful of doing that , replied the old man with the same simplicity , before she has gone half her time .
How !
interrupted the king , astonished and disordered to the last degree  what is it you say , friend ?
surely you rave , and are not in your right senses


Alibour supported his assertion with good proofs , which the king thought he should destroy , by telling him upon what terms he was with the lady .
I know not what you have done , or what you have not done , replied the old physician with great composure  and , for a complete proof , referred him to six or seven months from that time .


 The king quitted Alibour in great rage , and went immediately to reproach the sick fair one , who , no doubt , knew well enough how to new dress all the good man had ignorantly said  for it was not perceived that any misunderstanding happened between the king and his mistress .


It is certain , however , that the event was exactly conformable to Alibour 's prediction : but it was thought that Henry , after a more strict examination , was brought to believe , that he had been mistaken in his reckoning , since , instead of disowning the child that madam de Liancourt lay in of at Coucy , during the siege of Laon , he acknowledged it openly , and had it baptized by the name of Caesar .


Gabriella found it no difficult matter to persuade the king , that she loved him alone .
She affected the tender solicitude of a wife for his person and safety , when he left her to put himself at the head of his army  tears , swoonings , and passionate complaints , expressed her strong apprehensions of his danger .
She continued to lend him money in his exigencies  and we find in Sully 's Memoirs an order to him from the king to repay madame de Liancourt four thousand crowns he had borrowed from her .
It may easily be imagined that Henry was reduced to great streights when he consented to receive this assistance from his mistress .


Henry , while the affairs of his kingdom were still in the utmost confusion , and while several of the chiefs of the League were in arms against him , some of whom he was endeavouring to bring  over to his party by negotiations , and reducing others by force , found leisure for the soft anxities of love .


He was in Picardy , where , finding himself unable to support the absence of madame de Liancourt , he wrote to his faithful friend the duke of Sully , then marquis of Rosny , to conduct that lady to him .


In this journey the fair Gabriella was in imminent danger of her life .
The duke of Sully gives a particular account of it , which I shall transcribe for the sake of the observation he makes at the end of it * .


At Maubuisson I met madam de Liancourt , with whom I took the road to Clermont .
I rode seven or eight hundred paces before the litter in which this lady was , and which was followed at some distance by a great unwieldy coach that carried her women  before and behind this coach marched several mules loaded with baggage .


About a league from Clermont , where the road was very narrow , a steep hill on one side , and a hanging valley on the other , leaving only room enough for two carriages to go a-breast  the coachman alighting on some occasion or other , one of the mules passing near the side of the coach after it stopped , by its neighing and the sound of its bells , so terrified the horses , which unfortunately were young and skittish , that , taking the bit between their teeth , they drew the coach with such rapidity , that , meeting with two  other mules , they overturned them in their course .


The women within , seeing a thousand abysses opened under their feet , apprehended their danger , and sent forth most lamentable cries .


The coachman and muleteers endeavoured in vain to stop the horses : they were already within fifty paces of the litter , when madam Liancourt , alarmed by the noise , looked out , and screamed aloud .
I also turned back , and , trembling at the danger in which I saw this lady and her attendants , without being able to assist them , on account of the distance I was at , Ah , friend , said I to La Font , the women will be dashed in pieces , what will become of us ?
and what will the king say ?
While I was thus speaking , I pushed my horse forwards with all my strength  but this was useless , and I should have arrived too late .


By one of those lucky chances , and which almost amount to a miracle , when the danger was greatest , the axle-tree of the litter-wheels coming out of the nave by a violent shock which broke the pegs , the two wheels fell on each side , and the coach to the ground , and there stopped : one of the hindmost horses was thrown down by the shock , and kept in the other .
The fore horses broke their traces , and passed so close to the litter , which was already at the extremity of the precipice , that it is plain if they had drawn the coach along with it , it would have been thrown over it .


 I stopped them and gave them to my domesticks to hold , after which I flew to relieve Madame de Liancourt , who was half dead with fear .
I went next to the coach and assisted the women to get out of it : they were for having the coachman hanged  and I was complaisant enough to give him two or three strokes with my cane .
At length their terrors being entirely dissipated , and the carriage refitted , we resumed our journey  and till we arrived at Clermont I continued to ride close to Madame de Liancourt 's litter .


The king had set out for this place to meet his mistress , and arrived there a quarter of an hour after us .
I did not fail to inform him immediately of what had happened  and while I was relating this adventure , I observed him attentively , and saw him grow pale and tremble .
By these emotions , which I never saw in him in the greatest dangers , it was easy to guess the violence of his passion for this lady .


In the year 1596 the king created his mistress marchioness of Monceaux : his passion for her encreased to such a degree that he suffered no one to be ignorant of it .
He passed through Paris , with this lady by his side  and by the tenderness which he took pleasure to shew to her in public , he seemed to invite the adorations of his courtiers to this idol , who made her influence be universally felt .


Gabriella , under the appearance of a disinterested love for the king 's person , concealed a boundless ambition , which made her not scruple to sacrifice the honour of her royal lover to any prospect of  aggrandizing herself .
She contracted her son Caesar , whom she had by the king , to the opulent heiress of the house of Mercoeur .


The Duke of Mercoeur , who was then in arms against his sovereign , found himself by this alliance restored to his favour , without suffering the least diminution of his honours and estates  and Henry , anxious only to please his mistress , condescended to treat upon almost equal terms with a rebel subject , whom he had it in his power to crush at a blow .


The Duke of Sully did not fail to make very lively remonstrances to his master upon this occasion  but the whole affair was concluded before he had been made acquainted with it .


The ceremony of the contract was performed at Angers , with the same magnificence as if the little Caesar had been a son of France born in marriage .
He was then but four years old , and his betrothed wife but six .


The birth of a second son drew from the king an increase of tenderness and honours .
Gabriella now quitted the title of Marchioness of Monceaux for that of Dutchess of Beaufort .
As she had for a long time set no bounds to her ambition , she aspired at nothing less than being declared queen of France  and Henry 's passion for her , which encreased every day , gave her hopes of accomplishing her designs .


When she was informed that the king 's agents at Rome were commissioned to solicit the dissolution of his marriage with Margaret of Valois , and that his majesty was upon the point of sending the Duke of Luxembourg to that court , with the title of ambassador ,  to hasten the conclusion of it , she looked upon this to be a favourable opportunity  but apprehensive that those agents and the new ambassador would not enter into her views , she resolved to get Sillery , then minister of state , and who was already deep in her interests , to be nominated for this embassy .
As she well knew what was most likely to tempt him , she promised him the seals at his return from Rome , and the post of Chancellor when it became vacant .


At this price Sillery engaged with all the oaths she exacted of him to neglect nothing that might prevail upon the pope to legitimate the two children which she had by Henry , and to dissolve his marriage with Margaret .


This first step taken , few obstacles remained to hinder her advancement to the throne .
She easily found reasons to make the king approve of the ambassador she had chosen .
The Duke of Luxembourg was only suffered to set out , to be recalled as soon as Sillery should be in a condition to take his place .


The Dutchess assisted herself in preparing his equipages , and prevailed upon the king to give the necessary orders for Sillery 's appearance with all the pomp and magnificence by which the success of his negociation might be secured .


To prepare the French at the same time for the change which she meditated for her children , she prevailed upon the king , who had no less tenderness for them than the mother , to let the ceremony of her second son 's baptism be performed at Saint Germain , where the king then was , with the same  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  magnificence and honours which in this ceremony are only observed to the children of France .


` Although I could pardon this lady , says the Duke of Sully , for an intoxication in which she was kept by the servile respect the courtiers expressed for the children , and the adorations they offered to herself , yet I could not have the same indulgence for Henry , who was so far from taking any measures to undeceive her with regard to the extravagant hopes she had entertained , that he gave orders for the baptism of this child with a readiness that shewed how agreeable the request was to him . '


' I declared my sentiments , pursues the duke , of this conduct , with great freedom  I endeavoured publickly to oppose the inferences which the courtiers would make from it in favour of these children 's pretentions to the crown .
The king himself , when the ceremony was over , became sensible that his orders had been exceeded  and this I had no difficulty to believe . '


` The child was named Alexander , as the eldest had been Caesar  and the court-flatterers , by a kind of second baptism , gave him the title of Monsieur , which in France no one is permitted to bear but the king 's only brother , or the presumptive heir to the crown . '


` The mistress did not stop here  she began to assume all the airs of a queen : not indeed so much of her own accord , for I think she knew herself well enough not to have ventured on any such notion , but driven on to take that step by  the continual solicitations of her creatures and relations . '


` Madame de Sourdis , Cheverny , and Fresne , seconded her so well on their parts , that it became insensibly the public talk of the court , that the king was going to marry his mistress  and that it was for this purpose he was soliciting his divorce at Rome . '


' I was shocked at a report so injurious to the glory of this prince  I went to him and made him sensible of the consequence of it .
He appeared to me affected , and even piqued at it : his first care was to justify Madame de Beaufort , who , he positively assured me , had not contributed to the report  for which , all the proof he had was , that she had told him so . '


` He threw the whole blame upon Madame de Sourdis and Fresne , to whom he shewed that he was capable of pardoning a conduct so little respectful to him , since although he was assured they were guilty , he gave them not the slightest reprimand . '


` One circumstance added great weight to the steps I took in this affair , both in public and private .
Queen Margaret , with whom the affair of the approaching dissolution of her marriage obliged me to keep a correspondence by letters , was the last who heard of what was said and done at court with regard to Madame de Beaufort 's pretensions  as soon as she was informed of them she wrote to me , and gave me to understand , that she had not changed her mind concerning a separation from the king  but  that she was so much offended at their intending to give the place she resigned , to a woman so infamous as the Dutchess was , by her commerce with the king , that although she had at first given her consent , without annexing any conditions to it , she was now determined to insist upon the exclusion of this woman  and no treatment whatever should oblige her to alter her resolution .
I shewed this letter to the king , who judging by it how much his marriage with his mistress would irritate the best of his subjects against him , began , in reality , to change his sentiments and conduct . '


' I was of opinion , that if madame de Beaufort was acquainted with the contents of this letter , it might probably produce the same effects upon her .
I would not take this trouble upon myself , being unwilling to meet the insolence and rage of a woman , who looked upon me as a stumbling block in the way of her advancement  but I communicated the letter to Chiverny and Fresne , who immediately informed Madame de Sourdis of it , and she almost in the same moment the Dutchess of Beaufort . '


` But this lady 's counsellors were not so easily alarmed  they were very sensible that the step they had undertaken to prevail upon the king , would not fail of meeting with many difficulties , and they had settled their behaviour upon each : the result of their deliberations had been to hasten , as much as possible , the conclusion of the affair , persuading themselves , that when it was once over , they might give it a colour that  should make it excusable  or at worst , matters might be composed after a little talk , as always happens when things are without remedy . '


` They knew well the disposition of the French nation , especially the courtiers , whose first law it is to be always of the same mind with the sovereign  and whose strongest passion the desire of pleasing him .
In a word , they thought themseves secure of every thing , provided the king himself did not fail them . '


` Fresne having drawn up the warrant for the payment of the heralds , trumpeters , and other officers of the crown who had attended at the ceremony of this baptism , it was brought to me as well as the rest of the counsellors , that I might give my order for its discharge .
As soon as I cast my eyes upon this writing , a tender concern for the king 's honour made me look upon it as a lasting witness of his weakness , which was going to be handed down to posterity .
I hesitated not a moment to return it , and caused another to be drawn up in terms more proper . '


` The titles of Monsieur , son of France , and all that could give any notion of that kind were suppressed , and consequently the houshold fees were reduced to the ordinary sum , with which they were highly dissatisfied .
They did not fail to renew their efforts  and in their discontent quoted monsieur de Fresne , and the law by which their claims were regulated .
At first I restrained myself before these people , whose bad intentions I was not ignorant of  but growing impatient at last , I could not help saying to  them with some indignation , Go , go , I will do nothing in it  learn that there are no sons of France '


This firmness in Sully was the occasion of a quarrel between the king and the fair Gabriella .
The duke relates it at large in his memoirs  and the whole passage being extremely curious , I shall give my readers the pleasure of seeing it here .


The duke continues thus .
` No * sooner had these words escaped me , than , suspecting that a troublesome affair would be made of it  to prevent it I went immediately to his majesty , who was walking with the duke D'Epernon in the palace of Saint-Germain .
I shewed him the warrant Fresne had drawn up , telling him , that if it was allowed , there needed no more but to declare himself married to the dutchess of Beaufort .
This is Fresne 's malice , said the king , after he had read it , but I shall take care to prevent it '


` Then commanding me to tear the paper , he turned to three or four lords of the court who were nearest him .
How malignant are these people , said he aloud , and what difficulties do they throw in the way of those who serve me with fidelity ?
they brought a warrant to monsieur de Rosney , with a design to make him offend me , if he passed it  or my mistress , if he refused it . '


` In the state affairs then were , these words were far from being indifferent  they gave the  courtiers , who had smiled at my simplicity , to understand that they might possibly be deceived themselves , and that the supposed marriage was not so near as they had imagined . '


` The king continuing to converse with me apart , told me , that he did not doubt but that madame de Beaufort was greatly enraged against me , and advised me to go to her , and endeavour by solid reasons to give her satisfaction .
If that will not do , added he , I will speak to her as her master . '


' I went directly to the dutchess 's apartment , which was in the cloister of Saint-Germain  I knew not what notion she conceived of a visit , which she found I began with a sort of explanation .
She did not allow me to go on  the rage with which she was animated not permitting her to observe any measures , she interrupted me with a reproach that I had imposed on the king , and made him believe that black was white . '


'' Tis well , madam , said I , interrupting her in my turn , but with great calmness , since you think fit to talk in this manner , I shall take my leave , but I shall not however , neglect to do my duty Saying this , I left her , not being willing to hear more , that I might not be tempted to say any thing severer .
I put the king in a very ill humour with his mistress , when I repeated to him what she said .
Come along with me , said the king , with an emotion that pleased me greatly , and I will let you see that women do not wholly possess me '


 ` His coach not being ready soon enough for his impatience , his majesty got into mine , and as we drove to the dutchess 's lodgings , he told me that he would never have cause to reproach himself , that , through his complaisance for a woman , he had banished , or even disgusted servants , who , like me , were only solicitous for his glory and interest . '


` Madame de Beaufort , upon my leaving her apartment so hastily , had expected to see the king soon after  and during that time had taken sufficient pains to adorn her person  believing like me that the victory which one or other of us was to gain would be the happy or miserable presage of her fortune . '


` As soon as she was informed of the kind 's arrival , she came as far as the door of the first hall to receive him .
Henry without saluting her , or shewing any part of his usual tenderness , Let us go , madam , said he , to your chamber , and suffer no one to enter but yourself , Rosney , and me , for I want to talk to you both , and make you live together upon friendly terms '


` Then ordering the door to be shut , and that no one should be suffered to remain in the chamber , wardrobe , or closet , he took her hand , holding one of mine at the same time , and with an air that she had good reason to be surprised at , told her , that the true motive which had determined him to attach himself to her , was the gentleness he had observed in her disposition  but that her conduct for some time past , had convinced him , that what he had believed to be real was only dissembled   and that she had deceived him : he reproached her with the bad counsels she had listened to , and the very considerable faults they had occasioned . '


` He loaded me with praises , to shew the dutchess , by the difference of our proceedings , that I only had a true affection for his person : he commanded her to subdue her aversion for me so far as to be able to regulate her conduct by my advice , since she might depend upon it his passion for her should never induce him to banish me from his presence . '


` Madame de Beaufort began her answer with sighs and tears .
She affected a tender and submissive air : she would have kissed the hand of Henry  omitting no artifice which she thought capable of melting his heart .
It was not till she had played over all these little arts , that she began to speak , which she did by complaining , that instead of those returns she might have expected from a prince to whom she had given her heart , she saw herself sacrificed to one of his grooms . '


` She recapitulated all that I had done against her children , in order to awake his majesty 's resentment against me  then feigning to sink under the violence of her grief and despair , she let herself fall upon a couch , where she protested she was determined to die , not being able to endure life after so cruel an affront . '


` The attack was a little strong .
Henry did not expect it : I observed him heedfully , and saw his countenance change  but recovering himself  immediately , that his mistress might not perceive it , he continued to tell her in the same tone , that she might spare herself the trouble of having recourse to so many artifices on so slight an occasion . '


` Sensibly affected at this reproach , she redoubled her tears , crying that she plainly perceived she was abandoned  and that doubtless it was to augment her shame and my triumph , that the king had resolved to make me a witness of the severest behaviour that ever was shewn to a woman . '


` This thought seemed to plunge her into a real despair .
By heaven , madam , said the king , losing patience , this is too much .
I know to what all this artifice tends : you want to prevail upon me to banish a servant whose assistance I can not be without  I declare to you if I was reduced to the necessity of chusing to lose one or the other , I would rather part with ten mistresses like you , than one servant such as him .
He did not forget the term of groom which she had made use of  and was still more offended , that she had applied it to a man whose family had the honour of being allied to his own . '


` After this harsh speech the king quitted the dutchess suddenly , and was going out of her apartment , without seeming to be moved at the condition he left her in  probably because he knew her well enough to be sensible that all this violence of grief was affectation and grimace . '


 ` As for me , I was so far deceived by it , as to be greatly concerned for her , and was not drawn out of this error , till madam de Beaufort , perceiving the king was going to leave her so much offended , that she had reason to apprehend he would never return again , changed her behaviour in an instant , ran to stop him , and threw herself at his feet , no longer to impose upon his tenderness , but to sooth him to a forgetfulness of her fault .
She began by apologising for her past conduct , assumed an air of gentleness and complacency , and vowed she never had , nor ever would have any will but his . '


` Never was there a change of scene more sudden !
I now saw a woman perfectly agreeable , easy , and compliant , who acted towards me as if all that had just passed had been a dream  and we separated very good friends . '


The dutchess of Beaufort however still entertained hopes of being queen of France .
She employed every artifice which her own cunning and the more subtile policy of her relations suggested to her to secure the success of her designs .
The king having recovered from a dangerous fit of illness , she engaged his first physician , who was absolutely devoted to her , to persuade him that he could have no more children .


She had practised so successfully upon some of his ministers of state , that they made no scruple to advise Henry to secure the succession by marrying the dutchess , and legitimating the eldest of the children which he had by her .


 That the king was but too well disposed to admit this counsel appears by the following conversation which he had with the duke of Sully , who of all his ministers was the only one that had courage and resolution enough to oppose a design so injurious to his honour .


` The king , says the duke of Sully * , at certain intervals , appeared so pensive and reserved , that it was not difficult to guess some secret uneasiness preyed upon his mind  and I was the more convinced of it , when his majesty , who often diverted himself with hunting , ordered me twice to follow him apart , that he might have an opportunity of conversing with me alone  yet when I did he was silent . '


' I then remembered that the same thing had happened at Saint Germain and Angers  and I concluded that he had a design in view , which he had some difficulty to disclose to me , knowing with what freedom I sometimes opposed his opinions  but what this design was I could not guess .
Returning from a visit to the duke of Bouillon , his majesty being at the foot of the stair case , saw me as I entered the court , and calling me , made me go with him into the garden , which was extremely large and beautiful , holding my hand with his finger between mine as usual , then ordered the door to be shut , and that no person should be allowed to enter . '


` This prelude made me expect to hear a secret of great consequence .
Henry did not enter upon  it immediately  but , as if he had not sufficient resolution to explain himself , began to tell me what had just happened between him and the duke of Bouillon .
This conversation was followed by news relating to the negotiations of Vervins , and led him insensibly to reflect on the advantages France would receive from a peaceable government . '


` One circumstance the king said gave him great uneasiness , which was , that not having children by the queen his wife , it would answer no purpose to be at so much trouble to procure peace and tranquility to his kingdom , since , after his death , it must necessarily fall into its former calamities , by the disputes that would arise between the prince of Condé , and the other princes of the blood , concerning the succession to the crown . '


` His majesty confessed to me , that this was his motive for desiring with such ardour to leave sons behind him .
Unless his marriage with the princess Margaret could be dissolved , it was not possible for him to be absolutely happy  but the informations he received from the archbishop of Urbin , Mess .
du Perron , D'Ossat , and de Marquemont , his deputies at Rome , of the pope 's favourable dispositions in respect to that affair , gave him great hopes of its success .
In effect , Clement the Eighth , who was as good a politician as any prince in Europe , revolving in his mind what means were most likely to hinder France and the other christian kingdoms from falling again into a state of anarchy and confusion , could find none so effectual as to secure  the succession to the crown of France , by authorising Henry to engage in a second marriage , which might produce him male children . '


` Our conversation being fixed upon this subject , it was easy for me to perceive that it was from hence his majesty 's uneasiness proceeded  but I could not so soon know what was the particular thing that disturbed him .
The king began to consider with me what princess of Europe he should chuse for his wife , in case his marriage with Margaret of Valois should be dissolved  but indeed he set out with a declaration that shewed , that any reflections on that head would be fruitless . '


` That I may not repent , said he , of taking so dangerous a step , nor draw upon myself a misfortune , which is with justice said to exceed all others , that of having a wife disagreeable in person and mind  it is necessary that in her I marry , I should find these seven things , beauty , prudence , softness , wit , fruitfulness , riches , and a royal birth . '


` But there was not one in all Europe with whom he appeared entirely satisfied .
I should have no objection to the infanta of Spain , pursued Henry although she is a little advanced in years , provided that with her I could marry the Low-Countries  even if I should be obliged to restore to you the Earldom of Bethune : neither would I refuse the princess * Arabella of  England , if , as it is publickly said , that crown really belongs to her , she were only declared presumptive heiress of it  but there is no reason to expect that either of these things will happen .
I have also heard of some princesses of Germany , whose names I have forgot  but the women of this country do n't suit me  I should always fancy I had a hogshead of wine in bed with me : besides , I have been told that France had once a queen of that country , who had like to have ruined it .
All these considerations have given me a disgust to the German ladies .
The sisters of Prince Maurice have likewise been mentioned to me  but besides that they are protestants , which would give umbrage to the court of Rome , and the more zealous catholics , they are daughters of a nun , which , together with a certain reason that I will inform you of some other time , has prevented my entertaining any thoughts of them .
The Duke of Florence has a niece who is said to be handsome , but she is descended from one of the most inconsiderable families in Christendom , that bear the title of prince  it not being above three-score or four-score years since her ancestors were only the first citizens of Florence : she is likewise of the same race with the queen-mother Catherine , who did so much mischief to France , and to me in particular . '


` These , continued the king , observing that I listened attentively to him , are all the foreign princesses that I have any knowledge of : of those within  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  my kingdom , my niece of Guise would please me best * , notwithstanding the malicious reports that have been spread that she loves poulets † in paper better than in a fricassee  for my part , I not only believe those reports to be false , but should rather chuse a wife who is a little fond of gallantry , than one who wanted understanding  but I am apprehensive that the violent affection which she discovers for her family , particularly for her brothers , would create some disorders in the kingdom . '


` After this the king named all the other princesses in France , but to as little purpose : he acknowledged that some were beautiful , and genteel , such as the eldest of the Duke of Maienne 's two daughters , although of a brown complexion  the two daughters likewise of the Duke of Aumale , and three of the Duke of Longueville  but all these were either too young , or were not to his taste . '


` He afterwards named Mademoiselle Rohan , the Princess of Conti 's daughter , of the house of Lucé , Mademoiselles Luxembourg and Guémené  but the first was a protestant , and the second not old enough  and the persons of the  two others did not please him  and all for some reason or other were excluded . '


` The king closed this enumeration by saying , that although these ladies might be all agreeable enough to him in their persons , he saw no way to be assured that they would bring him heirs , or that he could suit himself to their tempers , or be convinced of their prudence , three of the seven conditions , without which he had resolved never to marry  since , if he entered into an engagement of that kind , it would be with a design to give his wife a share in the management of all his domestick affairs  and that , if according to the course of nature , he should die before her , and leave chldren very young behind him , it would be necessary that she should be able to superintend their education , and govern the kingdom during a minority . '


` Weary at length of endeavouring to no purpose to find out what the king aimed at by this discourse  But what do you mean , Sire , said I , by so many affinitives and negatives  and what am I to conclude by them , but that you are desirous to marry , and yet can not find a woman upon earth qualified to be your wife ?
By the manner in which you mentioned the Infanta Clara Eugenia , it should seem that great heiresses are most agreeeable to you  but can you expect that heaven should raise a Margaret of Flanders , or a Mary of Burgundy from the dead for you  or at least restore the Queen of England to her youth ? '


' I added smiling , that for proof of the other qualities that he demanded , I saw no better expedient  than to bring all the beauties of France together , from the age of seventeen to that of twenty-five , that by talking with them in person , he might know the turn of their temper and genius  and that for the rest he should refer himself to experienced matrons , to whom recourse is had on such occasions . '


` Then beginning to talk more seriously , I declared that , in my opinion , his majesty might contract his expectations , by striking off a great fortune and royal birth , and be satisfied with a wife who might keep his heart , and bring him fine children  but that here again he must content himself with mere probability , there being many beautiful women incapable of child-bearing  and many illustrious fathers unhappy in their offspring : but whatever his children should prove , the blood from which they sprung would secure the respect and obedience of the French nation . '


` Well , interrupted the king , setting aside your advice concerning this assembly of beauties , with which I am mightily diverted , and your sage reflection , that great men have often children who possess none of their qualities , I hope to have sons whose actions shall exceed mine .
Since you confess that the lady whom I marry ought to be of an excellent temper , beautiful in her person , and of such a make as to give hopes of bringing children  consider a little , whether you do not know a person in whom all these qualities are united . '


' I replied , that I would not take upon me to decide hastily upon a choice wherein so much consideration  was requisite , and to which I had not yet sufficiently attended . '


` And what would you say , returned Henry , if I should name one , who , I am fully convinced possesses these three qualities ? '


' I would say , sire , replied I , with great simplicity , that you are much better acquainted with her than I am , and that she must necessarily be a widow , otherwise you can have no certainty , with regard to her fruitfulness . '


` This is all you would desire , said the king  but if you can not guess who she is , I will name her to you . '


` Name her then , said I , for I own I have not wit enough to find out who she is . '


` Ah !
how dull you are , cried the king  but I am persuaded you could guess who I mean if you would , and only affect this ignorance to oblige me to name her myself  confess then that these three qualities meet in my mistress  not ( pursued the king in some confusion , at this discovery of his weakness ) that I have any intention to marry her , but I want to know what you would say , if , not being able to meet with any other whom I could approve of , I should one day take it into my head to make her my wife . '


` It was not difficult for me to discover , amidst these slight artifices , that his majesty had already thought of it but too much , and was but too well disposed to this unworthy marriage , which every thing he had said tended to excuse . '


 ` My astonishment was indeed very great , but I thought it necessary to conceal my thoughts with the utmost care .
I affected to believe that he was jesting , that I might have an opportunity of answering in such a manner as might make the king ashamed of having entertained so extravagant a notion . '


` My dissimulation did not succeed  the king had not made so painful an effort to stop there .
I command you , said he to me , to speak freely , you have acquired the right of telling me plain truths  do not apprehend that I shall be offended with you for doing so , provided that it is in private  such a liberty in public would greatly offend me . '


' I replied that I would never be so imprudent as to say any thing in private , any more than in public , that might displease him , except on such occasions when his life or the good of the state was in question .
I afterwards represented to him the disgrace so scandalous an alliance would draw upon him , in the opinion of the whole world , and the reproaches he would suffer from his own mind upon that account , when the ardour of his passion being abated , he should be able to judge impartially of his own conduct . '


' I shewed him that if this was the only means he could have recourse to , to free France from the calamities a doubtful succession would produce , that he would expose himself to all the inconveniences he was anxious to avoid , and others still greater .
That although he should legitimate the children he had by madame de Liancourt , yet that could not hinder the eldest , who  was born in a double adultery , from being in this respect , inferior to the second , whose birth was attended with but half of that disgrace , and both must yield to those whom he might have by madam de Liancourt , after she was his lawful wife  it being therefore impossible to settle their claims , they could not fail of becoming an inexhaustible source of quarrels and war .
I leave you , sire , pursued I , to make reflections upon all this , before I say any more '


` That will not be amiss , returned the king , who was struck with my arguments , for you have said enough of this matter for the first time . '


` But such was the tyranny of that blind passion , with which he was inflamed , that in spite of himself he renewed the subject that very moment by asking me , if , from the disposition I knew the French to be of , especially the nobility , I thought he had any reason to apprehend they would rise in rebellion while he was living , if he should marry his mistress . '


` This question convinced me , that his heart had received an incurable wound .
I treated him accordingly , and entered into arguments and expostulations , with which I shall not trouble the reader , since his own imagination may suggest to him all that it was necessary to say upon this occasion  and this subject has been already dwelt upon too long .
We continued three hours alone in the garden , and I had the consolation to leave the king in a full persuasion of the truth and reasonableness of all I had said to him . '


 ` The difficulty lay in breaking those two powerful ties  the king had not yet brought himself to that point  he had many dreadful conflicts of mind to suffer e'er that could be effected  and all he could do for the present , was to defer taking his last resolution till he had obtained the permission he had been so long solliciting from the pope , and till then to keep his sentiments secret . '


` He promised me not to acquaint his mistress with what I had said , lest it should draw her resentment upon me .
She loves you , said the king to me , and esteems you still more  but her mind still entertains some remains of distrust , that you will not approve of my design in favour of her and her children : she often tells me , that when one hears you perpetually carrying in your mouth my kingdom and my glory  one is apt to think that you prefer the one to my person , and the other to my quiet . '


' I answered , that against this charge I would make no defence  that the kingdom and the sovereign were to be looked upon with the same eyes .
Remember , sire , added I , that your virtue is the soul that animates this great body , which must by its splendor and prosperity repay you that glory which it derives from you , and that you are not to seek happiness by any other means . '


` After this we left the garden , and it being night separated , leaving the courtiers to rack their imaginations to guess the subject of so long a conference . '


[ To be continued ] 9 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER II . ]


 FROM the account I have already given of my temper and inclinations , it will be readily supposed that the love of power , which our great satirist asserts to be the ruling passion of my sex , is not the least prevailing one of mine  and therefore I will candidly acknowledge that the too perceptible decline of our influence has often been the subject of much painful reflection to me .


We live no longer in those happy times , when to recover one stolen fair one , whole nations took up arms  when the smile of beauty was more powerful than the voice of ambition  when heroes conquered to deserve our favour , and poets preferred the myrtle to the laurel crown .


In this degenerate age instances of dying for love are very rare , and instances of marrying for  love are still rarer .
Formerly , if a lady had commanded her lover to bring her the head of a lion , he would have gone to Africa in search of the savage conquest , though death were to have been the consequence of his obedience : but now , what lady would presume so much upon her authority , as to exact from her lover the sacrifice of a party at whist , or a match at Newmarket !


However desirous I am to find the cause of this decline of our empire in the depraved manners of the men , yet justice obliges me to own that we ourselves are not wholly free from blame .
Beauty , like the majesty of kings , weakens its influence when familiarised to common view .
The face that may be seen every morning at auctions , at public breakfastings , and in crouded walks  every evening at assemblies , at the play , the opera , or some other fashionable scene of pleasure , soon loses the charm of novelty , and effaces the impression it first made .
We may gaze upon a fine picture till the grace of the attitude , the loveliness of the features , and the strength of the colouring cease to surprise and delight us  and unhappily many of our present race of beauties are too solicitous about their personal charms to attend to the improvement of their minds : so that a fine woman is indeed often no more than a fine picture .


It has been observed , that there is no country in the world where women enjoy so much liberty as in England , and none where their sway is so little acknowledged .
In Spain , where the severe father , and jealous brother , guard the secluded maid from all converse with men , she will conquer more hearts by being seen once without a veil , than one of our  beauties , who appears with her neck and shoulders uncovered at every place of publick resort during the whole season .


The Spanish lover passes whole nights at his mistress 's door , and employs sighs , tears , serenades , and tender complaints to move her companion  bribes the vigilant duenna with half his estate to procure him a short interview at a grated window : and for this inestimable favour he exposes himself to the rage of her relations , who probably stand ready to punish his presumption with death  while he , regardless of the insidious stab , contemplates her by the faint light of the moon , with enthusiastic rapture .


For her sake he enters the dreadful lists , and encounters the fiercest bull of Andalusia  the spectators tremble at his danger  he looks up to the balcony where she is stated , and catches fortitude from her eyes .
Should he be wounded in the unequal combat , a sign from her gives him new force and courage : again he assails his furious antagonist , and drives him bellowing about the field .
The lady waves her handkerchief to him as a token of her joy for his victory  the lover , half dead with fatigue and loss of blood , but triumphing more in that instance of her regard for him than in the loud acclamations he hears on every side , turns to the place where she stands , kisses his sword , and is carried out of the lists .


Thus ardent are the flames which love inspires in a country where the promiscuous assembly , the wrangling card-table , the licentious comedy , and late protracted ball , are not permitted to rob  beauty of its most engaging charms , the blush of unsullied modesty , and the soft dignity of female reserve .


With us the lover dresses at his mistress , sings , dances , and coquets with her , expects to dazzle her with superior charms , and loves her for the superficial qualities he admires in himself .
He hopes not to gain her heart in reward of his services and constancy , but claims it as a price due to the resistless graces of his person .


Such is the low state of our power at present , and such it will continue till our own prudence and reserve supply the place of imposed retiredness , and throw as many difficulties in the lover 's way as the tyranny of custom does in other countries .
Beauty , like the Parthian archer , wounds surest when she flies , and we then most certain of victory when we have not courage enough to invite the attack .


10 .
Conclusion of the HISTORY of the DUTCHESS of BEAUFORT


THE Dutchess of Beaufort was not ignorant that the Duke of Sully opposed all her designs  she knew the power which his wisdom and integrity gave him over the mind of the king  but such was her confidence in her own charms , and in those schemes which her low cunning , and the interested policy of her relations and dependants had suggested , that she fondly flattered herself  neither reasons of state , nor motives of honour would have force enough to hinder her royal lover from gratifying her wishes .


Henry , either because he had not yet taken any resolution against her , or , that his tenderness and regard for her hindered him from declaring it , suffered her to remain in this pleasing delusion .


In the mean time she appeared in the state and equipage of a queen  the servile courtiers anticipated her expected dignity by paying her those honours which were due only to the wife of their prince .
No language but that of adulation ever reached her ear  power , magnificence , pleasure , offered her every day successive delights  her smile was considered as the smile of fortune  less successful guilt looked up to her with secret repinings  envy , dazzled by her blaze of grandeur , durst not even in whispers breathe its discontent  and only virtue beheld her at once with pity and contempt .


In the midst of all this splendor madame de Beaufort was completely wretched  the fear of future disappointments rendered her present enjoyments tasteless  conscious of the slender chains by which she held the king 's heart , she lived in perpetual anxiety , lest her beauty should suffer any decay  the slightest alteration in her complexion filled her with dreadful alarms , and every evening brought with it the painful reflection that she was now a day older than she was yesterday .


While the dissolution of the king 's marriage with Margaret of Valois was soliciting at Rome ,  she equally dreaded and wished for the determination of that important affair .


If the divorce was granted , the king would indeed be at liberty to marry her , but he would be free likewise to marry any one else  and all the wisest and best of his subjects earnestly desired to see him married to some princess of Europe , who might bring him heirs worthy to reign over them  and if among all those princesses who were judged to be suitable matches for Henry the IV .
she heard any of them praised for their beauty , she trembled and could not conceal her uneasiness .


The king caused the pictures of the Infanta of Spain , and of Mary de Medicis to be shewn to her , being curious to know what she would say .


' I am under no apprehension of that brown woman , said she , speaking of the Infanta , but the Florentine fills me with dread . '


This painful anxiety , which was the consequence of her precarious situation , received continual increase by the confidence she placed in the predictions of astrologers .


` Madame de Beaufort , says the Duke of Sully , was the weakest of her sex , with regard to divination : she did not pretend to deny that she consulted astrologers concerning her affairs  and indeed she had always a great many of them about her , who never quitted her  and what is most surprising , though she doubtless paid them well , yet they never foretold her any thing but what was disagreeable . '


` One said that she would never be married but once , another that she would die young , a third  warned her to take care of being with child , and a fourth assured her that she would be betrayed by one of her friends .
Hence proceeded that melancholy which oppress'd her , and which she was never able to overcome . '


` Gracienne , one of her women , has since told me , that she would often retire from company to pass whole nights in grief and weeping , on account of these predictions . '


If we add to this continual anxiety the stings of conscience for unrepented guilt , can imagination form the idea of a more wretched being than this woman , in the midst of all her splendor , power , and magnificence ?


The trouble of despair , says a sensible writer , always rises in proportion to the evil that is feared  consequently the greatest agonies of expectation are those which relate to another world .


These agonies , which she who lived in an infamous commerce with a married man often experienced , were heightened by an event which affected her more than any other person , and seemed a frightful presage of her own approaching fate .


She was far advanced in another guilty pregnancy , when the strange death of Louisa de Budos , second wife to Henry Constable de Montmorency , filled her with unusual horrors , and embittered all the short remainder of her life .


` These two deaths ( says the Duke of Sully speaking of the constable 's lady , and Madame de Beaufort ) made a great noise every where , and were attended with a surprising similarity of very uncommon circumstances : both were seized  with a violent distemper that lasted only three or four days  and both , tho ' extremely beautiful , became horribly disfigured , which together with some other circumstances , that at any other time would have been thought natural , or only the effects of poison , raised a report in the world , that the deaths of these two young ladies , as well as their elevation , was the work of the devil , who made them pay dearly for that short felicity he had procured them .
And this was certainly believed not only amongst the common people , who are generally credulous to a high degree of folly , but amongst the courtiers themselves . '


`` This , pursues the duke of Sully , is what is related of the constable 's lady , and as it is said by the ladies who were then at her house : she was conversing with them gaily in her closet , when one of her women entered in great terror , and told her that a certain person , who called himself a gentleman , and who indeed had a good presence , saying that he was quite black , and of a gigantic stature , had just entered her antichamber , and desired to speak to her about affairs of great consequence , which he could communicate to none but her .


`` At every circumstance relating to this extraordinary courier , the lady was seen to grow pale  and appeared so oppressed with grief , that she could scarcely bid her woman intreat the gentleman to defer his visit to another time  to which he replied in a tone that filled the messenger with horror , That since the lady would not come to him willingly he would take the trouble to go and seek her in her closet .
She , who was more afraid of a publick than  a private audience , resolved at last to go to him , but with all the marks of a deep despair .


`` The terrible message performed , she returned to her company , bathed in tears , and half dead with dismay : she had only time to speak a few words to take leave of them , particularly of three ladies who were her intimate friends , and to assure them that she should never see them more .


`` That instant she was seized with exquisite pains , and died at the end of three days , filling all who saw her with horror at the frightful change of every feature in her once lovely face . ''


The dutchess of Beaufort proved the truth of that observation , that repentance is often not so much remorse for our sins , as fear of the consequence - This fear indeed acted powerfully upon her mind  but it did not produce reformation in her conduct , which is the only infallible sign by which true penitence may be known .


The king having resolved to spend the Easter holidays at Fontainebleau , was unwilling to incur the censure of keeping this lady with him during that sacred festival .
Madame de Beaufort , who had insisted upon making one of the party with the king , was sensibly mortified when , after a stay only of three or four days , he intreated her to leave him at Fontainebleau , and return herself to Paris .


This request , enforced by motives drawn from the impropriety of their continuing together at such a time , was received with tears by the dutchess .
Whether it was that her pride was sensibly wounded by the king 's so easily admitting the necessity of her absence , or that she had really some secret foreboding  that she should never see him more , she seemed to consider this separation as the greatest misfortune that could befal her .


The duke of Sully , as well as all the other historians who have mentioned this parting of the king and his mistress , allow that there was something very extraordinary in the grief expressed by the two lovers upon this occasion .


When the moment came that madame de Beaufort was to leave Fontainbleau , she appeared overwhelmed with anguish .
The king , who was more passionately fond of her than ever , struggled to repress his emotions : he conducted her half way to Paris  and although they proposed only an absence of a few days , yet they dreaded the moment of separation , as if they were never to meet more .
` Those ( says the duke of Sully ) who are inclined to give faith to such kind of forebodings will lay some stress upon this relation .
The two lovers renewed their endearments  and in every thing they said to each other at that moment , some persons have pretended to find proofs of these presages of an inevitable fate . '


Henry sighing led his mistress to the boat which was to carry her down to the arsenal .
Just as she was preparing to enter it , she stopped , and turning to the king , who was oppressed with grief , she spoke to him , as if for the last time .
She recommended to his care her children , her estate of Monceaux , and her domestics .
Henry listened to her  but , instead of comforting her , gave way to sympathising sorrow .
Again they took leave of each other , and a secret emotion again drew them to each other 's arms .


 The king , not being able to tear himself from her , the marshal D'Ornano , Roquelaure , and Frontenac , forced him away , and prevailed upon him at length to return to Fontainebleau , after he had tenderly recommended the care of his mistress to La Varenne , with orders to conduct her safely to the house of Zamet * , to whom he chose to confide this pledge so dear to him .


The duke of Sully being at Paris when madame de Beaufort arrived there , he thought himself obliged to wait on her before he set out for his estate at Rosny  and by the account he gives of her discourse to him , it appears that her melancholy ideas were already dissipated  and that she again indulged herself in her gay dreams of royalty , and cherished all her ambitious hopes : dreams so soon to be changed to a frightful certainty , and hopes shortly to terminate in despair and death !


` She gave me ( says the duke of Sully ) a most obliging reception , and seemed to have wholly forgot our dispute at Saint Germain  but not chusing to explain herself clearly upon that compliance with her projects to which she wished to bring me , she contented herself with endeavouring to engage me in her interest , by mingling with those civilities which she shewed to very few persons , words which carried a double sense , and hinted to me a boundless grandeur , if I would  relax a little in the severity of my counsel to the king with regard to her . '


' I ( pursues the duke ) who was as little moved with the chimeras that filled her head as with those she sought to inspire me with , pretended not to understand any part of a discourse intelligible enough  and answered her equivocal terms with general professions of respect , attachment , and devotion , which signify what one will . '


The dutchess of Sully going likewise to pay a visit to the triumphant mistress , was overwhelmed with the airs of royalty assumed by this poor creature already devoted to the shades of death , and so soon to answer at the tribunal of divine justice for that guilty grandeur which she prefered to eternal happiness .


Madame de Beaufort kindly intreated the dutchess of Sully to love her , and to converse with her as a friend .
` Entered into confidances ( says the duke of Sully ) that would have appeared to be the last instances of the most intimate friendship to those , who , like madame de Sully , knew not that the dutchess , who had no great share of understanding , was not very delicate in the choice of her confidants .
It was her highest pleasure to entertain any person she first saw with her schemes and expectations  and when she conversed with her inferiors , she scarce submitted to any caution  for with them she no longer guarded her expressions , but often assumed the state and language of a queen . '


` Madame de Sully ( continues the duke ) could not avoid shewing some surprize at the dutchess 's  discourse , especially when that lady , making an absurd assemblage of the civilities practised among persons of equal rank with these airs of a queen , told her she might come to her coucher and lever when she pleased , with many other speeches of the same kind . '


It was in the midst of these intoxicating dreams of ambition , and while she resigned her whole soul to scenes of present pleasure , and to hopes of future greatness , that Providence thought fit to put a period to her life .


She was still at the house of Sebastian Zamet , who had received his fair guest with all the assiduity of a courtier solicitous to please , when on Maundy Thursday , after a luxurious repast , she had an inclination to hear the evening service at Saint Anthony 's the Less : she was there seized with fainting fits , which obliged her attendants to carry her back immediately .


As soon as she arrived at Zamet 's , she went into the garden , hoping to receive some benefit from the air  but in a few minutes she was attacked with an apoplectic fit , which it was expected would have instantly stifled her .


She recovered a little , through the assistance that was given her  and , strongly prepossessed with a notion that she was poisoned , she commanded her servants to carry her from that house to madame de Sourdis her aunt , who lived in the cloister Saint Germain .


They had but just time to put her in bed , when thick succeeding convulsions , so dreadful as amazed  all who were present , and every symptom of approaching death , left monsieur Varenne , who had taken up the pen to inform the king of this melancholy accident nothing else to say , but that the physicians despaired of the dutchess 's life , from the nature of her distemper , which required the most violent remedies , and the circumstance of her being big with child , which made all applications mortal .


Scarce had he sent away the letter , when the dutchess , drawing near her last moments , fell into new convulsions , which disfigured her so horribly , that Varenne , not doubting but that the king would upon the receipt of his letter set out instantly to see his mistress , thought it more prudent to tell him in a second letter that she was dead , than expose him to a spectacle at once so dreadful and afflicting , as that of a woman whom he tenderly loved , expiring in agitations , struggles , and agonies which scarcely left any thing of human in her figure .


On the Saturday following the convulsions had turned her quite black , and writh'd her mouth to the back of her neck .
Riviere , the king 's first physician , coming in great haste upon this occasion with others of the king 's physicians , but just entered her chamber , and when he saw the extraordinary condition she was in went away , saying to those who were with him , This is the hand of God


A few moments afterwards the dutchess expired , in a general subversion of all the functions of nature , capable of inspiring horror and dismay .


The king who , upon the receipt of Varenne 's first letter , had not failed to mount his horse immediately , received the second when he was got  half way to Paris  and listening to nothing but the excess of his passion , was resolved , notwithstanding all that could be said to him to give himself the consolation of seeing his mistress once more .


Marshal Bassompierre , in his Memoirs , relates that Henry did not believe his mistress was dead , and continued his journey  but that Varenne , having come to acquaint the marshal D'Ornano and him , who had accompanied the dutchess to Paris , that she was just dead , they both took horse , to carry the melancholy news to the king , and hinder him from proceeding to Paris .


We found the king , says marshal Bassompierre , on the other side of La Saussaye near Vilejuif , coming on post horses with the utmost expedition .
As soon as he perceived the marshal D'Ornano , he suspected that he was come to bring him fatal tidings , which as soon as he had heard , he uttered the most passionate complaints .


These noblemen having with great difficulty prevailed upon Henry to go into the Abbey La Sauissay , they laid him upon a bed , till the coach which they had ordered to follow came from Paris : they put him into it , to carry him back to Fontainebleau , and during this little journey he was so oppress'd with grief that he fell into a fainting fit in the arms of the master of the horse .


As soon as he arrived at Fontainebleau he dispatched a messenger to the Duke of Sully , who was at his country-seat , to desire he would come to him instantly .


It is worthy remark , that the king should upon this occasion of his mistress 's death think no one  so capable of giving him consolation as the man who had most opposed his extravagant fondness for her  such is the involuntary homage which even the passions themselves pay to wisdom and virtue !


When this messenger arrived at the duke 's castle , he was conversing with his wife upon the extraordinary airs assumed by the Dutchess of Beaufort when she last saw her  and perceiving her to be so much affected with the discourse she had held with her as to conclude there would certainly be some very great change in the fortune of this lady , the duke acquainted her with Madame de Beaufort 's design to get herself declared queen , with the practices of her relations and dependants for that purpose , the struggles the king had in his own mind , and the resolution he had taken to overcome himself .


Madame de Sully was listening attentively to this relation , when they heard the bell of the first gate of the castle , without the moat , ring , and none of the servants answering , it being yet scarcely day , a voice several times repeated , I come from the king


The Duke of Sully that instant wakening one of the grooms of his chamber , sent him to open the gate  and in his impatience to know the cause of this early summons , he slipt on a night-gown and ran to meet the courier , when observing a deep concern upon his countenance , he asked him trembling , if the king was ill ?


No , replied the man , but he is in the utmost affliction , madame the dutchess is dead .


 ` This news , says the Duke of Sully , appeared to me so improbable , that I made him repeat his words several times  and when convinced that it was true , I felt my mind divided between grief for the condition to which her death reduced the king , and joy for the advantages all France would derive from it , which was increased , by my being fully persuaded that the king would by this transitory affliction purchase a release from a thousand anxieties , and much more anguish of heart than what he now actually suffered .
I went up again to my wife 's chamber full of these reflections , ` You will neither go to the dutchess 's Coucher nor Lever , said I , for she is dead . ' '


So sudden and so fatal a fall from all those towering hopes of grandeur filled Madame de Sully with astonishment and concern for the unhappy dutchess of Beaufort .
The shocking particulars of her strange death she was made acquainted with by a letter from La Varenne to her lord .


The Duke of Sully hastened to the king , whom he found walking in a gallery , so oppress'd with grief that all company was insupportable to him .
This wise counsellor and faithful friend employed every argument drawn from religion , virtue , and policy , to mitigate his sorrow : he even ventured to represent to him that the event which now caused him all this affliction was among the number of those which he would one day look upon as most fortunate : he conjured him to consider the painful situation he would have been in , if his mistress had lived  when on one side , struggling with the force  of a tender and violent passion , and on the other with the silent convictions of what honour and duty required of him , he would have been under an absolute necessity of coming to some resolution with respect to an engagement which he could not break without torture , nor continue without infamy .


Heaven , he told him , came to his assistance by a stroke painful indeed  but the only one that could open the way to a marriage upon which depended the tranquillity of France , the fate of Europe , the welfare of his subjects , and his own happiness .


` Henry , adds the Duke of Sully , had not the weakness of resigning himself up to grief through obstinacy  or of seeking a cure in insensibility .
He listened more to the dictates of his reason than his passion , and appeared already much less afflicted to the courtiers who entered his chamber .
At length , every one being careful not to renew his grief , which his daily employments gradually diminished , he found himself in that state which all wise men ought to be , who have had great subjects of affliction  that is , neither condemning nor flattering the cause , nor affecting either to recal or banish the remembrance of it * . '


11 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 MR. Herbert having recovered from the astonishment into which he had been thrown by the strange behaviour of Miss Darnley , endeavoured to comfort her mother , whose weak mind was more disposed to be alarmed at the threat she had uttered upon her quitting the room , than to resent such an insult to parental tenderness .


After gently insinuating to her , that she ought to reduce her eldest daughter to reason , by a proper exertion of her authority , he earnestly recommended to her to be particularly attentive to an affair which concerned the happiness of her youngest child , from whose piety and good sense she might promise herself so much comfort .


He advised her to give Sir Charles Stanley an opportunity of explaining himself to her as soon as possible  and to make him comprehend , that he must not hope for permission to pay his addresses to Sophia , till he had satisfied her that his intentions were such , as she ought to approve .


 Mrs. Darnley appeared so docile and complaisant upon this occasion , so ready to take advice , and so fully determined to be directed by it , that Mr. Herbert went away extremely well satisfied with her behaviour , and full of pleasing hopes for his beloved Sophia .


Harriot , in the mean time , was tormenting her sister above stairs : she had entered her room with a heart full of bitterness , and a countenance inflamed with rage , flinging the door after her with such violence , that Sophia letting fall her book , started up in great terror , and in a trembling accent asked her what was the matter with her ?


Her own apprehensions had indeed already suggested to her the cause of the disorder she appeared to be in , which it was not easy to discover in that torrent of reproach and invective with which she strove to overwhelm her .
Scornful and unjust reflections upon her person , bitter jests upon her pedantick affectation , and malignant insinuations of hypocrisy , were all thrown out with the utmost incoherence of passion  to which Sophia answered no otherwise than by a provoking serenity of countenance and calm attention .


That she was able to bear with so much moderation the cruel insults of her sister , was not more the effect of her natural sweetness of temper , than her good sense and delicate turn of mind .
The upper region of the air , says a sensible French writer , admits neither clouds nor tempests  the thunder , storms , and meteors , are formed below : such is the difference between a mean , and an exalted understanding .


 Harriot , who did not find her account in this behaviour , sought to rouse her to rage by reproaches still more severe , till having ineffectually railed herself out of breath , she aukwardly imitated her sister 's composure , folded her hands before her , and seating herself , asked her in a low but solemn tone of voice , whether she would deign to answer her one plain question ?


Sophia then resuming her seat , told her with a look of mingled dignity and sweetness , that she was ready to answer her any question , and give her any satisfaction she could desire , provided she would repress those indecent transports of anger , so unbecoming her sex and years .


Why , you little envious creature , said Harriot , you do not surely , because you are two or three years younger than I am , pretend to insinuate that I am old ?


No certainly , replied Sophia , half smiling , my meaning is , that you are too young to adopt , as you do , all the peevishness of old age  but your question sister , pursued she -


Well then , said Harriot , I ask you , how you have dared to say that Sir Charles Stanley was tired of me , and preferred you to me ?


Tired of you !
repeated Sophia , shocked at her coarseness and falshood , I never was capable of making use of such an expression , nor do I familiarise myself with ideas that need such strange language to convey them .


Harriot provoked almost to frenzy by this hint , which her indiscreet conduct made but too just , shew down stairs to her mother , and with mingled sobs and  exclamations , told her , that Sophia had treated her like an infamous creature , who had dishonoured herself and her family .


Mrs. Darnley , though more favourably disposed towards her youngest daughter , since she had been made acquainted with the baronet 's affection for her , yet was on this occasion governed by her habitual preference of Harriot  and sending for Sophia , she reproved her with great asperity for her insolent behaviour to her sister .


Sophia listened with reverence to her mother 's reproofs  and after justifying herself , as she easily might , from the accusation her sister had brought against her , she added , that not being willing to be exposed to any farther persecutions on account of Sir Charles Stanley , whose sincerity she thought very doubtful , she was resolved not to wait any longer for a place such as Mr. Herbert 's tenderness was in search of for her , but to accept the first reputable one that offered .


' I have not the vanity , madam , pursued she , to imagine that a man of rank and fortune can seriously resolve to marry an indigent young woman like me  and although I am humble enough to go to service , I am too proud to listen to the addresses of any man who , from his superiority of fortune , thinks he has a right to keep me in doubt of his intentions , or , in a mean dependance upon a resolution which he has not perhaps regard enough for me to make . '


This discourse was not at all relished by Mrs. Darnley , who conceived that many inconveniences were to be submitted to , for the enjoyment of affluence  and pleasure  but Sophia , who had revolved in her mind all the mortifications a young woman is exposed to , whose poverty places her so greatly below her lover  that she is to consider his professions as an honour , and to be rejoiced at every indication of his sincerity  her delicacy was so much wounded by the bare apprehension of suffering what she thought an indignity to her sex , that she was determined to give Sir Charles Stanley no encouragement , but to pursue her first design of seeking a decent establishment , suitable to the depress'd state of her fortune .


Mrs. Darnley , however , combatted her resolution with arguments which she supposed absolutely conclusive , and added to them her commands not to think any more of so humiliating a design , which so offended Harriot , that she broke out again into tears , exclamations , and reproaches .


Her mother would have found it a difficult task to have pacified her , had not a message from a lady , inviting her to a concert that evening , obliged her to calm her mind , that her complexion might not suffer from those emotions of rage which she had hitherto taken so little pains to repress .


As soon as Harriot retired , to begin the labours of the toilet , Mrs. Darnley , with great mildness , represented to Sophia , that it was her duty to improve the affection Sir Charles express'd for her , since by that means it might be in her power to make her mother and her sister easy in their circumstances , and engage their love for ever .


This was attacking Sophia on her weak side  she answered with the softest tenderness of look  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  and accent , ` That it was her highest ambition to make them happy . '


` Then I do not doubt , my child , said Mrs. Darnley , but you will employ all your good sense to secure the conquest you have made . '


Sophia , melted almost to tears by these tender expressions , to which she had been so little used , assured her mother she would upon this occasion act so as to deserve her kindness .


Mrs. Darnley would have been better pleased if she had been less reserved , and had appeared more affected with the fine prospect that was opening for her  but it was not possible to press her farther .
Nature here had transferred the parent 's rights to the child , and the gay , imprudent ambitious mother , stood awed and abashed , in he presence of her worthier daughter .


Sophia , who expected Sir Charles would renew his visit in the evening , past the rest of the day in uneasy perturbations .
He entered the house just at the time that Harriot , who had ordered a chair to be got for her , came fluttering down the stairs in full dress .
As soon as she perceived him her cheeks glowed with resentment  but affecting a careless inattention , she shot by him with a half courtesy , and made towards the door : he followed , and accosting her with a grave but respectful air , desired she would permit him to lead her to her chair .
Harriot , conveying all the scorn into her face which the expression of her pretty but unmeaning features were capable of , and rudely drawing away her hand , ` Pray , Sir , said she , carry your devores where  they will be more acceptable  I am not disposed to be jested with any longer . '


Sir Charles , half smiling and bowing low , told her , that he respected her too much , as well upon her own account as upon Miss Sophia 's , for whom indeed he had the most tender regard , to be guilty of the impertinence she accused him of .


Harriot did not stay to hear more : offended in the highest degree at the manner in which he mentioned Sophia , she darted an angry look at him , and flung herself into her chair .


It must be confessed that Sir Charles discovered upon this occasion a great share of that easy confidence which people are apt to derive from splendid fortunes and undisputed rank  but as he wanted neither good sense , generosity , nor even delicacy , he would have found it difficult to own to a lady whom he had been used to address in the style of a lover , that his heart had received a new impression , if the contemptible character of Harriot had not authorised his desertion of her .
Pride , ignorance , folly , and affectation , sink a woman so low in the eyes of men , that they easily dispense with themselves from a strict observance of those delicate attentions , and respectful regards , which the sex in general claim by the laws of politeness , but which sense and discernment never pay to the trifling part of it .


Sir Charles was likewise glad of an opportunity to shew Miss Darnley , that he did not think the little gallantry which had passed between them , entitled her to make him any reproaches  or to consider the passion he professed for her sister as an  infidelity to her  and now finding himself more at ease from the frank acknowledgment he had made , he sent up his name , and was received by Mrs. Darnley with all the officious civility she was used to shew him .


Sophia was in the room , and rose up at his entrance in a sweet confusion , which she endeavoured to conceal , by appearing extremely busy at a piece of needle-work .


Sir Charles , after some trifling conversation with her mother , approached her , and complimented her with an easy air upon her being so usefully employed , when most other young ladies were abroad in search of amusement .


Sophia , who was now a little recovered , answered him with that wit and vivacity which was so natural to her  but looking up at the same time , she saw his eyes fixed upon her with a look so tender and passionate , as threw her back into all her former confusion , which encreased every moment by the consciousness that it was plain to his observation .


The young baronet , though he was charmed with her amiable modesty , yet endeavoured to relieve the concern he saw her under , by talking of indifferent matters , till Mrs. Darnley seeing them engaged in discourse , prudently withdrew , when he instantly addressed her in language more tender and particular .


Sophia , shocked at her mother 's indiscretion , and at his taking advantage of it so abruptly , let all the weight of her resentment fall on him  and the poor lover was so awed at her frowns , and the  sarcastic raillery which she mingled with expressions that shewed the most invincible indifference , that not daring to continue a discourse which offended her , and in too great concern to introduce another subject , he stood fixed in silence for several minutes , leaning on the back of her chair , while she plied her needle with the most earnest attention , and felt her confusion decrease in proportion as his became more apparent .


At length he walked slowly to the other end of the room , and taking up a new book which he had sent her a few days before , he asked her opinion of it in a faultering accent  and was extremely mortified to find she was so much at ease , as to answer him , with all the readiness of wit and clearness of judgment imaginable .


Another pause of silence ensued , during which Sophia heard him sigh softly several times , while he turned over the leaves of the book with such rapidity as shewed he scarce read a single line in any page of it .


He was thus employed when Mrs. Darnley returned , who stood staring first at one , then at the other , strangely perplexed at their looks and silence , and apprehensive that all was not right .
Sophia now took an opportunity to retire , and met an angry glance from her mother as she passed by her .


Her departure roused Sir Charles out of his revery , he looked after her , and then turning to Mrs. Darnley , overcame his discontent so far as to be able to entertain her a quarter of an hour with his usual politeness  and finding Sophia did not appear again , he took his leave .


 As soon as he was gone Mrs. Darnley called her daughter , and chid her severely for her rudeness in leaving the baronet .


Sophia defended herself as well as she could , without owning the true cause of her disgust , which was her mother 's so officiously quitting the room  but Mrs. Darnley was so ill satisfied with her behaviour , that she complained of it to her friend Mr. Herbert , who came in soon afterwards , telling him that Sophia 's pride and ill temper would be the ruin of her fortune .


The good man having heard the story but one way , thought Sophia a little to blame , till having an opportunity to discourse with her freely , he found the fault she had been charged with , was no more than an excess of delicacy , which was very pardonable in her situation : he warned her , however , not to admit too readily apprehensions injurious to herself , which was in some degree debasing the dignity of her sex and character  but to make the baronet comprehend that esteeming him as a man of honour , she considered his professions of regard to her as a claim upon her gratitude  and that , in consequence , she should without any reluctance receive the commands of her mother , and the advice of her friends in his favour .


Poor Sophia found herself but too well disposed to think favourably of Sir Charles  her tenderness had suffered greatly by the force she had put upon herself to behave to him in so disobliging a manner , and the uneasiness she saw him under , his silence , and confusion , and the sighs that escaped him , apparently without design , had affected her sensibly ,  and several days passing away without his appearing again , she concluded he was irrecoverably prejudiced against her  the uneasiness this thought gave her , first hinted to herself the impression he had already made on her heart .


Sir Charles indeed had been so much piqued by her behaviour as to form the resolution of seeing her no more  but when he supposed himself most capable of persisting in this resolution , he was nearest breaking through it , and suddenly yielding to the impulse of his tenderness , he flew to her again more passionate than ever  this little absence having only served to shew him how necessary she was to his happiness .


When Sophia saw him enter the room , the agitations of her mind might be easily read in her artless countenance  a sentiment of joy for his return gave new fire to her eyes , and vivacity to her whole person  while a consciousness of the effect his presence produced , and a painful doubt of his sincerity , and the rectitude of his intentions , alternately dyed her cheeks with blushes and paleness .


The young baronet approached her trembling , but the unexpected softness with which she received him , increasing at once his passion and his hopes , he poured out his whole soul in the tenderest and most ardent professions of love , esteem , and admiration of her .


Sophia listened to him with a complaisant attention  and having had sufficient time , while he was speaking , to compose and recollect herself  she told him , in a modest but firm accent , that she was obliged to him for the favourable opinion he entertained  of her  but that she did not think herself at liberty to hear , much less to answer to such discourse as he had thought proper to address to her , till she had the sanction of her mother 's consent , and Mr. Herbert 's approbation , whose truly parental regard for her , made her look upon him as another father , who supplied the place of him she had lost .


Sir Charles , more charmed with her than ever , was ready in his present flow of tender sentiments for her , to offer her his hand with an unreservedness that would have satisfied all her delicate scruples  but carried away by the force of habit , an insurmountable aversion to marriage , and the false but strongly impressed notion of refinements in a union of hearts , where love was the only tye , he could not resolve to give her a proof of his affection , which in his opinion was the likeliest way to destroy all the ardor of it  but careful not to alarm her , and apprehending no great severity of morals from the gay interested mother , he politely thanked her for the liberty she gave him to make his passion known to Mrs. Darnley , and to solicit her consent to his happiness .


Sophia observed with some concern , that he affected to take no notice of Mr. Herbert upon this occasion  but she would not allow herself to dwell long upon a thought so capable of raising doubts injurious to his honour  and satisfied with the frankness of his proceeding thus far , she suffered no marks of discontent or apprehension to appear in her countenance and behaviour .


Sir Charles did not fail to make such a general declaration of his sentiments to Mrs. Darnley as he  thought sufficient to satisfy Sophia , without obliging himself to be more explicite  and in the mean time , having acquired a thorough knowledge of Mrs. Darnley 's character , he sought to engage her in his interest by a boundless liberality , and by gratifying all those passions which make corruption easy .
She loved dissipation  and all the pleasures and amusements that inventive luxury had found out to vary the short scene of life were at her command  she had a high taste for the pleasures of the table , and therefore the most expensive wines , and choicest delicacies that earth , sea , and air could afford , were constantly supplied by him in the greatest profusion .
No day ever passed without her receiving some considerable present , the value of which was inhanced by the delicacy with which it was made .


The innocent Sophia construed all this munificence into proofs of the sincerity of his affection for her  for the young baronet , whether awed by the dignity of her virtue , or that he judged it necessary to secure the success of his designs , mingled with the ardor of his professions , a behaviour so respectful and delicate , as removed all her apprehensions , and left her whole soul free to all the tender impressions a lively gratitude could make on it .


Mr. Herbert , however , easily penetrated into Sir Charles 's views  he saw with pain the progress he made every day in the affection of Sophia  but by the speciousness of his conduct , he had established himself so firmly in her good opinion , that he judged any attempt to alarm her fears , while there seemed  so little foundation for them , would miss its effect  and not doubting but ere it was long her own observation would furnish her with some cause for apprehension , he contented himself for the present with keeping a vigilant eye upon the conduct of Sir Charles and Mrs. Darnley , and with being ready to assist Sophia in her perplexities , whenever she had recourse to him .


The change there was now in the situation of this amiable girl , afforded him many opportunities of admiring the excellence of her character : she who formerly used to be treated with neglect and even harshness by her mother , was now distinguished with peculiar regard  her opinion always submitted to with deference , her inclinations consulted in all things , and a studious endeavour to please her was to be seen in every word and action of Mrs. Darnley 's , who affected to be as partially fond of her as she had once been of her sister .


Even the haughty insolent Harriot , keeping her rage and envy concealed in her own breast , condescended to wear the appearance of kindness to her , while she shared with her mother in all those gratifications which the lavish generosity of Sir Charles procured them , and which Sophia , still continuing her usual simplicity of life , could never be persuaded to partake of .
Yet all this produced no alteration in Sophia  the same modesty and humility , the same sweetness of temper , and attention to oblige , distinguished her now as in her days of oppression .


 Mr. Herbert contemplated her with admiration and delight , and often with astonishment reflected upon the infatuation of Sir Charles , who could allow himself to be so far governed by fashionable prejudices , and a libertine turn of mind , as to balance one moment whether he should give himself a lawful claim to the affections of such a woman .


Affairs continued in this state during three months , when the good old man , who watched over his young favourite with all the pious solicitude of her guardian angel , perceived that she was grown more melancholy and reserved than usual  he often heard her sigh , and fancied she had been weeping , and her fine eyes would appear sometimes suffused with tears , even when she endeavoured to appear most chearful .


He imagined that she had something upon her mind which she wished to disclose to him  her looks seemed to intimate as much , and she frequently sought opportunities of being alone with him , and engaged him to pass those evenings with her when her mother and sister were at any of the public entertainments .
Yet all those times , though her heart seemed labouring with some secret uneasiness which she would fain impart to him , she had not resolution enough to enter into any explanation .


Mr. Herbert , who could have wished she had been more communicative , resolved at length to spare her any farther struggles with herself  and one day when he was alone with her , taking occasion to observe that she was not so chearful as usual , he asked her tenderly if any thing had happened to give her uneasiness  speak freely my child , said  he to her , and think you are speaking to a father .


Sophia made no other answer at first than by bursting into tears , which seeming to relieve her a little  she raised her head , and looking upon the good man , who beheld her with a fixed attention .
` May I hope sir : said she , that you are still disposed to fulfil the kind promise you once made me - Oh take me from hence , pursued she , relapsing into a new passion of tears , place me in the situation to which my humble lot has called me  save me from the weakness of my own heart - I now see plainly the delusion into which I have fallen  but , alas !
my mother does not see it - every thing here conspires against my peace . '


[ To be continued . ]
12 .
AN ACCOUNT OF THE VESTAL VIRGINS .


 NUMA Pompilius , the second king of Rome , a man of great virtue , piety , and wisdom , is considered as author of the vestal institution  though there were vestals before his time , and even so early as the settlement of Eneas in Italy , who , we are told , placed the palladium , an image of Pallas so called , which he had brought with him from Troy , in the temple of Vesta , and committed it to the care of the virgins dedicated to the service of that goddess , who from her name were called vestals .
But it was Numa who gave a form to this institution , and regulated the ministry and office of the order .


That prince confined the number of the vestals to four  two more were afterwards added by Tarquinius Priscus , one of his successors , and that number continued unaltered .


Numa committed to these virgins the keeping of the immortal fire , and the palladium , with the care of certain secret sacrifices in the worship of the  goddess Vesta .
They vowed chastity during the space of thirty years that they attended on the service of the goddess  the age of admission was above six , and under ten , and they were to be without any corporal blemish .


The ten first years were a kind of noviciate or probation , when they were instructed in all the sacred mysteries  the next ten were passed in the practice of them , and the last ten in teaching the novices .


This term being expired , they were free to quit the order , to lay aside the distinctions of it and to marry  but very few , it is said , made use of this liberty , terrified with frequent examples of the unhappy end attending those who changed their conditition .


Very great privileges and marks of distinction were at several times granted to the vestals .
They had a right to make a will during their father 's life , and to dispose of their fortunes , without a trustee  for the Roman women were always under guardianship : they were forbid to take an oath , and in courts of justice their evidence was admitted upon their bare affirmation .


When they appeared in public , a lictor attended them with the fasces  and if a vestal in her walks happened to meet a criminal leading to execution , he was pardoned upon her declaring that the meeting was accidental .
They had a distinguished rank and place of honour assigned them in the circus , and at other public shews , and were educated and maintained at the expence of the commonwealth .


 But if great honours were paid to the dignity and virtue of the vestals , their faults were also punished with equel severity .
The faults thus punishable were either negligence of their duty , in suffering the sacred fire to go out , or incontinence in violating their vow of chastity .


In the first case , which was looked upon as the sign of some great calamity to the state , the guilty vestal was punished as a slave , that is , with scourging  covered only with a veil , she was whipped with rods by the Pontifex Maximus , or chief priest .
One of the vestals spent the whole night by the sacred fire , to prevent its extinction , and watched thus each in turn .
When the fire was out , it was to be rekindled by the rays of the sun , the manner of which is variously related .


The great crime of the vestals was the violation of their vow of chastity  and this was punished in a manner not to be described without horror .
They were buried alive .
Near the Colline gate , says Plutarch , there is a little vault , with a hole to go down to it  in the vault there is a bed , a lighted lamp , and a small quantity of provisions , consisting of a loaf , a pitcher of water , a vial of oil , and a pot of milk : these are provided for the criminal , that religion may not be wounded by starving to death a person consecrated with the most august and sacred ceremonies .
Strange scruple !
they feared to starve her whom they buried alive .


The offender was put into a close and covered litter , that her piercing shrieks might not be heard , and carried in that manner through crouds of people cross the forum .
At the sight of the litter , all made  way for it to pass , and followed it in awful silence , and all the marks of the deepest sorrow .
There could not be a more horrible spectacle , nor a more dreadful or melancholy day for Rome , than that on which a vestal was carried to execution .


When the litter was come to the place of punishment , the lictors took off the covering and opened it  then the pontifex maximus , after some private prayers , with hands and eyes lifted up to heaven , took out the unhappy criminal , all closely veiled , and set her on the ladder , by which she was to descend into the vault : after which , he returned with the other priests  and the wretched vestal was no sooner down , but the ladder was removed , and the hole filled up with earth till the ground was even , and no sign of a grave remained , to intimate that the criminal was deemed unworthy to appear either among the dead or the living .


By this terrible execution is seen what notions the heathens themselves entertained concerning the breach of chastity  and their fear of its drawing down the curse and vengeance of the Gods upon the whole state , if it remained unpunished .
To avoid such a fatal calamity , the vestals were exhorted not only to fly with horror from every temptation to guilt , but to avoid with the utmost care whatever could cast the least blemish on their reputation .


Posthumia , a vestal , having subjected herself to unfavourable suspicions , on account of her too great solicitude in dress , and gaiety of manners , unbecoming the sacred purity of a virgin , was called to her trial .
After a long examination she was pronounced  innocent  but the pontifex maximus commanded her to quit those gay airs for the future , and to shew in her dress more wisdom and modesty than elegance and taste .


The 638th year of Rome gives us an example of corruption among the vestals , never heard of before .
In preceding times it rarely happened that a vestal violated her vow of chastity , and the day of her punishment was a day of universal mourning at Rome .
But this year , of the six vestals , three were proved criminal , two of which losing all sense of fear as well as shame , had almost publickly abandoned themselves to dissolute practices .


The mischief was begun by a Roman knight , named Butaetius Barrus , a professed libertine , who being tired of too easy conquests , sought to vary his infamous pleasures by the charm of difficulty and danger .
He therefore attacked a vestal called Emilia , and when he had succeeded in seducing her , the contagion soon spread  and two other vestals , Licinia , and Marcia , followed the example of their companion .


Marcia , however , less criminal than the other two , admitted only one lover  but Emilia and Licinia , who were become great friends , if such leagues which the wicked form with the wicked may be called by the name of friendship , not chusing to confine themselves to their first gallants , each introduced her brother to her friend , and managed each other 's interviews .


Having once begun to extend their criminal amours , they soon had occasion to observe that their secret took air  therefore to engage those  to silence whom they apprehended would inform against them , they made them all accomplices in the guilt .


This scene of infamy , after having been long acted in secret , was at length brought to light by a slave named Manius , whose master was one of Emilia 's gallants .


This fellow had been employed by Licinia and her to carry on their intrigues with several young Romans , and had for some time acquitted himself very faithfully in their infamous service  but being disappointed in the rewards they had promised him , and in his expectations of liberty from his master , he made a full discovery  and the guilty vestals were immediately brought to trial .


The college of pontiffs , which by the constitution of Numa were the proper judges of this affair , acted with great lenity , and condemned only Emilia  a favourable sentence was passed upon Marcia and Licinia , for which the former was probably indebted to her having been less criminal  and the latter to the eloquence of the celebrated L. Crassus , her kinsman , who being then twenty seven years of age , defended her in an oration of which Cicero speaks with praise .


The unhappy Emilia was buried alive , pursuant to her sentence  Marcia and Licinia were just recovered from the horrors of that dreadful fate which had impended over them , when a new process was commenced against them .


The whole Roman people exclaimed against the lenity of the pontiffs , on an occasion when the crime was equally evident and odious  and the  tribune Sextus Peduceus having put himself at the head of those who murmured at the sentence , caused an extraordinary commission to be voted by the people for re-hearing the cause of Marcia and Licinia  and at the head of that commission placed L. Cassius , who for that purpose was created praetor a second time , after having been consul and censor .


He was a person of rigid virtue and inflexible severity , and one who , as Cicero observes , had rendered himself agreeable to the people , not by politeness and a popular behaviour , but by an austerity of manners , which acquired him respect .


Cassius fully answered the expectation of those who had chosen him  for he not only condemned the two vestals , who were punished in the same manner as Emilia , but also a great number of other persons  so that his tribunal was called the rock of the accused .


13 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE .


 Written by himself .
THE house of Comminge , from which I am descended , is one of the most ancient and illustrious in the kingdom  my great grand-father , who had two sons , was so extremely fond of the youngest , that he settled some very considerable estates upon him , in prejudice to the rights of his elder brother  and gave him the title of marquis of Lussan .
The partiality of my ancestor did not weaken the friendship between his two sons , which encreased with their years .
They would have their children brought up together  but by giving them their education in common , instead of uniting them by stricter ties than those of blood , which was their sole view in it , they rendered them enemies almost from their birth .


My father , who was always excelled in his exercises by the young marquis of Lussan , conceived a jealousy at it , which soon degenerated into a  fixed aversion .
They often quarrelled  and my father being always the aggressor , it was he who was always punished .


One day , when he complained of this treatment to the steward of our family , ` Know , said the man to him , that you will have it in your power to repress the pride of the marquis of Lussan  all the estates he possesses are entailed upon you , and your grandfather could not dispose of them : when you are the master , continued he , it will not be difficult for you to recover your right . '


This intimation convincing my father , that he had it in his power to be revenged of his cousin , made him set no bounds to his resentment .
Their quarrels became so frequent and so violent , that there was a necessity for separating them .
They were many years without seeing each other , during which they were both married .
The marquis of Lussan had only a daughter by his wife , and my father only a son by his , which was myself .


As soon as my father came to the possession of his hereditary estates , by the death of his grandfather , he determined to follow the advice that had been given him , while he was yet a youth , and which he had never lost sight of : he omitted nothing that could render his claim unquestionable , and rejecting several proposals for an accommodation , commenced a law-suit with the marquis of Lussan , which could not but terminate in the despoiling him of all his estates .


An unhappy rencounter , which they had one day in a hunting-match , rendered them for ever irreconcileable .
My father , whose vowed revenge  was never out of his thoughts , said several cruel things to the Marquis of Lussan , upon the despicable condition to which he expected soon to reduce him .
The marquis , tho ' naturally mild , could not help answering with some haughtiness .
They had recourse to their swords : fortune declared in favour of Monsieur de Lussan : he disarmed my father , and bid him ask his life .


' I should hate it , answered my father fiercely , if I owed it to thee . ''
Yet , spite of thyself , thou shalt owe it to me , ' said the marquis , of Lussan , throwing him his sword : after which he instantly left him .


This generous action did not move my father in his favour  on the contrary , the double victory his enemy gained over him , encreased his hatred , and he carried on the suit against the marquis of Lussan more vigorously than before .
However , when his hopes were highest he received some accounts from his lawyers , which effectually destroyed them .
This disappointment threw him into such transports of rage and grief , as brought on a dangerous fever , under which he languished a long time , and in this state I found him at my return from my travels , upon which I had ben sent immediately after my studies were finished .


A few days after my arrival , the Abbot de R - , a kinsman of my mother 's , sent notice to my father , that the writings which alone were able to prove his just claim to the estates possessed by the marquis of Lussan , were in the archives of the abbey of R - , to which place many of the papers belonging to our family had been carried during the civil  wars .
My father was desired by the abbot to keep this information secret , and to come himself for those writings , or send a person for them , on whose fidelity he could have an absolute dependance .


The bad state of his health not permitting him to go himself , he charged me with this commission , after many times representing to me , the great importance of it .
` You , said he to me , are more concerned in the recovery of those papers , than I am  the estates will probably soon be yours  but if you had no interest in them , I think well enough of you , to believe that you share my resentment , and are eager to revenge the injuries I have received . '
After giving some other necessary instructions , it was resolved that I should take the title of marquis of Longaunois , that my business in the abbey might not be suspected , madame de Lussan having several relations there .


I set out , accompanied only by an old servant of my father 's , and my own valet de chambre .
My journey proved successful : I found in the archives of the abbey the writings which proved incontestably the entail .
I wrote to my father , and gave him an account of all that I had done  and , as I was only at a small distance from [ ... ] , I desired he would permit me to stay there during the season for drinking the waters .
My father was so pleased with the success of my journey , that he readily complied with my request .


I still appeared under the borrowed title of the marquis of Langaunois : my equipage was too inconsiderable to support the grandeur of that of Comminge .
 The day after my arrival , I went to the fountain : in these places ceremony is laid aside , and an easy polite freedom better supplies its place .
From the first day of my appearance at the baths , I was admitted into all parties of pleasure , and introduced at the house of the marquis de la Valette , who that day gave a grand entertainment to the ladies .


I found several of them whom I had seen at the fountain already come , and said some tender things to them , as I then thought myself obliged to do to all women .
I was engaged in a particular conversation with one of them , when a lady of a good presence entered the room , followed by a girl of surprising beauty  her charms fixed my attention immediately , her graceful modesty won my esteem .
I loved her from that moment , and that moment decided the destiny of my whole life .
Insensibly my former gaiety vanished  I could do nothing but gaze on her , and follow her every where : she perceived it , and blushed .
A walk was proposed , and I had the good fortune to lead her .
We were at a sufficient distance from the rest of the company to give me an opportunity of talking to her upon a subject by which my whole thoughts were engrossed  but I who a few moments before was not able to remove my eyes from her face , had now when we were alone not courage enough to look upon her .
Till then I had always talked of love to women for whom I felt nothing but indifference  but as soon as my heart was really subdued , I found impossible to speak .


We rejoined the company , without having uttered a single word to each other .
The ladies were  conducted to their lodgings , and I returned home , where I shut myself up in my apartment .
In the disposition my mind was then , solitude was most agreeable .
I felt a certain kind of joy mixed with pain , which I believe always accompanies a beginning passion : mine had rendered me so timid , that I durst not endeavour to know the name of her I loved .
I was apprehensive my curiosity would betray the secret of my heart  but how did it sink within me , when I learned that it was the daughter of the marquis of Lussan who had charmed me .
All the obstacles that opposed my happiness rose instantly to my mind  but the fear that Adelaida , so was that lovely girl called , had been early taught to hate my name , was what most alarmed me .
I thought myself fortunate in having assumed another  and fondly hoped that she would know my passion for her before she could be prejudiced against me  and that when she knew who I was she would at least be induced to pity me .


I therefore determined to conceal my true name as long as possible , and in the mean time to use every method to please her  but I was too much in love to employ any other than that of loving .
I followed her wherever she went : I ardently wished for an opportunity of speaking to her in private  and when that so much desired opportunity offered itself , I had not power to take advantage of it .
The fear of forfeiting a thousand little freedoms , which I now enjoyed , restrained me  but my greatest fear was that of offending her .


This was my situation , when one evening , as the company were walking in separate parties , Adalaida  dropt a bracelet off her arm , to which her picture was fastened .
The chevalier de Saint Oden , who led her , eagerly stooped to take it up , and , after gazing upon it a moment , put it in his pocket .
Adelaida at first asked for it mildly  but he obstinately refusing to return it , she expressed great resentment at a behaviour which showed so little respect for her .


The chevalier was handsome  some little successes with the fair had made him vain and presuming .
Without being disconcerted at Adelaida 's anger , ` Why , mademoiselle , said he , would you deprive me of a good which I owe only to chance ?
I flatter myself , continued he , lowering his voice , that when you know the sentiments you have inspired me with , you will suffer me to keep what that has presented me . '
Saying this he bowed profoundly low  and , without waiting for her answer , retired .


I happened not to be with her then .
The marchioness de la Valette and I were talking at a little distance  but altho ' I quitted her as seldom as possible , yet my attention was always fixed upon her .
I never lost a look , a word , or action of hers , and however particularly engaged , I never failed in any of those assiduities , which others practise to please , but which the excess of my passion made we find inconceivable pleasure in performing .


[ To be continued . ]
14 .
PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES .


 14.1 .
INTRODUCTION .


IN the enumeration of those studies which the fair sex may properly be permitted to employ some part of their time in an application to , given in our last Number , it may be remembered that history and natural philosophy stood foremost in the list .
Curiosity is one of the most prevalent , and , when properly applied , one of the most amiable , passions of the human mind  nor can it in any way find a more rational scope for exertion , than in the recollection of historical facts , and a curious inquisition into the wonders of creation .
To this application of that passion the female part of the world are unquestionably most happily adapted .
Undisturbed by the more intricate affairs of business  unburthened with the load of political entanglements  with the anxiety of commercial negotiations  or the suspense and anguish which attend on the pursuit of fame or fortune , the memories of the fair are left vacant to receive and to retain the regular  connection of a train of events , to register them in that order which fancy may point out as most pleasing , and to form deductions from them such as may render their lives more agreeable to themselves , and more serviceable to every one about them .
Their more exalted faculties , not being tied down by wearisome attention to mathematical investigations , metaphysical chimeras , or abstrusescholastic learning , are more at liberty to observe with care , see with perspicuity , and judge without prejudice , concerning the amazing world of wonders round them than those of men , who , very frequently by attempting to arrive at every kind of knowledge , find themselves stopped short in their career by the limited period of life , before they can properly be said to have reached any


To gratify and furnish food for this laudable curiosity , therefore , in both these branches of knowledge , shall be one of our principal aims in the prosecution of this work  yet as amusement no less than instruction will ever constitute one of the main columns of our edifice , and that our wish is to render the ladies though learned not pedantic , conversable rather than scientific , we shall avoid entering into any of those minutiae , or diving into those depths of literature , which may make their study dry to themselves , or occasion its becoming tiresome to others .


If therefore we treat of philosophy , it shall be polished from the rust of theoretical erudition , and adorned with all those advantages which a connexion with the politer arts and sciences can throw upon it .
If of history , a pleasing relation of the most interesting facts shall be endeavoured at , the movement  of the grand machine of government shall indeed be set before our readers , and the influence of each apparent wheel be rendered visible : but we shall think it unnecessary to look into every secret spring whereby these wheels were actuated  and shall dispense with entering into the never to be discovered causes of the rise and fall of nations now no more , to make room for the more useful knowledge of those movements of the human heart on which depend the happiness or ruin of individuals .
If geography should form , as we propose it shall , one portion of each number , it will not be with us the meer description of large tracts of land , where woods and plains , mountains and valleys , rivers and sandy deserts occur alike in all  but only a detail in every country of those things which are peculiar to itself : a picture not of the face of the earth , of sea and air , in different latitudes and longitudes , but a more varied prospect of human nature diversified by different laws , by different constitutions , and different ideas .


Thus much will be sufficient to premise in regard to the matter of our researches on these kind of subjects , in order to obviate the horrid idea which the word philosophy might perhaps otherwise impress on the minds of our female readers , who might from that term expect to find a work intended and calculated chiefly for their amusement and instruction , loaded with dry and abstruse investigations , which some of them might not have time , or others even want attention , to examine with the application necessary to become mistresses of them  and which if they were attained would stand a  chance of more than ten to one of exciting the outcry of the world against them .


As to the method we intend to pursue , however , something , though not much , will be necessary to add .
Which will be only to observe that no regular course of philosophy , no long train of historical events , nor any close confinement to one branch of geographical knowledge , shall be aimed at in our essays on these subjects .
Variety is the soul of study , as well as the pleasure of life  and a thousand useful pieces of knowledge steal into the vacancies of our mind when detached , which would never find their way thither if they were entangled with each other , or mingled in the grand mass of philosophical enquiries .


Learning , in short , is the old man 's bundie of rods : when bound up in the cluster , it is almost impossible to be overcome , yet every single twig may easily be mastered .
In short , we see not the labour we have to go through , when it is presented to us in minute portions  yet still it answers the end proposed , ` Small sands the mountain , moments make the year . '
We accumulate knowledge by golden grains , and find ourselves possessed of an ample treasure before we are even aware that we have attained the necessary store for our passing easily through life .


To render this accumulation therefore thus easy , we shall fix ourselves to no peculiar order , but make variety our aim  transport our reader by turns through all the regions of earth , air , and ocean , and to different climates , with expedition beyond  the power of a magician 's wand .
No bars of time , of place , or distance , or even impossibility itself , shall stop our progress .
One Number of our work perhaps shall leave us admiring the stupendous fabric of the immense extended universe  the next shall find us aiding our limited sight by help of glasses in observations on a world of unknown beings contained within a drop of fluid , or forests waving in the narrow circuit of a small piece of moss .
To-day we shall converse with almost our cotemporaries , enquire their actions , and censure or applaud them as we please  to-morrow shall introduce us to an intercourse with the great founders of long abolished empires .
One page shall teach the manners used by nations where splendour and magnificence surpass even the most volatile imagination  the next point out the various artifices which want , the parent of inventive labour , instructs the poor unhappy savage to make use of for the supply of those necessities which barren wilds and mountains desolate deny the fuller solace of .
In short , every thing curious , every thing instructive , every thing entertaining , shall be carefully sought out , and offered to the view , without distinction or respect to order  still leaving to the mind of every reader to range and form them into systems according to his pleasure .


14.2 .
OF THE UNIVERSE AS CONSIDERED Under a GENERAL VIEW .


 ALthough , as I have hinted above , we do not propose to enter into any regular order with regard to particular details , yet previous to our engaging in any disquisitions at all , it may not be improper to take one general review of nature , in order to open and prepare the mind for the reception of such discoveries as may at first sight confound from their novelty , and such truths as may appear incredible from their overleaping the limits of our conception .


Every study ought to have its peculiar use not only with regard to mankind in general , but to the person to whom it is recommended in particular .
It is not enough to say , such or such a branch of knowledge will , if pursued , be productive of some emolument to others  the person who is particularly solicited to pursue it ought to be informed in what respect it may be rendered serviceable to him in particular .
Let mankind argue on the principles of stoicism and public spirit as long as they please , it would be difficult through the history of now almost six thousand years , to find any action ever so  trivial , if attended with either labour or hazard , that has been performed merely for the sake of the publick in present , or of posterity in future , wherein some advantage either real or imaginary was not to accrue to the agent .


The motives to great and illustrious actions in the loud and busy occurrences of the world have been usually incited by ambition : Ambition , united with avarice , has aimed at present aggrandizement  ambition , spurred on by fancy , has made future fame its final goal .
Yet have the actions thus produced generally tended to oppression or extravagance .


In the continued practice of moral opinions , and the support of religious tenets , many have run thro ' lives of pain and persecution  many have fallen voluntary martyrs in the midst of the most excruciating tortures , and gloried in the sufferings they have borne .
The hope of future meed , the prospect of a certain happiness in another state , purchased by patient sufferings in this , have been at once their motive and support : yet these have frequently deserved the names of wild enthusiasm and headstrong superstition .


In the still calmer and more retired sphere of learned disquisition , the springs of action seem with greater disinterestedness to tend towards general utility .
Fame is but rarely gained by studious lore  fortune still seldomer .
The present therefore seems improbable , the future most uncertain .
Ambition and interest here seem to have no effect .
The motives then of action here are more concealed  yet motives still there are : for human  nature finds its powers too limited , its inclinations too much clogg'd , to act without some point in view to rouse it to exertion .


From the concealment then , or rather from the non-appearance of these motives , arises the so common cry against the practice of natural philosophy , What is the use of this ?
A cry thus raised as easily is answered , The use is universal - But to explain that answer more may be necessary .


To those whose minds are too contracted to wander through the tracts of boundless space , to view at once with wonder , and follow with discernment , the motions of the heavenly bodies  and whilst contracted thus are still too dissipated to fix upon the objects placed before them , and pay the due attention to that mechanism , which , as the judicious Mr. Boyle most justly has observed , ` is more conspicuous in nature 's watches than her clocks  ' to these , I say , the use of all these studies will still remain concealed .


But to the mind of clear and cool reflection , their use is plain and evident : they lead by smooth and regular gradations to peace and happiness : they raise the thoughts to humanity and devotion  serve to calm our ruffled passions , and , by a regular transition , convey our contemplations from the creature to its Creator .


In this light then let us consider them : look on the vast universe as one immense machine , whose complicated mechanism bespeaks an artist of almighty power and wisdom - a machine formed for our use , and consequently a most amazing proof of his benevolence and goodness - a machine whose  several parts have all a wonderful connection , and all their several uses  which it is therefore a duty enjoined on us to endeavour at the discovering , and the discovery itself a reward granted for the performance of that duty .


Let us then first take a view of this mighty machine in the whole , and then descend to a more immediate disquisition of its several parts .


For this purpose then , reader , imagine yourself conveyed to some place beyond even the limits of infinite space  there cast your eyes around , and view the number of the stars which glitter in their several orbs .
Small as they from our earth appear , behold them each a sun , shining with brightest lustre  each an immense mass of heat and light .
Around them see numbers of worlds revolving in stated orbits , and in certain times .
Lost as you are in the irregularity of their number and their motions , now fix your attention on a single one - return to our system only .


There , in the centre , the only place from whence the advantages of light and heat could be dispersed with equal impartiality to all the surrounding planets , and almost equally to every one in all the several periods of its course , behold the sun : a wondrous moss of fire , of so immense a bulk , glowing with so much brightness , and heated to a fervor so intense , as to diffuse its genial warmth , and spread its rays for millions of miles around it , and , tho ' burning for thousands of years , enduring no visible decrease .
Next to him , although at a distance of thirty-two millions of miles from his body , rolls the small planet Mercury , revolving rapidly  all the several periods of its season in eighty-eight of our days .
Then in a larger circle , next comes Venus , forming its year in somewhat more than seven months .
Her bulk is nearly equal to that of our globe  and in her course appears to us , sometimes a full bright star , reflecting the sun 's rays from the whole circle of her body  at others horned , and in a crescent , representing as it were in miniature the changes of the moon .


For these two planets , placed as they are within the immediate influence of the beams which emanate from the great fount of light , those rays are full sufficient for their purpose , unaided by extraneous assistance .
Not so the Earth , the next in order of the planets  stationed where the sun 's rays diverge and dissipate , so as to afford only a fainter day , and endued with motions whereby sometimes that day is very short  in order to procure and to prolong to her the great blessing of light , she is attended by a satellite , a planet perpetually revolving round her body , which by receiving on its surface the rays of the great luminary , sends them back by reflection to the inhabitants of this globe  and here let us reflect on the amazing complication of various motions carried on at once in these two bodies !
The daily revolution of the earth round its own axis , performed in four and twenty hours , combined with that in her own orbit , performed with a velocity of almost a thousand miles in a minute .
The Moon turning round her own centre in twenty-seven days , rolling in the same space of time around her primary , and carrying on these motions calm and undisturbed , whilst she is  borne along with equal swiftness by that primary in its annual progress - how wonderful a combination !
how inconceivable to human fancy , the impulse by which it could be at first set to work !
what less than infinite power could continue it in such unwearied regularity of rotation for so many ages !
what but infinite wisdom could have contrived it in such just proportion , in such connected harmony , as to bring about every change of time and season which can be conducive either to the convenience , the use , or even to the pleasure of the inhabitants of both these globes !


In the fourth circle of the solar system rolls , in a period of almost two years , the planet Mars .
Above him still , and in the realms of everlasting frost , and little more than constant twilight , the mighty Jupiter , superior to all the other planets from his stupendous bulk , revolves in a large circuit of twelve tedious years .
Round him four moons continually attend , moving in different periods , to furnish his inhabitants with light , and entertain them with the almost infinite variety of their changes and aspects .


Still farther off , and at not much less than eight hundred millions of miles distance from the sun , in slow and stately progress Saturn moves , filling almost thirty years in one revolution .
Five moons relieve his almost total darkness  nor would even the help of these avail to chear the gloom which his inhabitants experience , were they not aided by a still brighter band of reflected light formed by the ample ring whereby his body ever is encircled .
Let fancy paint the glorious prospect of the face of heaven as it appears to them  where sometimes in one hemisphere  at once are to be seen , ( besides the brilliant arch now over their heads , and now forming to a certain height a luminary border to their horizon ) five moons , shining with borrowed lustre , and at once glance presenting to their view all the several phenomena which with our single satellite we are obliged to wait for years to see  some in the full , some new , and some increscent  some undisturbed and clear , and others in eclipse .
Eclipses too , unknown to our moon , formed by the interchangeable positions of the several satellites  and sometimes by the ring , behind which they remain a time concealed , and then emerge again .


Besides these regular , these well known periods , behold a set of bodies , whose errant progress extends sometimes far , far beyond the orbit of the farthest of these planets , and sometimes comes within a nearer distance to the sun than is the very nearest : In one part of their orbit moving slower than Saturn , and in another whirling swifter round the body of the sun than Mercury himself : sometimes in regions , to the cold of which the frosts of Greenland must be the dog star 's heat  sometimes in raging fires which the most wild imagination can not form the least idea of  experiencing thus within one revolution , sometimes indeed of several hundred years , all the vicissitudes of times , of seasons , climates , and appearances , which all the other planets in their several orbits separately undergo  yet are these wandering masses , these phenomena , which from their rare appearances have been esteemed portents and prodigies , restrained by mighty power , their progress stated by almighty wisdom ,  and their wild courses ruled by the great hand that made them .


Such is the system , such the vast machine , of which our globe is but a single part , one wheel , and that no more than one of the most trivial  for of the bodies we have named , there are some exceeding it in bulk by many hundred times : yet let us come to a nearer view of that alone , and we shall find its mechanism such as , in our narrow comprehensions , might of itself exhaust the utmost power even of Omnipotence  yet this , compared with the whole system , how insignificant !
and that whole system itself , if lost from out the universe , how little to be missed !
- not more than would the smallest pebble conveyed from the extended coast of the wide ocean - what then is man !
and what is his creator !


Contract we now our views , and fix them on our earth .
- Behold the mighty mass , a fertile globe , of near eight thousand miles diameter , covered in every part with animated beings , formed into an infinite variey of different shapes , of different natures , and different inclinations , and consequently with an infinity of different wants : yet see upon its surface , within its bowels , or floating in its surrounding atmosphere , the means for the supplying all those wants  nay more , of gratifying every needless wish of those insatiate animals mankind  of yielding supernumerary delights , and leaving to the mind of just reflexion not even a single wish to form .


Observe the atmosphere wherewith to the height of a few miles the globe appears enwrapped .
In  it you see the treasure houses of the rain , of snow , and hail , let loose at proper periods to cool and to refresh the earth  to afford nourishment to all the vegetable world , and to supply the rivers and the springs with water : of clouds to overshadow and protect alike the animals and plants from the sun 's scorching heat , and to relieve that heat by seasonable showers .
There you behold the prison of the winds which are sent forth at proper times to put in motion the stagnant air , and scatter all those noxious vapours which in receives by circulating through the several organs of animal life .
The lightnings too , and thunder there are formed with more than chymic art  whose dreadful explosions , at the same time that they cool and purify the surrounding elements , seem more immediately to be the voice of the Almighty , warning his creatures of his wrath , at the same time that it declares his power .


Descend we to the surface .
There observe the almost infinite variety of forms and of materials .
See there high mountains reaching to the clouds , whose long extended ridges serve so many various purposes  as limits to great kingdoms , and bars to wild o'erbearing thirst of empire  as ribs whereby this mass of earth and water is strengthened and supported , as is the animal frame by massy bones  and lastly as immense alembics , to collect and to distil those waters which the sun 's heat evaporates from the wide surface of the ocean  thence to disperse them down their sides in numberless little rills , which , meeting and uniting in their progress , compose those mighty rivers whereby the several tracts of land which form the continents , are equally  supplied with that most useful element , and which upon their bosoms bear the trade of many inland nations .


View next the vallies adorned with pleasing verdure , and variegated with a dazzling glow of beauteous colouring , affording food for miriads of animals , created for the use and the conveniencies of man - Observe the woods and forests waving in the wind , and yielding shelter from the storm and tempest , laden with fruits of every kind , and furnishing materials for building more convenient habitations .
In other parts large wide extended heaths , covered with underwood , serve for the dwelling-place of various animals - Elsewhere see sandy deserts , thro ' which scarce any tract of feet can be discerned - rocks and vast cliffs which stop the ocean 's rage  and lastly , view the wide expanse of ocean , whose surface is enriched with all the treasures of the commercial world , and serves to bring about an intercourse between those very nations which it appears to bar from all communication - Within its bulk of waters miriads of animals of various forms and sizes find habitation and existence , from the immense floating island of the whale 's enormous body and the devouring shark , to the poor little lifeless limpet , which fixes to the rock , and there passes all the period of its being without either sight or motion - Around its borders see growing on every part mosses and corals , which with a kind of vegetation differing from other plants , and varying from each other , form groves for the smaller inhabitants of the waters to range among , and hide themselves from the perception of their voracious enemies  whilst its unfathomed bottom contains  a world unknown to us of animals which never rise to the surface , or wander to the shores , and therefore must possess organs , respiration , and means for the preserving life , hitherto undiscoverable by anatomical researches , and unaccounted for by philosophical theory .


Let us , I say , but once reflect on this review of nature , and who can ask what use these studies have ?
What use , but to adapt and to prepare the mind for still more speculative and important reflections on the immensity of that great power by which these wonders have been all created : who , with his single fiat , has set this incomprehensible machine in motion , and who with a meer nod can stop that motion , and instantly reduce it to its original chaos .
What use , but to point out to man , that proud presumptuous being , who dares to set himself in bold defiance to that power , how poor , how insignificant , how very a worm he is when placed in competition with many of the other productions of omnipotence !
- What use , but to inspire the true philosopher with the most humble reverence , with the most ardent gratitude , and with the deepest sense of that beneficence which has placed him in a world where he remains surrounded with ten thousand miracles , supplied with every thing his real wants can stand in need of , or his unbounded wishes form in fancy : and sees himself possessed of all this by the immediate kindness of a power which claims from him no other recompense but his enjoying them with wonder and with gratitude , and paying the small tribute of praise to him who gave them .


15 .
THE LADY 'S GEOGRAPHY .


 AS we have before observed that it shall be our endeavour in the progress of this work to render it as interesting as possible , and to reject every thing that does not tend in some measure either to instruct or entertain , we shall consequently be very short in our descriptive part of the particular countries we may have occasion to conduct our fair readers through  since the general face of nature varies little more in different countries than the face of man .
Air , earth , and water , hills and valleys , woods and open plains , are the universal features every where  and therefore would produce continual and tedious repetitions , were we to attach ourselves to such descriptions : but the peculiar variations in those features , together with the particular complexion which the mind of man appears to wear in every place , is what alone we shall think worthy of our notice .
For this reason we shall constantly divide our investigations of different countries into three parts , viz .
first , such general description as may be absolutely necessary for the knowledge of its situation , and to give some idea to the reader of the prospect he might expect to meet with if he was on the spot , but in this we shall be as concise as possible  secondly , the natural history , or a detail of the productions and  curiosities of nature peculiar to it  and lastly , the civil history , or an account of the manners , laws , and customs of the inhabitants  in which , as well as in the preceding article , we shall aim at preserving all imaginary novelty , by taking no notice at all of those things of either kind which are universally possessed in every country  making only a bare mention of such as they have in common with some others  and extending more amply on such alone as are peculiar to the very individual spot or nation which is the subject of our immediate consideration .
In pursuance therefore of this kind of plan , we shall now proceed to


15.1 .
A DESCRIPTION of AMBOYNA , AND OF The other ISLANDS dependent on it .


This cluster of islands , which are numbered by some authors amongst the Moluccas , were first discovered by the Portuguese , in 1511  but were taken from them by the Dutch in the beginning of 1605 , in whose possession they remain to this day .
They are situated in about the fourth degree of south latitude , and about the one hundred and forty-fifth of longitude from the Canary Islands .


Amboyna in itself , although the capital , is by no means the largest of the islands which are connected under the same jurisdiction : yet as it is the most populous in proportion to its size , the most regularly cultivated , the most carefully strengthened with many fortresses , and beautified with a very handsome city , it claims the preference of being first mentioned .


 Figure 2 .
An Inhabitant of the Island of Amboyna equippd for War .
 It is an island , or rather two joined together by a small isthmus of about a quarter of a league in breadth , and which forms on one side of it a gulph of upwards of six German leagues in length , and about a league over in the broadest part , capable of containing an infinite number of vessels , and on the other a very fine bay .
This isthmus lies so low , that by only cutting a canal of about six feet depth the two gulphs would communicate with each other .
The two parts of the islands separated by it are of different sizes  the northern part , which is called Hitto , is much the largest , being eight leagues and a half long , and two and a half broad  the other , named Leytimor , is but about five leagues in length , and its breadth at most not above two , gradually diminishing almost to a point at one end  at two leagues and half from which , on the northern coast , stands the town of Amboyna .


Hitto is divided into seven cantons , each of which for the most part contains about five villages , and is defended by a fortress and garrison .
Leytimor would of itself be very inconsiderable , were it not for its being the seat of the capital town and fortress in the island , viz .
Amboyna and Fort Victory .


The town stands in a fine plain on the coast of the larger gulph , and is about a quarter of a league in length , and fourteen hundred paces broad .
The streets are wide and regular  and altho ' they are not paved , yet the soil is so very spungy , that the heavy rains , which frequently sail there , do them much less damage than one would be apt to expect .
It contains about a thousand houses , exclusive of the public buildings : amongst which the  castle , the market-house , the church , the guard-house , the town-house , the hospital , the orphan-house , governor 's palace , the old and new Dutch churches , and the company 's linnen magazine , are the most considerable , and some of them very magnificent .


The number of inhabitants of the island of Amboyna are thought to amount to between seventy and eighty thousand souls , all of whom are Moors or Mahometans , excepting the people of Leytimor , who , most of them profess Christianity , and about five or six villages of the other part of the island .


Under the government of Amboyna are included ten other islands , viz .
Bouro , Amblau , Manipa , Kelang , Bonoa , Ceram , Ceram-Laout , Naussa-Laout , Honimoa , and Boangbesi .


The external aspect of all these islands present at first sight the appearance of the rudest desert .
On whatever side you turn your eyes , you see yourself surrounded with lofty mountains , whose tops are lost in clouds  with frightful rocks riding on one another 's heads  with horrid caverns , thick woods , shading with almost a continual darkness numbers of very deep valleys  and at the same time your ears are struck with the noise of rivers rushing into the sea with horrid roar , especially towards the beginning of the eastern monsoon , the time at which the European vessels most commonly arrive there .


Yet foreigners who stay there till the western monsoon find infinite beauties in the prospect .
The mountains abounding with seago and with cloves  the forests cloathed in verdure , and adorned with blossoms  the vallies laden with fertility  the rivers  rolling with waters pure and chrystalline  the very rocks and caverns , which seem but as the shadows in a picture  all these objects diversified in so many ways render it one of the finest countries in the world .


The frequent attacks of the palsy in these islands , and the yellowness of complexion which many persons bring from thence with them , have made it be concluded that the air of them is unwholsome : yet these disorders are rather to be attributed to the imprudence of travellers , than to the temperament of the climate , the air of which is clear and healthful .
Many have lost their limbs by sleeping in their shirts by moonlight in cool evenings  and the excessive drinking of the Saguweer , fixes that yellowness so much complained of : but these are disorders to which the natives , who take the same liquor in moderation , and do not expose themselves to the air in cold nights , are not subject to .


Earthquakes and heavy rains are the greatest inconveniences of these climates .
During the time of the eastern monsoon , which begins in May , and ends in September , it will sometimes rain for several weeks together : yet notwithstanding the vast quantity of water which falls direct , and the impetuous torrents which pour down from the mountains into the lower grounds , the land being so very spungy the fields soon become dry again .
But what is very remarkable is , that the season for these rains is not the same throughout all the islands : when it rains at Amboyna , it is frequently very fair at Bouro , Manipa , and other of the lands to the west .
This season is often accompanied with violent hurricanes   but earthquakes are more common during the western monsoon , which also lasts for five months .
In April and October they have no regular winds .
The easterly ones bring rain  the westerly ones a drought : yet both these , as well as the very plentiful evening dews , are of service in tempering the excessive heats which are sometimes so great in the middle parts of the day as to dry up rivers and cause the earth to open in clefts of twenty feet deep .
In these seasons of drought they are also incommoded with violent storms of thunder and lightning  and earthquakes are very frequently attendant on the rains which follow these heats .


15.2 .
NATURAL HISTORY of the Islands of AMBOYNA .


The principal and general product of these islands are rice , seago , and cloves : they have , however , great quantities of cocoa nuts , nutmegs , and other vegetable productions .
As to animals they have very few peculiar to themselves , excepting some of the bird kind We will now take a little circuit through the several islands , and remark what is to be found worthy of notice in each .


AMBOYNA .
In Hitto , or the northern part of this island , are two mountains almost inaccessible  one of which , called Tanita , is the highest in the whole island .
The top of it is so extremely cold that no kind of animal is to be found on it , excepting some black lizards , which live in a very thick moss , wherewith the ground , and even the barks of the trees , are entirely cover'd  and which  is so extremely moist , that the water will run out of it with the slightest pressure .


BOURO .
This island is many times larger than Amboyna , being about eighteen leagues in length , and upwards of thirteen in breadth .
It is remarkable for its very fine woods , amongst which three kinds of ebony , the black , the white , and a bastard kind between both , are the most distinguishable .


The internal parts of this island are fill'd with high mountains and vast forests in many places inaccessible , and which are the habitations of many large serpents and other venomous animals  and the banks of the rivers are infested with crocodiles .
But what is the most wonderful is a large inland lake which is at the top of a mountain about the middle of the island .
This is almost inaccessible , the way to it being over steep craigs and forests , so thick as to be scarce passable .
It is about two leagues and an half over , and nearly round .
Its depth in the middle is fifteen or sixteen fathoms , and it is supplied by a very rapid river .
It produces no fish but eels , some of which are as thick as a man 's thigh .
There are great number of wild ducks and plover about its borders , and the woods near it abound with a kind of bird , about the size of a Canary bird , with a black head , red neck , with a ring of white around it , and the wings of a bright gold colour .
In short , by the description , they seem much to resemble our goldfinches , and sing delightfully .
There are also in this island two other hills each almost in the form of a sugar-loaf , open at the top , and fill'd with water .


 On the coast of the island of Ceram , which is the largest of them all , being sixty leagues in length , and in some places fifteen in breadth , is a prodigious large rock , at the foot of which Nature has formed several caverns , which give it the outward appearance of a walled town with its gates .
These caverns sometimes serve for shelter to persons who happen to be overtaken by the night , tho ' the retreat into them is frightful and even dangerous , being very much infested with serpents and other venomous reptiles .


In the little islands of Noussa , Laout , and Honimoa , but especially in the latter , is found a kind of soap earth , which the women of that country , when pregnant , devour greedily , from a persuasion that it has virtue to make their children fair , altho ' experience most generally has contradicted that opinion .


The island of Oma is remarkable for a spring of hot water , the sulphureous steams of which are received thro ' a wooden grate , by way of bath , for the relief of gouty and paralytic persons  and the ground every where about it is also extremely hot .


But the most amazing particular in this island is a kind of fiery vapour , which is conveyed in the air with certain winds , and by which all the herbage for a large tract of ground will be almost instantaneously consum'd , and the cloaths , hair , and sometimes the faces of persons expos'd to it , extremely scorch'd .
Nor have they any means of escaping suffocation from the smoke produc'd by  it , but by throwing themselves flat on the ground with their faces to the earth .


The sea wherewith these islands are surrounded present at particular times , viz .
during the new moons of June , and August , a very amazing sight .
The surface of it appears in the night-time as it were striped with large furrows as white as milk , although in the day time no difference is to be seen .
This white water , which does not mingle with the other , has more or less extent according as it is increased by the rains , which the south-east winds bring along with them : no one has been able to discover from whence it comes , or whereby it is occasioned .
Some have attributed this whiteness to little animalculae  whilst others imagine it to proceed from sulphureous vapours rising from the bottom of the sea , and spreading on its surface .
It is true there are many mountains of sulphur in this part of the world  but was it occasioned by them , the like phaenomenon would be met with in other places where such mountains are  which is not the case .
When the white water is gone , the sea discharges a much greater quantity of froth and foam than usual .
This water is extremely dangerous for small vessels , as the breakers can not be distinguished through it  ships which are exposed to it also rot the sooner , and it is remarked that the fish constantly follow the black water .


Another object worthy of notice in those seas , is a kind of reddish worm , which appears every year at a certain time along the shore in many parts of the island of Amboyna .
The use the inhabitants make of these worms we shall shew hereafter .


15.3 .
The MANNERS and CUSTOMS of the Inhabitants of AMBOYNA .


 The inhabitants of these islands are of a middle stature , rather lean than fat , and extremely swarthy : their features are regular , and there are both men and women of them who are far trom unhandsome .
There is however a sort of them , which are called Cakerlaks , who are almost as white as the Europeans  but it is a sort of paleness which has something frightful in it when one is near them : they are very red hair'd , have large freckles on their hands and faces , and their skin is scursy , rough , and wrinkled .
Their eyes , which are perpetually winking , seem in the day-time half shut , and are so weak that they can scarce bear the light  but in the night they see very clear .
The women of this kind are very rare .
These Cakerlaks are a kind of lepers , and are held in great contempt by their country folks - They take their name from certain flying insects , which cast their covering every year , and whose skin resembles that of these people .


Their habitations are for the most part extremely poor and wretched : some indeed which belong to the principal persons are built of boards  but the generality are constructed of gabba-gabbas , or branches of the seago tree , the bark of which is extremely smooth and polished .
These houses make no bad appearance when they are new  but in a short time , when the gabba-gabbas begin to rot , and the nails and fastenings which hold them give  way , they form great gaps which render them extremely inconvenient .


Nor is their furniture more commodious or more plentiful - A few shelves to serve by way of canopy , some matts to sit on , a little earthen ware , a frying-pan , a copper bason to put their pisang in , a lamp of the same mettle , and two or three boxes made of the leaves of the nipa , ornamented with white shells , compose the principal part of it .
The leaves of the pisang serve them by way of table cloths and napkins , and the shell of the cocoa nuts for spoons .
The use of knives is unknown to them , but they do every thing with a kind of cleaver , which they manage very dexterously : besides these implements , for domestic use , they have also some arms in their houses , such as helmets , bucklers , sabres , and javelins .


Their habits are neither more diversified nor more magnificent : the men wear a kind of close-bodied coat and breeches , made of cotton , or some other stuff , of a blue colour , and for the most part unlined .
The women in the house wear a sort of petticoat sewed up , but without plaits , and equally open at both ends : this they fasten at their waists to their under habit , which is a kind of shift with the sleeves very long , and a little open before , and which reaches down somewhat below the navel .
When they go out they put on a second petticoat , which they throw over their left shoulder , in the manner of a cloak  so that only the right side is to be seen .


As fashion is unknown to the people of this country , all the difference of cloathing amongst  them consists in the difference of the stuffs .
The Moors have no other distinction in their dress from the Christians of the island but that of wearing a turban instead of the hat , or sometimes red or white handkerchiefs , which the latter fasten on their heads .


The grandees however are particularly fond of distinguishing themselves by the magnificence of their dress and the number of their slaves .
They also wear robes of brocade , silk stockings , and slippers , as marks of their nobility  whereas the commonalty , both men and women , go barefooted , or in wooden sandals .
The wives of the principal magistrates have the privilege of a kind of mantle , with hanging sleeves which comes down to their knees , is generally made of rich flowered silk , and gives them great consequence among the people .
They also adorn themselves with ear-rings , bracelets , and necklaces of many kinds , which are mostly made of gold .
They wear a hat cut in three or four points , and hold a handkerchief in their hands by way of a fan , which they put before their faces whilst at prayers in the church , where they have chairs  whereas the common women sit cross-legged on mats upon the ground .


As the Amboynians in general are not looked on as the best soldiers , they are also but indifferently provided with arms .
They have however some , which if they did but dare to look their enemies in the face , might be rendered extremely useful .
I have already , under the article of their furniture , mentioned the principal of them .
Nothing more therefore is necessary but to say something in regard to their structure .


 Their helmets are of brass adorned with the feathers of the bird of paradise .
Of bucklers they have two kinds  one sort , which are three or four feet long , and about one broad , and adorned on the outside with some rows of white shells : the other kind is only a small target made of rushes , very completely interwoven , about two or three feet diameter , with a spike in the centre , which renders them at the same time equally commodious for offence .
Of both these shields they avail themselves very skilfully in parrying off the strokes of their antagonists .
Their right hand is armed offensively either with a fabre or a javelin : some of them substitute , in the room of these , the bow and arrow , which are in more familiar use amongst the Alfourians , or mountaineers .
Their fire-arms , which they acquired the knowledge of from the Europeans , they employ only in sporting  nor have they any heavy artillery , excepting a few patteraroes on the walls of their fortresses .


The ordinary navigation of the Amboynians is in a kind of canoes cut out of the trunks of trees , which are ten , twelve , and sometimes even twenty feet long by one or two broad .
To either side of these vessels they fix a large wing , which , falling on the surface of the water , keeps it always in equilibrium amidst the waves  and as long as these wings are able to resist their force , the lightness of the vessel enables it to make a considerable progress in a very small time  but if once they happen to give way , the canoe infallibly oversets .
These little barks are manned with one or two rowers , besides the person who takes care of the helm .
 Their fishing-boats are broader , being about three or four feet wide , but without any covering , which would be very troublesome and inconvenient for that use .
Of the same form as these , but larger , are the vessels they make use of in their parties of pleasure .
In the middle of them , however , is fixed a square tent or pavilion , with benches and curtains all round , large enough to contain fifteen or twenty persons , in proportion to the size of the boat  by which also is determined the number of the rowers .
The smaller Orembayes ( for so are these vessels called ) carry ten or twelve , and the larger ones from thirty to forty .
These rowers are arranged towards the head and stern of the boat on planks which project from its two sides : the oars are broad and short , almost in the form of a baker 's peel , and the strokes of them are regulated by the time of certain instruments of music played on by two men for that purpose .


A third kind of bark , which they make use of , is called the Champan , carries a mast , and is covered  is about ten or twelve tons burthen  and is made great use of for the conveying goods from one island to another .
The last sort of shipping which these people employ are their Coracores , which are large vessels of sometimes an hundred feet in length , and twelve or fourteen in breadth .
The meaning of the name is the Sea-tortoise , which is given to them from their being very heavy and slow , altho ' with a fair wind they are very convenient , as they have the assistance of sails as well as oars .
Some of these galleys have two , some three , and others four rows of oars , extending from fifty to  near an hundred , with room for lodging about the same number of men , exclusive of two or three very elegant little apartments for persons of particular distinction .
Of these vessels , form'd into fleets from fifty to sixty-five , provided with proper arms , and a few pateraroes , they defend their own coasts from incursions , and frequently make attacks on their neighbours .


From what we have said of the habits , dwellings , and furniture of these people , it appears , that their necessities can be but few  one would therefore imagine that with a little application , join'd to a very small degree of oeconomy , it would be easy for them to increase their means , and even to amass great riches .
But altho ' there are several of them who enjoy a very considerable income by the profits arising from the produce of their cloves , yet they , for the most part , expend it all in feasts , presents , and law-suits , in the latter of which they make nothing of throwing away an hundred ducats in the defence of a controverted clove-garden .
It is , however , remarkable that in a country where poverty is in a manner the fashion , there are , nevertheless , no such thing as beggars : but the wonder will in some degree cease when it comes to be consider'd , that the trees produce in very great abundance certain fruits , the use of which is not denied to the passers-by  and that besides , no one there ever refuses to a poor man the liberty of cutting as much fire-wood as he has occasion for in one day , whilst it is very easily in his power , with no extraordinary industry , for him to make three shillings a-day by the sale of  those faggots , two pence of which will amply suffice for his day 's subsistence .


We have observed above that feasting is one of the articles which ruin the Amboynians , and by which they are perpetually kept in penury and distress .
In short , there are many various occasions on which they are obliged to give great and sumptuous entertainments .
Of these they have ordinary and extraordinary ones .
At those which are given on marriages , christenings , burials , c. all the relations are invited  but no one comes empty-handed .
Every person thinks himself obliged to contribute a certain number of dishes : and these presents are carried with great ceremony and abundance of ostentation by their slaves , one following another , in large brasen basons , each cover'd with an embroidered handkerchief , thro ' which , however , it is easy to distinguish what is underneath .


Besides this , three or four persons are constantly employed for what might easily be performed by one  each endeavouring to outshine the other in the quantity of his presents and the number of his domestics .


[ To be continued . ]
16 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER III . ]


 MADAM ,


WHEN ` squire Bickerstaff , in the time of our mothers , such a time as , if their accounts may be trusted , is never likely to return , took upon him to entertain the town , he endeavoured to secure a kind reception by deducing his genealogy , and proving his relation to the whole family of the Staffs


If you can either by proximity of blood , or similitude of mind , shew your alliance to the numerous and powerful generation of Triflers , you may set any other race of mortals at defiance  for very little is to be feared from any power against which the Triflers shall form a combination .


I have always had the honour of being numbered among the Triflers  my mother , my grand-mother ,  and my grand-mother 's mother , were all Triflers before me .
You know , if you know any thing of Trifles , that it is the peculiar practice of our family to count their pedigree on the female side .
By the advantage of a strong memory , diligently stored with repeated narratives , I have an exact knowledge of the whole succession of Trifles , which have engaged the elegant and gay for two centuries and a half .


It is said in one of Steel 's comedies , that nobody despises the honours of ancestry but those that want them  and therefore I will not lose any advantage of hereditary excellency .
My mother was the best knotter of queen Mary 's court  my aunt Pen was the third lady that in the reign of Charles the Second tied ribands to her nipples  my grand-mother was a country gentlewoman , and has left little behind her except a scented paste , with which the beauties of her time used to clear their skins without the help of water .
My grand-mother appeared at the court of James the First in Mrs. Turner 's yellow starch , and her mother was always solicited to cut out ruffs by queen 's Elizabeth 's maids of honour .


I suppose , madam , you will now allow me to be a genuine and legitimate Trifler  and I should be glad that you could by equal authority clear your pretensions to a place among the sisterhood .
Triflers are always jealous  and I will not conceal my suspicions , that you are claiming a character without right  and that your life has not been passed regularly among us  that you have either wanted the initiation of the boarding-school , or the completion of the ball-room .


 I know , that it is common enough among periodical authors to forget their titles : they fill their heads with the theory of a plan which experience soon shews them to be too narrow to last long .
The Tatler often talks with the most solemn austerity of wisdom , and the Guardian deviates into many topicks with which as a Guardian he has no concern  but none ever started from her own purpose so soon as the Trifler  and therefore I am afraid , that she has taken a province which she can not fill .


To the first paper I made no objection : it is natural to a Trifler to think her own adventures important , and to tell them to those who do not wish to hear them : but the second paper has betrayed you .
Can you think love and courtship subjects for a Trifler ?
If love be a Trifle , what can we call serious ?
The truth is that almost all other female employments are the sports of idleness  and that they seldom cease to trifle till they begin to love .


It is impossible in reading a book not to form some image of the writer .
You have told us little of yourself  and therefore your readers are left to their own conjectures .
To tell you the truth , I conceive you to be a rural virgin , that after having passed about thirty years between reading and needle-work among groves and brooks , has at the invitation of some great lady left her grotto and bower , and come to take a view of the scenes of life , with no other ideas of love or pleasure than she has gathered from the amours and amusements of her own village .


 I do not wonder that to a votaress of studious tranquility , the whole bustle of the town appears a Trifle .
Much of the splendor , and much of the cares of life , I shall willingly give up to your sport or censure .
You may say what you will of pleasures where no heart is light , of connections without kindness , of struggles for precedency , of competitions for the newest fashion  but believe me , dear Dryad , to love and to be loved is a serious business  and whatever customs of courtship , caprice , levity , or vanity , have dictated , however the modes of approach between the sexes may be varied by the accidents of time or place , it is not for the Trifler to treat as Trifles those operations which unite us for ever to tyrants or to friends , to savages or to sages , and which terminate the flighty wit , or airy flutterer in a wife , an economist , a mother , and a grand-mother .


I am , Madam , Your very Humble Servant .
PENELOPE SPINDLE .


17 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 SOphia , as if afraid she had said too much , stopped abruptly , and , fixing her eyes on the ground , continued silent , and lost in thought .


Mr. Herbert , who had well considered the purport of her words , passed over what he thought would give her too much pain to be explicite upon , and answered in great concern , ` Then my fears are true : Sir Charles is not disposed to act like a man of honour . '


A sudden blush glowed in the cheeks of Sophia at the mention of Sir Charles 's name  but it was not a blush of softness and confusion .
Anger and disdain took the place of that sweet complacency , which was the usual expression of her countenance , and with a voice somewhat raised , she replied eagerly .


` Sir Charles I believe has deceived me  but him I can despise - Yet do not imagine , Sir , that he has dared to insult me by any unworthy proposals : if he has any unjustifiable views upon me , he has not had presumption enough to  make me acquainted with them , otherwise than by neglecting to convince me that they are honourable  but he practises upon the easy credulity of my mother .
He lays snares for her gratitude by an interested generosity , as I now too plainly perceive  and he has the art to make her so much his friend , that she will not listen to any thing I say , which implies the least doubt of his honour . '


Mr. Herbert sighed , and cast down his eyes .
Sophia continued in great emotion : ` It is impossible for me , Sir , to make you comprehend all the difficulties of my situation .
A man who takes every form to ensnare my affections , but none to convince my judgment , importunes me continually with declarations of tenderness , and complaints of my coldness and indifference  what can I do ?
what ought I to answer to such discourse ?
In this perplexity , why will not my mother come to my assistance ?
Her years , her authority as a parent give her a right to require such an explanation from Sir Charles as may free me from doubts , which although reason suggests , delicacy permits me not to make appear  but such is my misfortune , that I can not persuade my mother there is the least foundation for my fears .
She is obstinate in her good opinion of Sir Charles  and I am reduced to the sad necessity of either acting in open contradiction to her sentiments and commands , or of continuing in a state of humiliating suspence , to which my character must at last fall a sacrifice . '


 ` That , my dear child , interrupted Mr. Herbert , is a point that ought to be considered .
I would not mention it to you first  but since your own good sense has led the way to it , I will frankly own that I am afraid , innocent and good as you are , the censures of the world will not spare you , if you continue to receive Sir Charles 's visits , doubtful as his intentions now appear to every one : I know Mrs. Darnley judges of the sincerity of his professions to you by the generosity he has shewn in the presents he has heaped upon her - but , my dear child , that generosity was always suspected by me . '


' I confess , said Sophia , blushing , I once thought favourably of him for the attention he shewed to make my mother 's life easy  but if his liberality to her be indeed , as you seem to think , a snare , what opinion ought I to form of his motives for a late offer he has made her , and which at first dazzled me , so noble and so disinterested did it appear ! '


' I know no offer but one , interrupted Mr. Herbert hastily , which you ought even to have listened to . '


` Then the secret admonitions of my heart were right , ' cried Sophia , with an accent that at once expressed exultation and grief .


` But what was this offer , child , said Mr. Herbert ?
I am impatient to know it . '


' I will tell you the whole affair as it happened , resumed Sophia  but you must not be surprised , that my mother was pleased with Sir Charles 's offer .
He has been her benefactor , and has a  claim to her regard : it would be strange if she had not a good opinion of him .
You know what that celebrated divine says whose writings you have made me acquainted with : Charity itself commands us where we know no ill , to think well of all  but friendship , that goes always a pitch higher , gives a man a peculiar right and claim to the good opinion of his friend .
My mother may be mistaken in the judgment she has formed of Sir Charles  but it is her friendship , for him , a friendship founded upon gratitude for the good offices he has done her , that has given rise to this mistake . '


Sophia , in her eagerness to justify her mother , forgot that she had raised Mr. Herbert 's curiosity , and left it unsatisfied  and the good old man , charmed with the filial tenderness she shewed upon this occasion , listened to her with complacency , tho ' not with conviction .
At length she suddenly recollected herself , and entered upon her story  but a certain hesitation in her speech , accompanied with a bashful air that made her withdraw her eyes from him , to fix them on the ground , intimated plainly enough her own sentiments of the affair she was going to acquaint him with .


` You know , Sir , said she , Sir Charles has had a fit of illness lately , which alarmed all his friends .
My mother was particularly attentive to him upon this occasion , and I believe he was sensibly affected with her kind concern for him .
When he recovered , he begged my mother , my sister , and myself , would accompany him in a little excursion to Hampstead to take the air .
 We dined there , and returning home early in the evening , as we passed through Brookstreet , he ordered the coach to stop at the door of a very genteel house , which appeared to be newly painted and fitted up .
Sir Charles desired us to go in with him and look at it , and give him our opinion of the furniture .
Nothing could be more elegant and genteel , and we told him so  at which he appeared extremely pleased , for all had been done , he said , according to his directions . '


` He came home with us , and drank tea  after which he had a private conversation with my mother , which lasted about a quarter of an hour  and when they returned to the room in which they had left my sister and I , Sir Charles appeared to me to have an unusual thoughtfulness in his countenance , and my mother looked as if she had been weeping  yet there was , at the same time , an expression of satisfaction in her face . '


` He went away immediately  and my mother , when , eager to give vent to the emotions which filled her heart , exclaimed , Oh , Sophia , how much are you obliged to the generous affection of that man ! '


` You may imagine , Sir , pursued Sophia , in a sweet confusion , that I was greatly affected with these words .
I begged my mother to explain herself .
Sir Charles , said she , has made you a present of that house which we went to view this afternoon  and here , added she , giving me a paper , is a deed by which he has settled three hundred pounds a year upon you . '


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  ' I was silent , so was my sister , who looked at me as if impatient to know my thoughts of this extraordinary generosity .
My thoughts indeed were so perplexed , my notions of this manner of acting so confused and uncertain , that I knew not what to say .
My mother told us Sir Charles had declared to her , that his late illness had given him occasion for many uneasy reflections upon my account  that he shuddered with horror when he considered the unhappy state of my fortune , and to what difficulties I should have been exposed if he had died  and that , for the satisfaction of his own mind , he had made that settlement upon me , that whatever happened I might be out of the reach of necessity . '


' I am afraid , Sir , pursued Sophia with a little confusion in her countenance , that you will condemn me when I tell you I was so struck at first with the seeming candor and tenderness of Sir Charles 's motives for this act of generosity , that none but the most grateful sentiments rose in my mind . '


` No , my dear , replied Mr. Herbert , I do not condemn you : this snare was artfully laid  but when was it that your heart , or rather your reason , gave you those secret admonitions you spoke of . '


` Immediately , said Sophia : a moment 's reflection upon the conduct of Sir Charles served to shew me that some latent design lay concealed under this specious offer  but I am obliged to my sister for giving me a more distinct notion of it than my own confused ideas could furnish me with . '


 `` Then you desired to know her opinion , '' said Mr. Herbert .


` Certainly , resumed Sophia , this conversation passed in her presence , and as my elder sister she had a right to be consulted . '


`` Pray what did she say ? ''
asked Mr. Herbert impatiently .


` You know , Sir , said Sophia , with a gentle smile , my sister takes every opportunity to rally me about my pretensions to wit : she told me it was great condescension in me , who thought myself wiser than all the world besides , to ask her advice upon this occasion  and that she would not expose herself to my contempt , by declaring her opinion any farther than that she supposed Sir Charles did not consider this as a marriage-settlement . '


` These last words , pursued Sophia , whose face was now covered with a deeper blush , let in so much light upon my mind , that I was ashamed and angry with myself for having doubted a moment of Sir Charles 's insincerity .
I thanked my sister , and told her she should see that I would profit by the hint she had given me . '


' I wish , interrupted Mr. Herbert , that she may profit as much by you  but people of good understanding learn more from the ignorant than the ignorant do from them , because the wise avoid the follies of fools , but fools will not follow the example of the wise : but what did Mrs. Darnley say to this ? '


' I never saw her so angry with my sister before , replied Sophia : she said several severe things to  her , which made her leave the room in great emotion  and when we were alone I endeavoured to convince my mother that it was not fit I should make myself a dependant upon Sir Charles , by accepting such considerable presents : she was however of a different opinion , because Sir Charles 's behaviour had been always respectful in the highest degree to me , and because the manner in which he made this offer left no room to suspect that he had any other design in it but to secure a provision for me , in case any thing should happen to him . '


` Your mother imposes upon herself , replied Mr. Herbert  but I hope , my dear child , you think more justly . '


` You may judge of my sentiments , Sir , answered Sophia , by the resolution I have taken : I wished to consult you  but as I had no opportunity for it , I satisfied myself with doing what I thought you would approve .
My mother , prest by my arguments , told me in a peevish way that I might act as I thought proper : upon which I retired , and , satisfied with this permission , I enclosed the settlement in a cover directed for Sir Charles .
I had just sealed it , and was going to send it away , when my mother came into my room : I perceived she was desirous to renew the conversation about Sir Charles  but I carefully avoided it , for fear me should retract the permission she had given me to act as I pleased upon this occasion .
My reserve piqued her so much , that she forbore to enter upon the subject again  but as I had no opportunity of  sending my letter that night without her knowledge , I was obliged to go to bed much richer than I desired to be  and the next morning , when we were at breakfast , a letter was brought me from Sir Charles , dated four o'clock , in which he informed me that he was just setting out in a post-chaise for Bath .
His uncle , who lies there at the point of death , has it seems earnestly desired to see him , and the messenger told him he had not a minute to lose . '


' I am sorry , interrupted Mr. Herbert , that he did not get your letter before he went . '


Sophia then taking it out of her pocket , gave it to him , and begged he would contrive some way to have it safely delivered to Sir Charles  ` and now , added she , my heart is easy on that side , and I have nothing to do but to arm myself with fortitude to bear the tender reproaches of a mother whose anxiety for my interest makes her see this affair in a very different light from that in which you and I behold it . '


Mr. Herbert put the letter carefully into his pocket-book , and promised her it should be conveyed to Sir Charles  then taking her hand , which he press'd affectionately , ` You have another sacrifice yet to make , my dear good child , said he , and I hope it will not cost you much to make it .
You must resolve to see Sir Charles no more : it is not fit you should receive his visits , since you suspect his designs are not honourable , and you have but too much cause for suspicion .
It is not enough to be virtuous : we must appear so likewise  we owe the world a good example , the  world , which oftener rewards the appearances of merit than merit itself .
It will be impossible for you to avoid seeing Sir Charles sometimes , if you continue with your mother : you have no authority to forbid his visits here  and whether you share them or not , they will be all placed to your account .
Are you willing , Miss Sophia , to go into the country , and I will board you in the family of a worthy clergyman , who is my friend ?
His wife and daughters will be agreeable companions for you  you will find books enough in his study to employ those hours which you devote to reading , and his conversation will be always a source of instruction and delight . '


Sophia , with tears in her eyes , and a look so expressive that it conveyed a stronger idea of the grateful sentiments which filled her heart , than any words could do , thanked the good old man for his generous offer , and told him she was ready to leave London whenever he pleased : but unwilling to be an incumbrance upon his little fortune , she intreated him to be diligent in his enquiries for a place for her , that she might early inure herself to the humble condition which providence thought fit to allot for her .


Mr. Herbert entering into her delicate scruples , promised to procure her a proper establishment  and it was agreed between them that he should acquaint her mother the next day with the resolution she had taken , and endeavour to procure her consent to it .


Mr. Herbert well knew all the difficulties of this task , and prepared himself to sustain the storm  which he expected would fall upon him .
He visited Mrs. Darnley in the morning , and finding her alone , entered at once into the affair , by telling her that he had performed the commission Miss Sophia had given him  that a friend of his who was going to Bath would take care to deliver her letter to her unworthy lover , who , added he , will be convinced , by her returning his settlement , that she has a just notion of his base designs , and despises him as well for his falshood and presumption , as for the mean opinion he has entertained of her .


Mr. Herbert , who was perfectly well acquainted with Mrs. Darnley 's character , and had studied his part , would not give her time to recover from the astonishment his first words had thrown her into , which was strongly impressed upon her countenance , and which seemed to deprive her of the power of speech  but added , with an air natural enough , ` Your conduct , Mrs. Darnley , deserves the highest praises  indeed I know not which to admire most  your disinterestedness , prudence , and judgment  or Miss Sophia 's ready obedience , and the noble sacrifice she makes to her honour and reputation .
You knew her virtue might be securely depended upon , and you permitted her to act as she thought proper with regard to the insidious offer Sir Charles made her : thus , by transferring all the merit of a refusal to her , you reflect a double lustre upon your own , and she has fully answered your intentions by rejecting that offer with the contempt it deserved . '


 While Mr. Herbert went on in this strain , Mrs. Darnley insensibly forgot her resentment  her features assumed all that complacency which gratified vanity and self-applause could impress upon them : and although she was conscious her sentiments were very different from those which Mr. Herbert attributed to her , yet , as she had really spoke those words to Sophia which had given her a pretence to act as she had done , she concluded his praises were sincere , and enjoyed them as much as if she had deserved them .


It was her business now , however vexed at her daughter 's folly , as she conceived it , to seem highly satisfied with her conduct , since what she had done could not be recalled  yet inwardly fretting at the loss of so noble a present , all her dissimulation could not hinder her from saying , that although she approved of Sophia 's refusal , yet she could not help thinking she had been very precipitate , and that she ought to have waited till Sir Charles returned  and not have sent , but have given him back his settlement .


Mr. Herbert , without answering to that point , told her , that what now remained for her prudence to do was , to take away all foundation for slander , by peremptorily forbidding Sir Charles 's future visits .
Here Mrs. Darnley began to frown  ` for , since it is plain to us all , madam , pursued he , without seeming to perceive her emotion , that marriage is not his intention , by being allowed to continue his addresses , miss Sophia 's character will suffer greatly in the opinion of the world  and the wisdom and discretion by which you have hitherto  been governed in this affair , will not secure you from very unfavourable censures .
To shew therefore how much you are in earnest to prevent them , I think it is absolutely necessary that you should send your daughter out of this man 's way . '


Mrs. Darnley , who thought she had an unanswerable objection to make to this scheme , interrupted him eagerly , ` You know my circumstances , Mr. Herbert , you know I can not afford to send my daughter from me  how am I to dispose of her , pray ? '


` Let not that care trouble you , madam , replied Mr. Herbert , I will take all this expence upon myself : I love Miss Sophia as well as if she was my own child  and slender as my income is , I will be at the charge of her maintainance till fortune and her own merit place her in a better situation . '


Mr. Herbert then acquainted her with the name and character of the clergyman in whose family he intended to board Sophia : he added , that the place to which she was going being at no great distance , she might hear from her frequently , and sometimes visit her , without much expence or inconvenience .


Mrs. Darnley having nothing that was reasonable to oppose to these kind and generous offers , had recourse to rage and exclamation .
She told Mr. Herbert that he had no right to interpose in the affairs of her family  that he should not dispose of her child as he pleased  that she would exert the authority of a parent , and no officious medler should rob her of her child .


 Mr. Herbert now found it necessary to change his method with this interested mother , ` Take care , madam , said he , with a severe look , how far you carry your opposition in this case : the world has its eyes upon your conduct  do not give it reason to say that your daughter is more prudent and cautious than you are  nor force her to do that without your consent which you ought to be the first to advise her to . '


` Without my consent !
replied Mrs. Darnley , almost breathless with rage  will she go without my consent , say you  have you alienated her affections from me so far ?
I will soon know that . '


Then rising with a furious air , she called Sophia , who came into the room , trembling , and in the utmost agitation .
The melancholy that appeared in her countenance , her paleness and disorder , the consequences of a sleepless night , which she had passed in various and afflicting thoughts , made Mr. Herbert apprehensive that her mother 's obstinacy would prove too hard for her gentle disposition  and that her heart , thus assaulted with the most powerful of all passions , love and filial tenderness , would insensibly betray her into a consent to stay .


Mrs. Darnley giving her a look of indignation , exclaimed with the sarcastic severity with which she used formerly to treat her  ` So my wise , my dutiful daughter , you can not bear , it seems , to live with your mother  you are resolved to run away from me , are you ? '


` Madam , replied Sophia , with a firmness that disconcerted Mrs. Darnley , as much as it pleasingly surprised Mr. Herbert , it is not you I am running  away from , as you unkindly say , I am going into the country to force myself from the pursuits of a man who has imposed upon your goodness , and my credulity  one who I am convinced , seeks my dishonour , and whose ensnaring addresses have already , I am afraid , given a wound to my reputation , which nothing but the resolution I have taken to avoid him can heal . '


Poor Sophia , who had with difficulty prevailed over her own softness to speak in this determined manner , could not bear to see the confusion into which her answer had thrown her mother  but sighing deeply , she retired towards the window , and wiped away the tears that fell from her charming eyes .


Mrs. Darnley , who observed her emotion , and well knew how to take advantage of that amiable weakness in her temper , which made any opposition , however just and necessary , painful to her desired Mr. Herbert to leave her alone with her daughter , adding , that his presence was a constraint upon them both .


Sophia hearing this , and dreading lest he should leave her to sustain the storm alone , went towards her mother , and with the most persuasive look and accent , begged her not to part in anger from Mr. Herbert .


' I can not forgive Mr. Herbert , said Mrs. Darnley , for supposing I am less concerned for your honour than he is .
I see no necessity for your going into the country  your reputation is safe while you are under my care  it is time enough to send you out of Sir Charles 's way when we  are convinced his designs are not honourable .
Mr. Herbert , by filling your head with groundless apprehensions , will be the ruin of your fortune . '


` Sir Charles 's dissembled affection for me , interupted Sophia , will be the ruin of my character .
There is no way to convince the world that I am not the willing dupe of his artifices , but by flying from him as far as I can : do not , my dear mamma , pursued she , bursting into tears , oppose my going  my peace of mind , my reputation depend upon it . '


` You shall go when I think proper , replied Mrs. Darnley  and as for you , Sir , turning to Mr. Herbert , I desire you will not interpose any farther in this matter . '


` Indeed I must , madam , said the good old man , encouraged by a look Sophia gave him .
I consider myself as guardian to your daughter , and in that quality I pretend to some right to regulate her conduct on an occasion which requires a guardian 's care and authority . '


` Ridiculous !
exclaimed Mrs. Darnley , with a malignant sneer , what a jest !
to call yourself guardian to a girl who has not a shilling to depend upon . '


' I am the guardian of her honour and reputation , said Mr. Herbert : these make up her fortune  and with these she is richer than if she possessed thousands without them . '


` And do you , miss , said Mrs. Darnley to her daughter , with a scornful air , do you allow this foolish claim ?
Are you this gentleman 's ward , pray ? '


 ` Come , madam , said Mr. Herbert , willing to spare Sophia the pain of answering her question , be persuaded that I have the tenderness of a parent , as well as guardian , for your daughter : it is absolutely necessary she should see Sir Charles no more  and the most effectual method she can take to shun him , and to preserve her character , is to leave a place where she will be continually exposed to his importunity .
I hope she will be able to procure your consent to her going tomorrow .
I shall be here in the morning with a post-chaise , and will conduct her myself to the house of my friend , whom I have already prepared by a letter to receive her . '


Mr. Herbert , without waiting for any answer , bowed and left the room .
Sophia followed him to the door , and by a speaking glance assured him he might depend upon her perseverance .


[ To be continued . ]
 MADAM ,


AS I apprehend the object of this publication is no less the moral than the literary improvement of your sex , permit me , through the channel of this useful work , to point out to your fair readers the fatal consequences of an opinion too generally received among them .


The opinion I could wish to see corrected is , that grandeur and happiness signify one and the same thing .
How far the same wrong notion prevails among men , is not my present purpose to examine  but I will venture , to affirm , that in the system of female logic , grandeur and happiness are convertible terms .
It is not surprising that this notion should be extremely prevalent , when we consider , that the whole system of female education tends to promote and extend it .
Whence is it , that many misses are instructed in accomplishments evidently above their rank , but in order to obtain a station in life to which they could not reasonably aspire .


In truth , it is more the vanity of being thought to possess such accomplishments than any pleasure arising from those attainments , that is the inducement to pursue them .
I have been assured by the parents of many young ladies , that their daughters were perfect mistresses of French , musick , c. when upon a better acquaintance , I plainly perceived , they had been at much expence only to say they had been learners .


 I would not be thought to mean , that the polite accomplishments are not very useful and becoming to persons of a certain rank and character  but I would observe , that the promiscuous aim of all ranks of females , to acquire those elegant distinctions , evidently proves my first principle , namely , that an appetite for vanity and splendor pervades the whole system of modern education .


The polite attainments too frequently give young ladies of middling station an unhappy propensity to dissipation and pleasure , and indispose them to the ordinary and necessary occupations of life .
It may be useful to consider what probability there is , that an appetite for distinction may be gratified , and then examine what superior happiness such envied distinctions necessarily confer .


I shall take it for granted , that a good establishment in marriage is the object of most women 's wishes .
It has been computed that nineteen marriages in twenty , among persons of liberal condition , are concluded upon no great inequality of circumstances .
It is plain then , that a lady who flatters herself , that she shall marry above her rank , runs no less a risk that twenty to one of a disappointment .
In fact this is unavoidable  for persons of rank and opulence are not very numerous , and frequently intermarry with each other : yet upon so slender a prospect has many a poor lady tired both herself and the public with a repetition of her countenance for many years past at every place of amusement .


To these dazzling and delusive hopes are ease and contentment often sacrificed , from a mistaken  opinion that grandeur and happiness are inseparable  or rather , that the latter was not possible without the former : hence anxious days and sleepless nights , not to mention that virtue is much endangered by pursuits giddy and fantastical .
After years of vain expectation the point in view is at a greater distance than ever , to obtain which dancing-masters and milliners have assisted in vain .
If it be said , that we hear sometimes of ladies , who from private stations have rose to great rank and riches , I answer , that particular exceptions conclude nothing against the general observation , that unreasonable expectation must almost always be disappointed .


Instances of surprising good fortune happen in all pursuits , and seeming accident will have its share in the happy events of matrimony , as well as in most others .
But if young people inflame their imaginations with extraordinary occurrences , and soar upon the waxen wings of expectation to regions of imaginary bliss , they will quickly find , like Icarus , misfortune interrupting the dream of vanity , and may possibly pay almost as dear for the experiment .


With respect to the blessings of Providence , we rather lament the absence of things perhaps not necessary , than make a proper use of those we have .
It sufficiently appears , that a passion for grandeur is not likely to be gratified  and that such wishes must , in the nature of things , much oftener miscarry than succeed .


But for once let us suppese the point obtained , and examine what happiness is annexed to that envied condition .
Providence , for the wisest reasons ,  has made a great difference in the external circumstances of his creatures , but not in their happiness .
In fact , the greatest blessings of life are proposed in common to us all .
Health and an approving conscience are the grand satisfactions of our being , as sin and pain are almost the only evils : nor can we cease to adore that goodness who has made the best things in life attainable by all conditions , without a possibility of interfering with each other .
In these two grand articles , it appears , that persons of wealth and station have no advantage over more moderate conditions .
The former are more exposed to temptations , and a full tide of prosperity has been always reckoned dangerous to virtue .


Besides , those who have large possessions and connexions are much broader marks for misfortune than others .
Socrates accounted those happiest who had fewest wants , as the happiest of all beings is he who wants nothing .
The more our wants are enlarged , and our appetites indulged , they become more ungovernable , and exceed our powers of satisfying them .
Such persons are exposed to perpetual disappointment , as it is much easier to imagine than obtain .


How many persons may we not presume , who are shining themselves , and shone on by fortune , that are inwardly miserable , and sick of life ?
Wealth and station may indeed procure a great variety of sensual gratifications , out of the reach of humbler fortunes : but of what nature are such pleasures ?
fleeting and dissatisfactory in the confession of all .


Let us reflect a little on the most exalted pleasures our nature is capable of .
We shall find them  attainable by private stations , and from some of the best of them the very lowest conditions not excluded .
Even those who are condemned to the drudgery of manual labour may , and do often enjoy a healthful body and a tranquil mind .
Though they are in a great measure excluded from intellectual enjoyments , yet even this view of their condition is not without its compensations .
It will not be denied , that our best enjoyments here below arise from temperance , moderate desires , easy reflexions , and a consciousness of knowledge and virtue .
I would ask my fair countrywomen , whether high rank and great riches are necessary to these attainments ?
The purest and most substantial pleasures are certainly those arising from religion and virtue  the pleasures of knowledge , and of friendship : which are attainable by the middling , if not all classes of life , depend much upon ourselves , and are little subject to accident or diminution .
So far from being the constant companions of rank and riches , that perhaps they are seldomer found among persons of elevated stations than most others .
It were easy to assign the reasons  as the necessaries of life are not difficult to obtain , so neither are its best comforts .
A person must have reflected indeed to very little purpose who is not sensible , that the prospect of the divine favour in another life , is the grand foundation of contentment in this imperfect and probationary state .


It will be said , that a competency of the good things of life , is necessary to our happiness , and truly desirable .
Most undoubtedly it is : but the misfortune is , our ideas of a competency are not  taken from nature , or even from our proper station and character , but from our imaginations and wrong habits  and what is yet more preposterous , from our comparisons with others .


A competency is not to be defined , because it varies according to the station and necessities of individuals .
To use a familiar comparison - Suppose a person undertakes a journey into a remote country , and has sufficient to defray his necessary expences , may he not enjoy the true pleasures of the scene equally with him who travels the same journey , attended with all the parade of equipage , and encumbered with a superfluity of wealth ?
May not as successful a voyage be made in a small , convenient bark , as in a galley no less splendid than Cleopatra 's ?


Let nothing here advanced be supposed to mean , that wealth and station incapacitate their possessors from enjoying the truest happiness of their nature .
Among other advantages in common with their fellow-creatures , they eminently enjoy the godlike power of doing good to others .
It is the exercise of that power that gives rank and riches their true dignity , and is the constant employment of him who is the source of all excellence .
But let not people mistake that which may be made the means of happiness for the necessary and never failing cause of it  nor repine at the want of those distinctions in the possession of which there occur so many examples extremely miserable .


I can not conclude this letter without observing , that an appetite for grandeur very fatally predominates at a crisis in life , wherein , of all others ,  it behoves us to act with the truest wisdom : I mean at the time of marriage .
Matches are now deemed good or bad , not from the qualities , but the external circumstances of the parties .
The opinion of Themistocles , like many other old opinions , is quite exploded , who declared , ` That he would rather marry his daughter to a man without an estate , than to an estate without a man . '


The candidates for the ladies affections , or more properly their fortunes , undergo the most exact scrutiny into their estates , expectations , and alliances  nor is any enquiry omitted , but into their sense and morals .
If your fair readers please to extend this charge to their admirers , they have my consent , only remembering , that folly on one side , never excuses it on another  and that they are most likely to be greater sufferers by an ill choice , as their condition is more dependent .


It is agreed on all sides , that the sure supports of conjugal felicity are the unreserved friendship and mutual esteem of the parties : now it is an axiom , that friendship can not exist but between virtuous minds  and surely no dreams of a lunatic were ever more visionary , than to suppose there can be any abiding pleasure without virtue , since in our system of being there is nothing durable but the consequences of it .


Many a thoughtless female , who despised all considerations but rank and riches , serves only to exhibit a wretched spectacle of their insufficiency .
I doubt not but this essay may fall into the hands of some of your fair readers , who have dragged out an insipid length of days , doating about vain and  perishable distinctions , and have sunk into utter contempt and oblivion , who , by a better conduct , might have enjoyed happy and comfortable establishments .


Let those whose cases are retrievable , consider that elevation must ever be the lot of very few  nor when it is attained does it invariably produce happiness .
The truest satisfactions in life are not necessarily connected with great estates or coronets , but are to be found among persons of all conditions , whose lives are governed by sense and virtue .
Of one thing they may be infallibly certain , that a life conducted by vanity can not fail to end in misery .


I am , Madam , Your very Humble Servant , W.M. .


19 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 HEaring her speak with unusual emotion , I approach'd her : she was giving her mother an account of what had happened .
Madame de Lussan was as much offended at the chevalier 's behaviour as her daughter .
I was silent : I even continued my walk with the ladies .
When they retired , I sent a message to the chevalier : he was at home , and in consequence of my desiring him to meet me , he came instantly to the place appointed .


' I can not persuade myself , said I , approaching him , that what has happened during our walk to-day , is more than a mere pleasantry : you are too gallant and well bred , to keep a lady 's picture , contrary to her inclination . '


' I know not , answered he warmly , what interest you take in my keeping or restoring it  but I know that I neither need , nor will accept of your advice . '
` Then , replied I , clapping my hand to my sword , I will force you to receive it in this manner . '


 The chevalier was brave .
He eagerly answered my defiance : we fought for some time with equal success  but he was not animated like me with the desire of serving what I loved .
He wounded me slightly in two places  but I gave him two large wounds , and obliged him both to ask his life , and to resign the picture .
After I had assisted him to rise , and had conducted him to the nearest house , I retired to my own lodgings , where as soon as the wounds I had received were drest , I set myself to contemplate the lovely picture , and kissed it a thousand and a thousand times .


I had a genius for painting , which I had taken some pains to cultivate  yet I was far from being a master in the art : but what will not love accomplish ?
I undertook to copy this portrait .
I spent two days in this employment .
Delightful task !
I succeeded so well , that even a very discerning eye might have mistaken mine for the original .
This inspired me with the thought of substituting one for the other , by which contrivance I should have the advantage of keeping that which belonged to Adelaida  and she , without knowing it , would always bear my work about her .


These trifles to one who truly loves are matters of great importance , and my heart knew how to set a full value on them .


After I had fastened the picture I had painted to the riband in such a manner that my cheat could not be discovered , I presented it to Adelaida .
Madame de Lussan express'd herself highly obliged to me .
Adelaida said little : she seemed embarrassed  but in the midst of that embarassment , I thought I  discovered that she was pleased at having received this little obligation from me , and that thought gave me real transport .


I have in my life experienced some of those happy moments  and had my misfortunes been only common ones , I shoud not have believed them too dearly purchased .


After this little adventure , I stood extremely well in the esteem of Madame de Lussan .
I was always at her lodgings : I saw Adelaida every hour in the day  and although I did not speak to her of my passion , yet I was sure she knew it , and I had reason to believe she did not hate me .
Hearts as sensible as ours were , quickly understand each other : to them every thing is expression .


I had lived two months in this manner , when I received a letter from my father , in which he commanded me to return immediately .
This command was to me like the stroke of a thunder-bolt : my whole soul had been engrossed with the pleasure of seeing and loving Adelaida .
The idea of leaving her was wholly new to me  the horror of parting from her , the consequence of the law-suit between our families , rose to my thoughts with every aggravation to distract me .


[ To be continued . ]
20 .
The following Essay , on the original inhabitants of Great Britain , is the composition of a nobleman , distinguished for his genius , taste , and learning .
 Figure 1 .
Antient Britons


 AN ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN .


THE history of every nation in the world begins in a dark and fabulous manner : nor can any history be more obscure than that of Great Britain .
It is impossible to guess when , or by whom our island was originally peopled .
The conjectures on this head have been various  but as they amount only to conjectures , and as the point itself is of no real importance , I shall pass directly forward to the first accounts upon which we may place any reliance .
The original inhabitants are represented as consisting of two classes , Priests and Soldiers .
The whole island , at least that part of it called South Britain , was divided into small provinces , each of which was allotted to the sovereignty of a prince .
These princes lived in constant warfare and contention .
The priests were distinguished by the name of Druids  but their power was not only confined to the ceremonies of sacrifice , and other religious parts of worship , it extended to the government of all civil judicature .
To the ordinary druids , ( who were  very numerous , but seldom or ever of mean birth ) was committed the administration of justice in the several provinces , the determination of all causes , and the judicial decision of right and wrong  but still subject to the supreme jurisdiction of one chief druid , who , in dignity , excelled all the rest  and who , in civil affairs , had the power of a king , while in religious matters , he might be called the reigning Pope of those days .


The military men were brave , even to a degree of fierceness .
They had never felt the effects of fear , fatigue , or luxury .
They had been bred in woods , and inured to hardships .
Agriculture and merchandize had made little or no progress in the kingdom .
The constant diet of the people was milk and flesh-meat , of both which they had great plenty , the whole island being filled with various kinds of cattle .


Such were the Britons , when Julius Caesar invaded their country .
He appeared , with his fleet , hovering upon the coast of England , August the twenty-sixth , in the year of Rome , 699 , * fifty-four or fifty-five years before the birth of Christ .
His pretence for this invasion was the constant refuge which the Belgae , a people of Gaul , had received from the inhabitants of Britain , and the perpetual succours and assistance which were granted by the Britains to the enemies of Rome .
The pretence was specious .
The true motive was a thirst of  glory .
Caesar 's ambition like the ocean he crost , had no bounds .


I am inclined to think , that this enterprize was not very acceptable to the Roman people : they looked upon it as an hazardous undertaking .
Cicero , in one of his epistles to Atticus , expresses himself thus : Britannici belli exitus expectatur : constat enim aditus insulae esse munitos mirificis molibus : etium illud jam cognitum est , neque argenti scripulum esse illum in illa insul , , neque ullam spem praedae , nisi ex mancipiis : ex quibus nullos puto te literis aut musicis eruditos exspectare .
` The event of the British war is waited for with impatience .
It is certain , that all the approaches to that island are fortified by amazing out-works : and it is universally known , that not a scruple of silver is to be found throughout the whole island  nor are there hopes of any acquisitions except the slaves , amongst whom I can not suppose you will expect musicians , or men of learning . '
Tully , we perceive , seems to treat the Britains rather in a sneering manner , than to speak of them with his usual , lively , but weighty manner of expression .
He has no great opinion of their genius , or of their learning .
But however illiterate , or however unskilled in music our ancestors might appear , it can not be denied , that they were not only couragious , but of a liberal nature , totally devoid of all low art , but not totally unversed in the policy of war .
Caesar gives an account of them , which as it comes from an enemy is very much to their honour .
He says , he had great difficulty in landing , being annoyed by their darts , and opposed by their cavalry   and when he had brought his troops to an engagement , he confesses , that the battle was maintained with sharpness on both sides .
Pugnatum est ab utrisque acriter .
At length the Roman arms prevailed .
The islanders gave way , retired to their woods , and immediately sent ambassadors to sue for terms of peace .
Caesar , upon the arrival of the ambassadors reproached the Britons , as having acted ungenerously , by imprisoning his friend Comius , whom he had sent into England , some time before , with his own particular commands .
Their excuse is remarkable .
Ejus rei culpam in multitudinem contulerunt , et propter imprudentiam ut ignosceretur petiverunt .
` They acknowledged their imprudence , begged that it might be forgiven , and fixed the rashness of the action entirely upon the common people . '
So powerful and ungovernable , even at that time , was an English rabble .
Caesar , gentle and compassionate , both by nature and policy , received the excuse , demanded hostages , and granted terms of peace .


The peace on the side of the Britons was an act of necessity , not of choice .
Perhaps is was no less so on the side of the Romans .
They would have penetrated farther into the island  they would have visited the coasts and would have considered the various parts that might have afforded them a refuge in any future invasion , if they had not met with a people very different from what they expected .
They expected wild savages , they met with real soldiers .
They had been used to strike terror upon the continent , they only excited spirit and unanimity in a little island , where they found  courage instead of fear  and order instead of confusion .


Caesar , at his first expedition from Belgic Gaul into Britain , had left his cavalry behind him .
They were detained by contrary winds in a port at some distance from that where he had embarked : He had given orders that they should follow , on the earliest opportunity , loaded with arms , ammunition , and soldiers : and four days after his arrival in England , they had obeyed those orders , and were more than half way over the British channel , when a sudden storm turned the ships entirely out of their course , and not only forced back many of them to the continent , but drove others to the most western part of the island .
At the same time , the vessels which had transported Caesar , and which had remained at anchor upon the British coast , were much shattered by the tempest .
Twelve of them were absolutely lost  and the Romans saw themselves at once deprived of all hopes of provision , except such as could be procured from the islanders , by sending out parties to forage at a small distance from the Roman camp .


From these unexpected circumstances , the Britons resolved to reap advantage : they assembled their disbanded troops with great privacy and expedition , and while one of the Roman legions was sent out to forage , they suddenly surrounded the foragers , and must immediately have destroyed the rest , if Caesar with amazing alacrity had not hastened to their assistance .
The sudden appearance of Caesar , although attended only by two cohorts , put the Britons to a stand  and the Romans  did not think themselves , at that time , sufficiently prepared for an engagement .
Each party retired  the Britons to the woods , the Romans to their camp .


Here the Britons seem to have been defective in military conduct .
They ought to have pursued their blow : they ought to have attacked Caesar  and in the true spirit of liberty , they ought either to have conquered , or to have died .
It is probable that they perceived their error , and it is possible , they might have retrieved it , if a succession of rain and storms for many days together , had not rendered all efforts against the enemy impracticable .


As soon as the weather changed , the Britons came out of their retirement , and marched to attack the Romans in their trenches .
Caesar drew out his legions before the camp  both armies engaged , and both fought with equal spirit and resolution  but the Romans were better disciplined , and more perfect masters of the art of war : so that the unhappy Britons were routed , and again compelled to sue for peace , from the hands of an invader , who , although the greatest man that ever lived , must ever appear as lawless a tyrant to Britain as to Rome .
Caesar was not sorry to be sollicited for terms of peace : he received the ambassadors in his usual attractive manner , and lost no time in setling the terms of accommodation .
He insisted upon a greater number of hostages than he had before required  and , under pretence of avoiding the storms that generally rage in the British seas at  the autumnal equinox , he embarked his troops , and hastened back to Gaul .


Caesar , during his short residence in Britain , had observed enough of this new world , to make him tacitly resolve upon a second invasion .
The woods were large , the cattle numerous , and the inhabitants a brave people , worthy of being conquered .


A finer object could not have presented itself to the eye of ambition .
However , Caesar passed his winter as usual in Italy , without any open declaration of returning into England .
In the mean time , the Britons , filled with anger , indignation , and disappointment , and perhaps guided by the dictates of pride , revenge , and obstinacy , were determined not to send the hostages , which had been peremptorily required on one side , and had been faithfully promised on the other .
Caesar let some months pass before he took notice of so notorious a breach of faith  and in this particular he acted with all the subtilty of a miser , who , when he has obtained a morgage upon an estate , purposely suffers the interest of it to run on , till he can claim a right of seizing the premises , and defying all equity of redemption .


In the year of Rome 700 , Caesar , who , during the winter , had been making various preparations for a second attempt upon England , put his design into execution .
He set sail late in the eveing from the Portus Itius * , and arrived the next  day * about noon upon the British coast .
His army consisted of two thousand horse , and five legions † of foot  and his ships , including transports and every other sort , amounted to above eight hundred .
Such a number of vessels appearing at once upon the ocean , was a terrifying circumstance to the Britons : they imagined Caesar 's military forces much more numerous than they really were  and they immediately withdrew their troops from the shore , and retired into a more covered part of the country  so that Caesar landed his men , and fixed his camp without the least opposition .
His first enquiry was , into what part of the island the Britons had withdrawn  and having learnt their particular situation , he left a sufficient number of forces to guard his fleet , and proceeded with the rest in pursuit of the enemy .
The islanders had expected his approach , and were prepared to receive him , by having fixed themselves upon a rising-ground near a river , at the distance of about twelve miles from the shore .
Here they endeavoured to oppose him by their chariots á and their cavalry  but in vain .
The Roman horse  prevailed , and the Britons again withdrew to their woods .
They were there fortified , as Caesar tells us , both by art and nature .
The woods were very thick , and the passage into them was rendered extremely difficult , by large trees , which had been cut down , and heaped upon each other to a great height .
The Britons had made use of this method of fortification , in their civil wars : but the Romans soon made their way over these entrenchments , and expelled the Britons even from the woods , where they had taken shelter .
A small number of regular troops will infallibly conquer a much larger number of undisciplined forces .
The Roman army consisted of veterans , who had been trained up from their youth in the art of war  and had carried their arms over the greatest part of the world .
The Britons had only practised the military science within their own island , and in contests against each other .
They were equal in courage , but inferior in skill to their enemies .
In some measure to remedy this defect , they enlisted themselves under the greatest commander of those days , Cassivelaunus , prince or sovereign of the Cassi , and the Trinobantes .
The Trinobantian territories * , were  Hertfordshire , Essex , and a great part of Middlesex .
The municipal city of this colony , was Verulanum , Verulam , the walls of which , built probably in the time of Agricola , are still to be seen in the approaches to St. Alban 's .


Several skirmishes passed between the Britons and the Romans  in one of which the former gained some small advantage .
But what force could repel Caesar ?
He still marched forward towards the river Thames , resolving to cross it at the only place where it was fordable .
Cassivelaunus had foreseen his design , and had drawn up a large body of British troops on the opposite shore .
He had fortified the banks with palisades , and had driven into the bottom of the river a great number of sharp stakes * whose tops were covered by the water .
He had used every precaution that courage , sagacity , and presence of mind could suggest  but the Romans were determined not to be repulsed .
Their cavalry first entered the river , the legions immediately followed , and notwithstanding all impediments , passed across the Thames , with such expedition , and approached the enemy with so much vigour , that the Britons , unable to sustain the assault , quitted the banks of the river , and fled farther into the country .


Cassivelaunus still continued to make some attempts against the Romans  but his designs constantly  proved abortive .
The repeated victories of Caesar , the intestine broils of the kingdom , the immediate presence of a powerful invader , were all circumstances that tended to damp the spirits of an unexperienced , and a disunited people .
Many of the principalities ( for so I think we may call the several Districts of the island ) began to entertain thoughts of suing for an accommodation with Caesar .
The Trinobantes set the example : they offered to submit to the conqueror , and to give themselves up to his disposal : at the same time requesting , that he would deliver them from the tyranny of Cassivelaunus , and assign the government , of their colony to Mandubratius , the son of Imanuentius their late king .


Caesar , ever fond of shewing acts of mercy and benevolence , accepted their offers and granted their request * .
The example of the Trinobantes was soon followed by several of the other colonies , and the unfortunate Cassivelaunus found himself deserted on every side .
His capital , a capital indeed of huts and hovels , was taken , plundered , and destroyed .
What step was left then for this unhappy prince ?
only an absolute submission to the conqueror .
A true Briton is always unwilling to submit , and Cassivelaunus deferred his submission to the latest hour : however , as he was a man of sense , as well as a man of spirit , and as all the inferior generals † were undermining him by making terms for themselves , he resolved to put an  end to a disadvantageous war , and to send ambassadors to the enemy , with offers * of a surrender .
Julius Caesar received them like Julius Caesar .
He exerted no acts of tyranny by the victorious progress of his arms  he imposed no hard terms of accommodation : but he required , in the style of a conqueror , the strongest assurances from Cassivelaunus , of never attempting any injuries towards Mandubratius , or the Trinobantes .
He received hostages for the performance of this contract  and he extracted a small annual tribute , to be paid by the states of Britain to the Roman people .
After these transactions , he took the advantage of a calm season , and sailed back with his army into Gaul .


The character of Cassivelaunus , as a general , must always shine with great lustre in the English annals .
Si pergama dextra defendi possent etiam hac defensa fuissent .
` If Britons could have been defended , such a right hand had defended them . '
But his behaviour to the Trinobantes appears by their complaints to Caesar , to have been tyrannical : and his murder of Imanuentius carries with it all the marks of a savage barbarity .
Yet perhaps in the seizure of the Trinobantian colony he was assisted by the inhabitants themselves  for I am apt to imagine , that even in those early days , the Britons were fond of making and unmaking kings .


 Till Caesar 's death , which was in the year of Rome 711 , the Britons remained unmolested by invasions , but still tributary to the Roman people .
The murderer of the mighty Julius was attended by all the violence and distraction of civil war  and the Romans were for some years too intensely employed upon the continent to turn their thoughts towards a distant western island , that at that time appeared of little consequence to the southern part of the world .


During this interval , it is not improbable that the Britons made some improvements in their manners , and some advantages in their trade .
Julius Caesar describes the inhabitants of the sea-coasts , those coasts that were nearest to Gaul , as a mixture of the Belgae and the Britons .
The people who were situated beyond the Thames , and in the most inland parts of the island , consisted , he says , entirely of natives .
These , indeed , he represents in general as men , who had scarce any pretensions to the dignity of human nature , except the figure .


Let us therefore remember that the Romans owed their origin to thieves and vagabonds  and that Great Britain owes her glory to savages and wild men .
The heralds must decide which of the two sets of Aborigines are entitled to the more-dignified coat of arms .


During the reign of Augustus the Britons remained entirely unmolested by the Romans .
The island was looked upon as a kingdom that had rather added personal fame to Julius Caesar than remarkable advantage to the empire of Rome .
Augustus was in no degree equal to his uncle in  like enterprising genius : however , he had formed a design of visiting Britain * , when a sudden revolt of the Salassi , a people of the Piedmontese , put a stop to his intentions , which were never afterwards revived .


Tiberius followed the example of his predecessor , and made no attempt upon the island .
Cornelius Tacitus , speaking of this behaviour towards the Britons , says , Consilium id divus Augustus vocabat , Tiberius praeceptum ` This conduct Augustus called policy : the example of Augustus , was a precept to Tiberius . '


The temper of Caligula , the next Roman emperor , differed in a great measure from the peaceful stupidity of Tiberius .
Caligula was vain , impetuous , and extravagant  but cowardly , passive , and irresolute .
He assembled an army of two hundred thousand men , passed the Rhine , repassed it , without seeing an enemy  plundered Gaul , came to the gallic shore , proclaimed war against Britain , and gathered cockle shells .


To Claudius the fifth emperor of Rome fate had reserved a more complete conquest of our island than had been made by any of his predecessors .
The Britons had justly ridiculed the military fopperies of Caligula  but they carried their exultations too far .
They imagined themselves invincible , because a Roman emperor and his numerous army had pompously marched to the sea-shore , and were  afraid to cross the ocean .
Our ancestors remained wrapt up in this kind of security , at the accession of Claudius , whose personal character could not possibly give the least room for apprehension .
He was as indolent as Tiberius , and as cowardly as Caligula  but his lucky stars ordained him to be governed by counsellors of far superior judgment to his own .
Among these were Aulus Plautius , and Ostorius Scapula , both men of great eminence in rank and reputation .
To the first , was assigned the command of the army destined against the Britons .


It is an observation made by Julius Caesar , that the Belgic Britons , and the native or antient Britons , were very different in their customs and manners .
A constant intercourse with the continent , some progress in agriculture , and a considerable increase of commerce , had , in a great measure , polished , and improved the former , whilst the latter remained in their original fierceness .


We can not wonder that men of such a dissimilar turn of mind and actions , should be continually jarring with each other .
The former , like courtiers , were too servilely submissive to tempting circumstances , and alluring views of ambition  the latter , like country gentlemen , were too obstinately resolute , and too impoliticly reserved .
These dissentions proved of great use to an invader , and Plautius landed , without the least opposition .
He found the island like a desert  scarce an inhabitant appeared .
The Belgic Britons had retired into woods and fortresses : they hastened to retreat  from an enemy with whom they were unprepared to engage .
Plautius moved onward , with his army coasting along the Thames , till he came to Wallingford , where he crossed the river , and entered into the territories of the Donubi , a colony to whom Oxfordshire , and a great part of Gloucestershire , belonged .
These were the first people from whom he met with resistance .
They fought against the Romans with great bravery  but being unfortunate in four successive battles , and in the loss of one of their chieftains , Togodumus , they retreated across the Thames , and were followed by Plautius .
Both armies encamped on the side of the river , next to Gaul  but our historians , I think , have not exactly fixed their situation .


The Roman General remained in his camp , and evidently declined an engagement .
The Donubi , although four times vanquished , and still in a state of exile from their own colony , attributed his conduct to fear : but they were mistaken in their judgment .
The inactivity of Plautius was neither the effect of fear nor caution : he waited for the arrival of the emperor  and , from a nobleness of soul , uncommon in a general , intended to crown his imperial master with all the laurels and honours that might arise from any future conquest over the Britons .


Claudius landed at the Portes Rutupinus ( Sandwich in Kent ) and marched with his troops to the mouth of the river Thames , where Plautius was encamped .
As soon as the Roman forces were all joined , they repassed the Thames , and , with much slaughter , made their way through a great number  of the Britons , who had endeavoured to stop their passage .
They took Camlodunum * the capital of one of the British Princes  and they passed on with such a victorious quickness , that many of the Belgic colonies thought it a proper time to submit .
Claudius placed them under the government of Plautius  and , after a stay only of sixteen days in the island , returned to Gaul , in his way to Italy .


The personal presence of a powerful prince , is of great efficacy wherever he goes .
The veni , vidi , vici of Julius , was a motto accidently applicable to Claudius Caesar , who , in a little more than a fortnight subdued , partly by arms , and partly by the terror of his name , four colonies of Britons † .
Plautius judged rightly in sending for such a figure to be carried about , at the head of the army : his judgment was not less exquisite , in sending it as quickly back .
A longer stay might have discovered the idol to have been pasteboard  and the Britons might have despised the pageant , when they found it only a moving machine in the human form .


As soon as Claudius had set sail , the Romans resolved upon a farther progress into different parts of our island .
They divided their troops under the command of two generals .
Aulus Plautius , the propraetor , and Flavius Vespasianus , afterwards  Emperor .
The actions of Vespasian are mentioned by Dio and Suetonius , and are particularly extolled by Tacitus .
Our English Historians are no less profuse in his praises .
Most of them assign to him the conquest of the isle of Wight  and of the several other Belgic colonies , from Hampshire , Wiltshire , and Somersetshire , to the extremity of the western part of Cornwall .


Plautius had undertaken the conquest of the more inland countries : but probably finding his task too difficult , he contented himself with the laurels which he had gained , and returned to Rome .
Astorius Scapula succeeded him in the title of propraetor , and in the command of the army .
Scapula , in attempting to pursue the plan of his predecessor , met with many difficulties .
His adversaries were endued with a certain stubborn bravery , that scorned the superior power of the Romans .
They fought with the resolution of men , who esteemed the enjoyment of their laws and liberty as the greatest blessings under heaven .
The love of liberty , and a true devotion to its cause , seems to have been implanted by nature itself in the breasts of our forefathers .
How strangely , and from what incidents this elementary British fire was frequently evaporated , and again was amazingly rekindled , must be the subject-matter of future enquiry .
Certainly it never shone forth with greater brightness than in the person and character of Caractacus : he was a prince of a noble birth , and a proud undaunted spirit : he was an able and a judicious commander .
During nine years successively , he had defended himself with inferior forces , against  Ostorius and the Roman army .
He had often shifted his ground , and had withdrawn his troops into mountains and rocky places .
Every passage that might prove accessible to the enemy , was stopt up , and fortified by heaps of stones .
At length the Romans , growing ashamed of their frequent disappointments , and enraged to be outdone by a Briton , demolished his fortresses , and forced him to an engagement .
The event of the battle was fatal to Britain in general , and particularly unfortunate to Caractacus , whose wife and daughter were taken prisoners .
The unhappy prince escaped , only to become more miserable : he fled , in confidence of receiving friendship and protection from Cartismandua , queen of the Brigantes , who immediately betrayed him to the conquerors  and Caractacus , with his captive family , were sent bound in chains to Rome .


[ To be continued . ]
21 .
THE TRYAL OF THE MAID OF ORLEANS .
Extracted from the Archives of Normandy , by John Nagerel , canon and archdeacon of the church of Nostre Dame at Rouen .
Communicated to the author by a friend .


 IN the year one thousand four hundred and twenty nine , a young girl named Jane Taré , of the dutchy of Lorrain , declared she had frequent revelations from heaven : she was the daughter of a common labourer , and her whole life had been employed in tending cattle .
God commanded her , she said , to go to Charles the seventh , king of France , in order to advise and assist him in the recovery of his dominions , then possessed by the English .


She was brought before the governor of Vaucouleurs , who looked upon her as disordered in her mind , and dismissed her .
She insisted however so strongly , and persevered so much in her resolutions to go and offer her services to Charles , that the governor at last contented to have her conducted to Chinon where the king resided .


Her behaviour there did not shew the embarrassment of a country girl , but the unaffected politeness and ceremony of a courtier .
She immediately distinguished her royal master from among the crowd of his attendants , and said to him that she came in compliance to the almighty 's orders to raise  the siege of Orleans , and to recover the kingdom from English usurpation , desired him not to be apprehensive of his enemies : that she would attack them wherever she met them : that she made no doubt of succeeding in her attempts : and that his majesty should be soon peaceably established upon the throne of his ancestors .


Charles ordered this extraordinary young woman to be examined in matters of religion  and asked her several questions relative to the art of war , and other curious subjects .


Her answers were so pertinent and so just , that the king , the prelates , and the other clergy who were present , were very much amazed .
It was revealed to her , she said , that in a neighbouring church was hid a sword on which five Flower-deluces , the arms of France , were engraved .


The sword was searched for , and found among some old iron in the church she had mentioned .
The king presented it to her , and she was soon accoutred in warlike dress .
Every thing seemed familiar to her mind  her activity and address were equal to those of the most accomplished warriors .


When she was admitted to his majesty 's council to advise on the exigency of affairs , she spoke with so much knowledge , with so much prudence and wisdom , that her opinion was often followed , and that of the most experienced generals laid aside .


But what was more astonishing , when a council was held in her absence , she knew every thing that was proposed and concluded there .
However , his majesty thought proper to desire the maid to give him some unquestionable proofs of her being the messenger  of God , as he might then entirely confide in her advice , and follow her instructions .


To which Jane answered , ` Sire , if I can discover to you your thoughts , which you confided to God alone , will you firmly believe that I am his messenger ? '


Charles said he would  on which she asked him if he remembered that some months before , in the chapel of his castle of Loches , he privately and alone humbly begged three things from heaven ?


The king remembred very well his having made requests to God , which he had not since revealed even to his confessor  and said that he would no longer doubt of Jane 's divine legation , if she could tell him what these entreaties were ?


Your first suit was then , continued Jane , that if you were not the true heir to the crown of France , God would please to deprive you of the courage and desire of continuing a war , in order to possess it , which had already caused so much bloodshed and misery throughout the kingdom .
Your second prayer was , that if the great troubles and misfortunes which the poor inhabitants of France have lately underwent , were the punishment of any sins by you committed , that he would please to relieve the people of France , that you alone might be punished , and make expiation , either by death or any torment he would please to inflict .
Your third desire was , that if the sins of the people were the cause of their sufferings , he would be pleased in his divine mercy to grant them pardon , and deliver them from the pains and miseries which they have been labouring under already above twelve years .


 Charles knowing the truth of all she said , was now firmly persuaded that she was a divine messenger , and placed much hopes in her assistance towards the recovery of his kingdom : soon after , assisted by Jane , he raised the siege of Orleans , and re-took possession of Gien , Gergueau , Meun , Baugenci , and many other places  and afterwards , by her persuasion , he ventured through the country of Champaign , though in the hands of the English , and went to Rheims , where he was anointed and crowned .


Jane carried the royal standard at this ceremony , and , in a little time , contributed very much to the recovery of several towns and castles .
Her reputation was at a great height  Charles always succeeded in every thing which she proposed and undertook  and in gratitude Jane had the credit of every thing that did succeed .


This brought upon her the hatred and envy of several of the commanders and chieftains of the French army , and at last proved fatal to her : for , in the year one thousand four hundred and thirty one , the maid of Orleans being informed that the duke of Burgundy , with some English , had laid siege to the town of Compiegn , immediately departed at the head of a few troops , to strengthen and support the feeble garrison that defended it .


A day or two after her arrival , some of the French lords proposed to sally out against the enemy  and though Jane did not think it adviseable , yet , lest she should be suspected of cowardice or backwardness , she consented , unfortunately for her , to be one of the number .


 As she was supporting her country 's cause with valour and intrepidity , some Frenchmen gave the signal for retreat , on which every body hastened to get back to the gates , where there was so great a throng , that before she could enter she was taken by some of the troops of John of Luxemburgh , who was at the siege with the duke of Burgundy .


Luxemburgh ordered her to be conducted to the castle of Beaurevoir , where she was strictly guarded , as he was apprehensive she would endeavour to escape by magic art , or some other subtle means .
The king of England , fearing that Luxemburgh would give her back to the French for a considerable ransom , was very anxious to have her in his own custody : but Luxemburgh absolutely refused to deliver his prisoner  so that Henry was obliged to have recourse to the bishop of Beauvais , in whose diocess she had been taken , entreating him to demand her as a person strongly suspected of heresy and witchcraft , and therefore liable to be examined and tried by him , according to the laws of proceeding against heretics .


The bishop , after much deliberation , consented to demand the suspected Jane from Luxemburgh , on paying him a reasonable ransom , if the assembly of divines of the university of Paris would advise him so to do .


The assembly not only was of opinion that he could and ought to do it , but also in complaisance , to the king of England , wrote to John of Luxemburgh , in the name of the university , praying him to send his prisoner to the bishop of Beauvais ,  in whose diocese she was still in custody , and who alone had the right of trying her for the crimes of which she stood accused .


This letter had the desired effect , and Jane was given up to the bishop , who immediately put her into the hands of the English , by whom she was carried to Rouen , and there kept in strong and close confinement .
Soon after , the king of England sent the following order to the magistrates of Rouen , to deliver Jane to be examined and tried by the bishop of Beauvais .


`` Henry , by the grace of God , king of France and England , to our magistrates of Rouen greeting .
It is publicly known , that for some time past a woman who calls herself Jane the Maiden , laying aside the dress and habit of her sex , which is against the law of God , and prohibited as an abominable practice by every law , and taking the dress and manner of man , has been guilty of many cruel homicides  and , in order to abuse the weak minds of the people , has made them understand that she was a messenger from God , and was privy to his divine secrets , and has entertained several other opinions contrary to our catholic faith , and scandalous and dangerous to our mother church .
That while she was in hostile act against us and our people , she was taken before the walls of Compiegne by some of our loyal subjects , and brought prisoner to our town of Rouen .
And whereas she has been strongly and universally suspected of superstition , false doctrine , and other crimes against our holy church , we have been earnestly sollicited by the reverend father in God and faithful counsellor  the bishop of Beauvais , right ecclesiastical judge of the said Jane , as taken in his diocess , and also entreated by our dearest and most beloved daughter the university of Paris , to give up and deliver our said prisoner to be examined and tried by the said bishop , for the crimes of which she stands suspected and accused  and to proceed against her according to the ordinances and dispositions of the divine and canon laws , in that case made and provided .
And as we are willing , in reverence and honour to God , the defence and dignity of our holy church and catholic faith , devoutly to obey , as a true and humble son of the holy church , the desires and demands of our daughter the university of Paris , we order and desire by these presents , our officers and magistrates of Rouen , to deliver up and bring before the reverend father in God the bishop of Beauvais , the said Jane Taré , to be tried and proceeded against according to God , to reason , and to the divine and holy canons .
Given at Rouen this third day of January , year of grace one thousand four hundred and thirty one , and of our reign the third . ''


The Bishop , impowered by this warrant , and having communicated the accusation to the inquisitor general of the faith , he assembled in the royal chapel of the castle of Rouen , Giles Abbot of Fescamp , John Beaupere , John de Chatisson , James le Tissier , Nicholas Midy , Guerard Fueillet , William Hecton , Thomas de Courselles , and Richard Proty , to assist him at the tryal of the said Jane .


 John Estivet , named proctor for this tryal by the bishop , moved his lordship that the prisoner should be brought into court and examined according to law , which was granted  and the prisoner having desired leave to hear mass , his lordship said that he had taken advice on that head from several persons of learning and wisdom , whose opinion it was , that , considering the great crimes of which she stood suspected , and having infamously put on men 's apparel , her request ought not to be granted  and that therefore he overruled it .


His lordship then acquainted Jane , that she being taken prisoner in his diocese , and being publickly accused of several crimes which were against the faith , not only in France but in every other kingdom , she was delivered up to him to be tried in matters of faith .
After which the proctor moved that the prisoner should be sworn to answer the truth to all such questions as he should ask her  which was agreed to by the bishop and his assistants .


His lordship then addressing himself to Jane , in a mild and charitable manner , begged she would make true and faithful answers to every particular , as well to shorten the trial as for the discharge of her own conscience , without any mental reservation or evasion whatsoever .


To which Jane answered , ' I do not know what questions you intend to ask me  perhaps you may ask some that I will not chuse to answer . '


 The bishop said she must answer every question relative to the catholic faith , and every thing else she knew .


Jane replied , that she was willing to communicate to the court every circumstance she knew about her birth , her parentage , and her arrival in France , as also every thing she did since  but as to the revelations which she had from God , that she never told them but to Charles , whom she called her king  and that she would never disclose them to any other , though her silence should cost her her head .


She added , that she was ordered from heaven to keep these revelations secret  but that in eight days she would be able to determine whether she could declare the purport of them .


The bishop then exhorted her to tell truth in matters of faith  Jane then kneeling , placed both her hands on the mass-book , and swore that she would declare the truth in every thing relative to her faith  but would not disclose what God had revealed to her , to any person whatsoever .


The same day the court asked her several questions relative to her parents , the place of her birth , and her age .


On her next appearance in court she complained that irons had been put on her legs : on which the bishop reminded her that she often attempted to escape from prison  so that the jailor was obliged to keep her in irons and close confinement .


Jane owned that some time before she did strive to get away , as it was natural and lawful for every prisoner to do  and added , that even if she had  made her escape , she could , not be accused of a breach of promise therein , as she had made none to any body .


Upon this answer the bishop immediately ordered John Ris , John Bernet , and William Talbot , in whose hands she was then entrusted , to watch her narrowly  and not allow any body to speak to her , without a special order signed by him .


She was then asked , if she had ever learned any art or trade ?


She answered , that her mother had taught her to sew  and she added , that she did not believe there was a woman in the city of Rouen who could teach her any thing .
She said that she had left her parent 's house partly through fear of the duke of Burgundy 's army  that she went to Neufchattel with a woman named La Rouse , where she remained a fortnight  that she was there in quality of maid-servant , and did not go to the fields to take care of sheep or other cattle during that time .


Being asked if she confessed every year ?


She answered , she did , to her parish priest , except when he happened to be busy , and then she confessed to another priest with his leave  that she had confessed two or three times to a mendicant friar  and that she received the body of our Saviour every year at Easter .


Being asked whether she received the body of our Saviour at other festivals besides Easter ?


She made no answer  but said , that from the age of thirteen she heard the voice of our saviour , which directed her how to behave  that the first time she heard the voice she was in very great fear   that she heard it about mid-day , in summer time , in her father 's garden , it being that day a fast  that the voice seemed to come from the right , where the neighbouring church was situated  that she perceived a certain brightness which accompanied the voice  that when she had heard it the third time , she knew it to be a heavenly voice  that it has taken care of her since that time .


Being asked what information she received from the voice , for the safety of her soul ?


She answered , that it shewed how to conduct herself in life  that it recommended to her to frequent church and other devout exercises  afterwards it told her it was necessary she should go to France , which it repeated twice or thrice a week till she departed : it desired her to make haste , and go away unknown to her parents  that she was to raise the siege of Orleans  that she should go to Robert de Baudricourt , who would give her guides to conduct her  that she then said to the voice , that she was but a poor country girl , and entirely ignorant of the art of war  that she went soon after to her uncle 's house , where she staid a week  that her uncle carried her to Robert de Baudricourt  that the voice had taught her to distinguish this gentleman , though she had never seen him before  that he twice refused to grant her desire  but at last he was prevailed on to have her conducted to France  that she then assumed man 's apparel , and wore a sword which Robert de Baudricourt gave her a little before she departed  that she was accompanied by a knight and four other men  that she often heard the voice on her road to France .


 Being asked , who advised her to put on man 's apparel ?


She answered , that the voice instructed her so to do  and that she accused no other person of it : that on her departure from Robert de Baudricourt , he said to her , ` You may depart , let what will happen . '
She also added that it was absolutely necessary she should change her dress .
Some time after she said that she was sure the duke of Orleans was much beloved by God  that there was not a man in France , except the king , of whom she had so many revelations as of the duke of Orleans .


Being asked , what letters she sent to the English , and what was the purport of them ?


She answered , that she addressed some letters to the English who were before Orleans , desiring them to part from thence  and that they would absolutely be obliged to raise the siege : that she has been told that some words had been altered in her letters , where she desired the French territories should be given up to Charles , the lawful king .
In the place of which have been inserted , as she was informed , that they should be given up to Jane the Maiden : that she did not call herself a warrior in these letters , as it was said , had been since added to them .


She then related , that she arrived without any difficulty at Chinon , where the king resided  that she arrived about noon , lodged at an inn , and after dinner waited on his majesty , whom she immediately distinguished from his attendants , by the instructions of the voice  that she told him she  was resolved to go fight against the English .
Being asked whether , when the voice pointed out the king to her , there was any shining light over the king ?
she would make no answer .


Being asked , whether she saw any angel over the king 's head ?


She made no answer  but said , that before his majesty employed her , she had many fine visions and revelations .


Being asked what revelations ?


She answered , ' I will not tell you as yet  but you may go to the king and he will inform you . '
She added , that the voice told her that soon after her arrival his majesty would accept the offer of her services  that those of her own party were confident the voice came from God  that they saw and heard the voice  that she knew it very well  that the king and several of his council had heard and seen the voice coming towards her  and among the rest Charles duke of Bourbon  that the only thing she ever asked of the voice was , the salvation of her soul  that it desired her to stay at St. Dennis in France , where she would have remained , but that the lords would not let her , as she was wounded  and that otherwise she would not have left it  that she had been wounded in the trenches of Paris , and cured in five days  that she commanded at a considerable attack near Paris .


Being asked , if it was a holiday when that skirmish happened ?


She answered she believed it was .


Being asked , if it was proper to make an assault on a festival ?


 She made no answer .


The court adjourned to consider matters , and being met again , the bishop of Beauvais exhorted and desired the prisoner to swear absolutely , and without reserve to tell the truth of every thing the court would ask her .


On which she desired his lordship 's leave to speak , and it being granted , said , ` It is possible you may ask me questions which I certainly will not answer , especially relative to revelations  perhaps you would insist on my informing you of what I already swore I would not mention  that would be perjury , and you ought not to desire me to perjure myself .
Take care , my lord bishop , what you are about  you pretend you have jurisdiction over me  you will have a great deal to answer for if you do not prove an upright judge to me . '
She added , that she thought it enough to have swore twice .


Being asked a second time , if she would not swear simply and absolutely ?


She answered , that they might do without it , as she had already swore twice  that all the clergy of Rouen should not oblige her to tell every thing  that she could not tell all in eight days  that she would communicate every circumstance of her arrival in France , but not every thing else .


Being desired a third time to swear without reserve , and informed that her refusal would render her suspected to the court , she made the same answer as before , and added , that she was come from God  that she had nothing to do in that court ,  and desired they might send her back to God , whose messenger she was .


Being again exhorted and advised to swear as before required , under pain of being found guilty of the crimes of which she was accused ,


She answered , `` I have swore enough , proceed . ''


Being once more fully and strongly admonished to tell the whole truth relative to her case , letting her know the danger she put herself in by a refusal , she said she was ready to tell every thing concerning her case , but not every thing she knew  and then she swore .


Being asked by John Beaupere , when before had she eat or drank ?


She answered , that afternoon .


Being then asked , when had she heard the voice ?


She answered , `` Yesterday and to-day . ''


Being asked what she was doing the day before when she heard the voice ?


She answered , that she was asleep , and that it awaked her .


Being asked , whether it yet remained in her chamber ?


She answered , not that she knew .


Being asked , if she thanked the voice , and whether she went on her knees ?


She answered , that she thanked it as she sat up in her bed  her hands joined , and begged it might direct her what she had to do  and that the voice desired her , to answer stoutly


 Being asked what the voice said to her when she was awake ?


She answered , that it desired her to ask advice from our Saviour .


The prisoner then said again to the bishop , ` You say you are my judge  take great care of what you do , for I certainly am come from God , and you put yourself in great danger . '


Being asked if the voice had ever varied in its instructions or commands ?


She answered , that she never found it so .


Being asked if it was an angel directly from God without the intervention of any saint ?


She answered , ` It comes from God , I will not tell you all I know on that subject  I am more uneasy , lest I should say any thing at which it might be displeased , than I am about answering you  and therefore relative to this question , I desire delay . '


Being asked whether she thought that God would be offended at truth 's being told ?


She answered , she thought he would not  but that what the voice revealed to her , she was to tell Charles the Seventh , king of France , and not to the bishop of Beauvais .
She then added , that the night before the voice said several things to her for the service of his majesty , which she wished he was informed of .


Upon which the court desired to know whether she could not prevail on the voice to go deliver a message from her to Charles with these tidings ?


She answered , she did not know whether it would obey her , unless such was the desire of God , and  that our Saviour consented to it  and if it was the will of God , he might very well reveal it himself to the king .


After many interrogatories , and the examination of several witnesses , she was condemned to be burned , and consumed as a heretic  and was accordingly brought to the old market-place of Rouen , and there , after a long exhortation , the sentence pronounced against her was put in execution  which was a great loss to the king of France , who was then unable to assist her : but when he recovered Rouen , he caused her trial to be brought before the judges , who declared her innocent of the crimes for which she so unjustly suffered .


22 .
PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONTINUED .


 22.1 .
Of the Metamorphoses of ANIMALS , and the several Changes observable in ANIMAL LIFE .


THERE scarcely ever perhaps was any system , doctrine , or opinion broach'd with more assurance , or that , for the time of its vogue , met with a greater and more universal approbation , than that which urg'd the idea of a metempsychosis , or transmigration of the soul , the spring or source of action , into various organized bodies , in which it had opportunities of exerting itself in different manners , and of producing different effects .
Pythagoras , who was perhaps the wisest as well as the most humane of all the heathen philosophers , was , if not the first , at least the most considerable amongst all those who gave any sanction to a principle , which , however productive of the most desirable effects , has nevertheless appeared extremely absurd  and , consequently , in ages more enlightend  in philosophical , tho ' perhaps less so in the more advantageous branches of real knowledge , has been rejected as entirely dissonant to experimental conviction  and therefore , without trial , judge , or jury , deserving to be cast aside by those who think they can know nothing unless they are masters of every thing  and would almost renounce an intercourse with the Lord of nature , unless they thought themselves able to dive into every motive of his actions .


Notwithstanding , however , this universal rejection of a system once was universally received , some of the more calm and rational devotees of philosophy have with great justice imagined , that an opinion advanced with so much positiveness , and accepted with so much zeal  inculcated by a man who could not impose on himself , and followed by a set of people who scarcely could be imposed upon , must have more in it than at first sight it appears to convey .
Some of these , therefore , have endeavoured to solve it , by supposing a hidden meaning , and others by imagining a conceal'd intention to be veiled under a principle which , in its literal sense , was so repugnant both to the innate conviction of the learned , and the hourly observation of the vulgar .
The first class of these rationalists imagined the impulse of a benevolent mind to have been the only motive that urg'd that great philosopher to advance a doctrine , which would terrify mankind from the destruction of animals , either in general or in particular , by the supposition of a possibility that , in taking away the life of any animal , however indifferent or even hurtful it might be to them  for other reasons , the animated part , perhaps , of some dear relation , or renowned ancestor , might not only be disturbed , but even be exil'd from the spot of its immediate residence , and not improbably transplanted into some state more painful and opposite to its natural biass and inclination , and still more contrary to our own ideas of happiness and satisfaction .


Another set again , calling to their assistance the mysterious investigations of the cabala , have endeavoured to prove that Pythagoras having study'd very closely the Egyptian mythology , which perpetually dealt in mystery and hieroglyphics , some conceal'd meaning was still conveyed in every part of his philosophy : and that , like the parables and fables of the eastern teachers , every thing he preach'd was merely allegorical , only to be understood by those whom he chose peculiarly to enlighten , that is to say , by the disciples of his own school  whilst to the vulgar an external shew of somewhat was set forth , which , from his ipse dixit alone , they were bound implicitly to obey .


Now it is by no means impossible that both of these suppositions may in some measure be right : that is to say , that the amiable sage we have mentioned might , from a perfect knowledge of the power of superstition on the mind of uninstructed men , make use of a maxim so well adapted for the purpose , to put a check to that unlimited destruction of animal life , which luxury and sportive cruelty had introduced into the world  and also that he might at the same time , under the veil of a like fable , convey to those , who were his more immediate pupils , the idea  of that incorruptibility of the human soul , which , from a want of those advantages that revelation has bestowed on us , he might imagine necessary to find some employment and distinction for  and by ordaining such distinction in one period of its existence , to be pointed out and determined by the inclination shewn by it in the preceding one , he might suppose , and no doubt his supposition met with confirmation from experience , that his disciples would be likely to model their actions according as they were influenced by the hope of rereward or dread of punishment ,


Thus far , therefore , may the suggestions which have been advanced in the Pythagorean philosophy be well grounded .
Yet there seems to be one most palpable observation , which has slipp'd all the commentators on , and solvers of this doctrine I have hitherto met with  and that is , from whence the first idea of such an opinion derived its original idea ?
No remembrance , no conception of a pre-existent state , continued in the mind of man to give it credit , and the assurance of the perfect corruptibility of all animals after death , concurred in some measure to contradict it : whereon , then , should these great men found the basis of a doctrine which , however aided forwards , and adorned by fable to confirm its power , must have needed at least the appearance of probability , something more than mere ipse dixit , to establish its first belief in the minds of the vulgar , which , little capable of philosophical reasonings , or theoretical investigations , must have their ideas fixt by some connection and analogy between what their senses  are capable of discerning , and what their minds are to be taught to believe ?


This being premised , from whence could be derived the doctrine of the Metempsychosis , or transmigration of the soul  but from a similar transmigration of the more visible soul  that is to say , of animal life , distinguishable from the slightest observation of Nature 's works , and hourly performed under our very eyes ?
Of these changes there are many varieties  of which it is impossible that the ancient philosophers , who were perhaps closer and more accurate observers than the moderns , could have been ignorant of in their fullest extent : and as even the very husbandman and labourer must also be well informed of several of them , it is not in the least improbable that an advantageous use might be made of these so well-known circumstances , for the illustrating and enforcing opinions , which it was necessary to inculcate the most forcibly in those minds which were the least capable of speculative or hypothetical theology .


Here , however , let us drop this conjecture , which I have rather introduced with a view of corroborating the principle which I first set out with in defence of the study of philosophy , viz .
that the observations we can not avoid making in the course of it , may be employed with great propriety towards humanizing the heart , and producing the most amiable effects in the general oeconomy of life and government .
Was I to expatiate farther on the very subject before us , it might not perhaps be difficult to evince that these changes , even of the very lowest class of animals , that is to say , of the  insect tribe , might be rendered not unserviceable even in the present more enlightened period , when christianity and revelation have drawn us out of the labyrinths of doubt and suggestion into the plainer and unwinding paths of more assured truth  yet still , I say , these changes might form to us , by analogy , the idea of a future and more exalted state  and convince us , that whilst we see the very minutest animals undergoing amazing alterations and metamorphoses , rising from the grovelling state of a grub or water-worm , to range the wide expanse of air , before they submit to the universal law of annihilation , it must be impossible that the Lord of them all , for whose use , amusement , or instruction , they have all been created , should only pass through a series of years , for the most part miserable ones , even with those who possess the happiest lot on earth , in little more than meer animal existence , and then sink down into the grave in common with them all , without enjoying some more exalted privilege  and , in proportion to the rank he here possess'd , becoming less encumber'd and fit to travel through and fully relish those other works of the Creator , of which even now , before ` We have shaken off this mortal coil , ' The very idea dazzles our imagination , and confounds our faculties  and of which we see just enough of to admire his power , but know not sufficiently to comprehend his wisdom .


From these reflections , however , let us proceed to relate to our fair readers what these changes are , of which we have here been speaking , and of which these reflectional uses may be made .


 They are of many different kinds , and proceed , as all nature 's works do , in a regular gradation  forming an ascent , the steps of which are scarcely visible  and yet the height , when we have reached it , most obvious and amazing .


Those kinds of animals which are viviparous , or produce their young alive , and apparently in a complete state , undergo the slightest alterations of any  yet some even they have .
Growth itself , the distension of parts , and increase of bulk , may be looked on as the lowest steps of this ladder , and these all animals have in common , man not excepted  who , lordly as he is , when in his more perfect growth , is not only the most helpless and imperfect at his birth , but longer continues in that situation , than any other member of the animal world .
- Excepting this incrementive change , however , he undergoes no other alteration in this life , but the addition of some excremental parts , such as teeth , hair , c..


Next to him , in stability of condition , we must place the quadrupeds , who , beside these additions , seem to be annually changed by the loss and renovation of their external covering , which almost all of them suffer , by what we call casting their coats .
This change however is very gradual , and almost invisible , the same substances , and bearing the very same marks and colours , succeeding to their predecessors , so as to leave the animal in appearance the very same he was at first .
One exception however there is to this , in those which undergo this alteration twice within the course of the year , as do the bears , foxes , hares , c. in Greenland and other cold countries ,  whose furs in the winter season intirely drop those colours which would render them more conspicuous to their respective enemies , by standing contrasted to the whiteness of the snow with which the whole ground is covered , and assume a pure white  which again quits them as the warmth of summer , by restoring the rest of nature to its original appearance , renders such a refuge unnecessary to them .


One class however of the viviparous animals undergo a more immediate and visible alteration , and that is the serpent kind , who , having no hair or furr to lose more gradually , cast their whole covering at once in certain periods  and are so dexterous in the doing this , although devoid of the assistance of feet or claws , that the whole skins of them will frequently be found entire , without even so much as the cornea , or outward case of the eyes , which is affixed to the rest of the exuvium , being at all broken .
From this renovation , which was well known to the ancients , and which is even attended by an additional brilliancy of colouring , a fresh glow of beauty , and a renewal of that strength and vigour which is constantly abated some little time before the change is brought about , it was that the antient writers considered the snake as an emblem of health  as may be seen in its being made the symbol of Esculapius , the God of physic , and a representation of time and eternity , ever destroyed and ever renewing , as we find from many of their coins  in which this animal , holding his tail in his mouth , is constantly attended with some legend or device expressive of duration .


 Next to these are the oviparous animals , or those who make their first appearance in a state of intire inaction , and devoid of any sign of life , but that of some kind of vital warmth  but yet afterwards , either by the natural heat of the tender parent , by the warmth of the surrounding atmosphere , or by the more intense rays of the sun , are , as it were , ripened by degrees  and being secured , through the period of infantile inactivity , in a cell wherein food , raiment , and lodging are dispensed within themselves , they at length burst forth , some in their fully complete state , as the lizards , spiders , crabs , lobsters , c. and in general all the species of fish  and others , amongst which are all the bird-class , requiring the same degree of perfecting that the viviparous ones do , by the addiction of their excrementitious parts , such as feathers , c. - And of these creatures almost every species that we are acquainted with stands in need besides of those additional alterations we have mentioned in the viviparous classes .
The birds of all sorts moult their feathers at certain periods , and even change the colour of them in the winter seasons of the cold countries , as we have described the quadrupeds to do by their furs .
The lizard kind drop their skins like the snakes , ( which they the nearest resemble in substance , and even in figure , excepting the addition of four very short feet ) and some of them , particularly the water-newt , so frequently as once in every fortnight or three weeks  and all the spider , crab , and lobster kind , whose outward coverings are crustaceous , and therefore incapable of distention , and so connected as not to be gradually dropt like  hair or feathers , cast their shells entire at certain times of the year , when nature kindly provides them with such supplimentary juices as , by a sort of exudation from their pores , form a new shell beneath .


Now , however , let us proceed to those whose metamorphoses are more complete and distinct  and which , being first allodged by the parent in one element , or appearing fully possessed of animal life under one figure , do afterwards assume another and very different form , and find their food , their business , and their pleasure in another and very different element .


Of these some live their first period in the earth , others in the water .
The inhabitants of this last named element content themselves with making earth their residence in their completer state  whilst those who first creep on the earth , when become more perfect , usually find the air the region where their more improved form is enabled to exert its abilites .


As we do not propose to enter here into a particular natural history , but only to treat of a general property , we need only mention a single example of each kind .
The frog is the most universally known instance of the first sort  the egg of which , being laid and nourished in the water , produces a small , but lively animal , which we call a tadpole .
Its body is almost globular , and seems furnished with no other limbs but a thin filmy tail , which serves to steer and move its body very briskly in the water , to which its residence is entirely confined , during its continuance in this form  yet , after a  certain space of time , small legs and feet begin to be discernible under the loosened skin of this little creature , which gradually bursting their way thro ' it , first one , then a second , and so to the number of four , and lastly , dropping the finney tail which had hitherto been so very useful and necessary to it , it now , as if it disdained the element it had first been bred in , leaps on shore , and springing over large tracts of land , becomes changed from a fish to a perfect terrestrial quadruped , and ranges at large over that very ground on which during its former state it would have been death for it to have been cast .


Of the other part of metamorphosis of these states , viz .
from the earth to the air , we shall mention at present only the beetle class , and more particularly the cock-chaffer , or jeffry-cock , as an insect universally known .
The female of this animal lays her eggs in the earth , where , by means of an instrument , which nature has purposely provided her with , she is able to deposit them at some depth below the surface .
Each of these , after a due time , is hatched into a soft white jointed grub , with six short clawed feet , and armed about the head , which is of a dark-brown colour , with a shelly coat , and two or three pair of very strong fangs or forcipes , by which means it is most amply furnished with the means of forcing its way in the mold where it was lodged , and of cutting and tearing to pieces for its nourishment the roots not only of the tenderer herbage , but even those fibres which the stronger roots of trees push forth to form a surer hold in the ground , to both which these voracious  animals frequently do very great mischief .
After continuing however in this situation , with no difference but increase of bulk , for two whole years , a shelly covering forms over its soft body  a pair of fine and filmy wings grow from the top of his back , to preserve which from danger , when unnecessary for use , a pair of crustaceous coverings are provided , and now forcing his way thro ' the surface of the ground , he comes forth a lively inhabitant of the air  and soaring at will wherever he pleases , seems , by a buzzing song , to proclaim his satisfaction at being able now with equal greediness to devour the leaves and fruits , as he had before done the roots and fibres of whatever plant or tree he chuses to fix upon .


[ To be continued . ]
23 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER IV . ]


 MADAM ,


I AM one of your readers , and bear you that sort of good will which we naturally feel for persons who contribute to our amusement .
I have done what very few friends do  I have spoke well of you behind your back , and have not scrupled to declare in all companies , that Mrs. Penelope Spindle 's attack upon your reputation is extremely unjust .


She denies that you are lineally descended from the ancient family of the Triflers  and confidently asserts that you have taken a province which you can not fill  but unfortunately for her , the arguments she brings in support of this opinion , are those which may be most successfully urged against  it .
Are love and courtship , she says , proper subjects for a trifler ?
Most certainly  for in this polite age , love and courtship are meer trifles  marriage is a trifle  virtue is an egregious trifle  wisdom , morality , religion , all are trifles  and there is nothing serious but cards .
I maintain that hitherto the subjects of your paper have been consistent with your title .
You have knowledge enough of life to perceive that cards is the sole business of it : and tho ' there are many other serious affairs , such as balls , operas , concerts , masquerades , and the like , which claim the attention of persons of rank and fortune , yet all these must yield to cards .


As a trifler therefore , you have wisely avoided entering upon so great and important a matter : you have confined yourself to such topics , as most of your readers will readily allow to be trifles  and when you talk of wit , learning , economy  when you recommend reservedness , and a contempt for fashionable amusements , there is not a fine lady in town who does not acknowledge the propriety of your title , and declare that you are an intolerable trifler .


Mrs. Spindle says , it is common for periodical authors to forget their titles  that the Tatler often talks with the most solemn austerity of wisdom  and that the Guardian deviates into many topicks , with which , as a guardian , he has no concern .
I wish , for the sake of your reputation as a writer , that you would follow their example , and sometimes forget your title .
If you hope to have your paper read with general approbation , do not dwell so much upon exploded trifles , unworthy the attention  of persons of polite education .
Raise your thoughts to things solid and rational  shew us the strength of your reasoning , in a dissertation on whist  and the subtilty of your wit , by leading us through all the mazes of quadril : if you have any genius for poetry , write a panegyric on loo  and if you dare venture on so sublime a subject , let your muse record the daring flights of brag .


I shall judge by the use you make of these hints whether you merit the farther correspondence of , Madam ,


Your Humble Servant , MARIA .


 MADAM ,


THE gaiety with which you set out in your first paper , and the agreeable manner in which you acknowledge your fondness for admiration , persuaded several of your readers , that the character under which you appeared was not assumed , but a real one : however , I am much mistaken if the Trifler is not written by the same moral pen that has given us so beautiful a picture of female virtue , in the history of Henrietta .


In full confidence therefore of your being no coquet , I dare solicit you to let loose all your satire against coquetry .
Consider it not as folly , but as vice , and do not treat it with railery , but with sharp rebuke .


Oh that I had a pen like yours !
and that I could think with equal force , and express those thoughts with equal elegance .
That inordinate desire of being admired , which prevails only among the least deserving of our sex , should be displayed in its true colours , and lose the soft name of coquetry under which it is disguised for that of libertinism which is its real characteristic .


Wonder not at my vehemence , madam : my peace and happiness have been sacrificed to that detestable  vanity , which seeks its gratification in the misery of others .
I have been deprived of the affection of a husband whom I love with the most passionate tenderness  the soft union we formerly lived in is dissolved  discord now rages in a family which was once all harmony and love , and this ruin is the work of a coquet , who , to indulge her passion for admiration , and to add a new adorer to her train , has made me miserable for ever : me who never injured her  me who was once her friend .


But I will take another opportunity to give you my unhappy story .
In the mean time I intreat you to print this letter , and you will really oblige ,


Madam ,


Your constant Reader , PERDITA .


25 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 AS soon as Mr Herbert went away , Harriot , who had been listening , and had heard all that past , entered the room .
The virtue and strength of mind her sister shewed in the design she had formed of flying from Sir Charles Stanley excited her envy  and she would have joined with her mother in endeavouring to prevail upon her to stay , to prevent the superiority such conduct gave her , had not that envy found a more sensible gratification in the thought that Sophia would no longer receive the adorations of the young baronet  and that all her towering hopes would be changed to disappointment and grief .


The discontinuance of those presents which Sir Charles so liberally bestowed on them , evidently on Sophia 's account , and which had hitherto enabled them to live in affluence , affected her but little  for vanity is a more powerful passion than interest in the heart of a coquet  and the pleasure of seeing her sister mortified and deserted by her lover out-weighed  all other confiderations : besides , she was not without hopes that when Sophia was out of the way , her charms would regain all their former influence over the heart of Sir Charles .


She came prepared therefore to support her in her resolution of going into the country  but Mrs. Darnley , who did not enter into her views , and who had no other attention but to secure to herself that ease and affluence she at present enjoyed , expected Harriot would use her utmost efforts to prevent her sister from disobliging a man whose liberality was the source of their happiness .


She complained to her in a tender manner of Sophia 's unkindness  she exaggerated the ill consequences that might be apprehended from the affront she put on Sir Charles , by thus avowing the most injurious suspicions of him  and declared she expected nothing less than to be reduced by the loss of her pension to that state of misery from which he had formerly relieved her .


Sophia melted into tears at these words  but a moment 's reflection convinced her , that her mother 's apprehensions were altogether groundless : Sir Charles was not capable of so mean a revenge  and Sophia , on this occasion , defended him with so much ardor , that Miss Darnley could not help indulging her malice , by throwing out some severe sarcasms upon the violence of her affection for a man whom she affected to despise .


Sophia blushed  but answered calmly , `` Well , sister , if I love Sir Charles Stanley , I have the more `` merit in leaving him . ''


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  ` Oh , not a bit the more for that , replied Harriot  for , as I read in one of your books just now , Virtue would not go so far , if pride did not bear her company '


` Sister , said Sophia , no woman is envious of another 's virtue who is conscious of her own . '


This retort threw Harriot into so violent a rage , that Sophia who knew what excesses she was capable of , left the room , and retired to pack up her cloaths , that she might be ready when Mr. Herbert called for her .


In this employment Mrs. Darnley gave her no interruption  for Harriot having quitted her mother in a huff , because she did not join with her against Sophia , she was left at liberty to pursue her own reflections .
After long doubt and perplexity in what manner to act , she resolved to consent that Sophia should depart  for she saw plainly that it would not be in her power to prevent it , and she was willing to derive some merit from the necessity she was under of complying .
She considered that if Sir Charles really loved her daughter , her flight on such motives would rather increase than lessen his passion  and that all his resentment for being deprived of her sight would fall upon Mr. Herbert , who was alone in fault .


Mrs. Darnley , as has been before observed , was not of a temper to anticipate misfortunes , or to give herself much uneasiness about evils in futurity : she always hoped the best , not because she had any well-grounded reasons for it , but because it was much more pleasing to hope than to fear .


 Sophia , when she saw her next , found her surprisingly altered : she not only no longer opposed her going , but even seemed desirous of it  and this she thought a master-piece of cunning which could not fail of gaining Mr. Herbert 's good opinion  never once reflecting that her former opposition deprived her of all the merit of a voluntary compliance .


This change in Mrs. Darnley left Sophia no more difficulties to encounter but what she found in her own heart .
Industrious to deceive herself , she had imputed all the uneasy emotions there to the grief of leaving her mother contrary to her inclination : she had now her free consent to go , yet still those perturbations remained .
She thanked her mother for her indulgence : she took her hand , and tenderly pressed it to her lips , tears at the same time flowing fast from her eyes .


Mrs. Darnley was cruel enough to shew that she understood the cause of this hidden passion .
` What , said she , to the poor blushing Sophia , after all the clutter you have made about leaving Sir Charles , does your heart fail you , now you come to the trial ? '


Sophia , abashed and silent , hid her glowing face with her handkerchief  and having with some difficulty represt another gush of tears , assumed composure enough to tell her mother that she hoped she should never want fortitude to do her duty .


` To be sure , replied Mrs. Darnely , with a sneer , one so wise as you can never mistake your duty . '


` Sophia however understood hers so well that she did not offer to recriminate upon this occasion   for Mrs. Darnley was but a shallow politician , and was thrown so much off her guard by the vexation she felt , that an affair on which she built such great hopes had taken so different a turn , that she gave plain indications of her displeasure , and that her consent to her daughter 's going was indeed extorted from her . '


Sophia had many of these assaults to sustain , as well from Harriot as Mrs. Darnley , during the remainder of that day  but they were of service to her .
Her pride was concerned to prevent giving a real cause for such sarcasms as her sister in particular threw out : opposition kept up her spirits , and preserved her mind from yielding to that tender grief which the idea of parting for ever from Sir Charles excited .


When Mr. Herbert came the next morning , Mrs. Darnley , who had no better part to play , had recourse again to dissimulation , and expressed great willingness to send her daughter away  but the good man , who saw the feint in her overacted satisfaction , suffered her to imagine that she had effectually imposed upon him .


Sophia wept when she took leave of her mother , and returned the cold salute her sister gave her with an affectionate embrace .
She sighed deeply as Mr. Herbert helped her into the post-chaise  and continued pensive and silent for several minutes , not daring to raise her eyes up to her kind conductor , lest he should read in them what passed in her heart .


Mr. Herbert , who guessed what she felt upon this occasion , was sensibly affected with that soft melancholy ,  so easy to be discovered in her countenance , notwithstanding all her endeavours to conceal it .
He wished to comfort her , but the subject was too delicate to be mentioned : kind and indulgent as he was , he began to think his admired Sophia carried her concern on this occasion too far  so true it is , that the case of tried virtue is harder than that of untried : we require from it as debts continual exertions of its power , and if we are at any time disappointed in our expectations , we blame with resentment as if we had been deceived .


Sophia 's sensibility , however , was very excusable  in flying from Sir Charles she had done all that the most rigid virtue could demand  for as yet she had only suspicions against him  and this man , whose generous gift she had returned with silent scorn , whom she had avoided as an enemy , had hitherto behaved to her with all the tenderness of a lover , and all the benevolence of a friend .
It was under that amiable idea that he now presented himself to her imagination  her pride and her resentment were appeased by the sacrifice she had made in her abrupt departure , and every unkind thought of him was changed to tender regret for his loss .


Mr. Herbert , by not attempting to divert the course of her reflections , soon drew her out of her revery : his silence and reserve first intimated to her the impropriety of her behaviour .
She immediately assumed her usual composure , and during the remainder of their little journey , she appeared as chearful and serene as if nothing extraordinary had happened .


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  The good curate with whom she was to lodge having rode out to meet his friend and his fair guest , joined them when they had come within three miles of his house .
Mr. Herbert , who had descried him at a little distance , shewed him to Sophia : ` There , my dear , said he , is a man who with more piety and learning than would serve to make ten bishops is obliged to hire himself out at the rate of sixty pounds a year , to do the duty of the parish-church , the rector of which enjoys three lucrative benefices , without praying or preaching above five times in a twelvemonth . '


Mr. Lawson , for that was the curate 's name , had now gallop'd up to the chaise , which Mr. Herbert had ordered the post-boy to stop , and many kind salutations passed between the two friends .


Sophia was particularly pleased with the candor and benevolence which appeared in the looks and behaviour of the good clergyman  who gazed on her attentively , and found the good opinion he had entertained of her from Mr. Herbert 's representations fully confirmed .
The bewitching sweetness in her voice and eyes , the spirit that animated her looks , and the peculiar elegance of her address , produced their usual effects , and filled Mr. Lawson 's heart with sentiments of tenderness , esteem , and respect for her .


Mrs. Lawson and her two daughters received her with that true politeness which is founded on good sense and good nature .
Both the young women were extremely agreeable in their persons , and Sophia contemplated with admiration the neat simplicity  of their dress , their artless beauty , and native sweetness of manners .
Health died their cheeks with blushes more beautiful than those the fine lady borrows from paint  innocence and chearfulness lighted up smiles in their faces , as powerful as those of the most finished coquet  and good humour and a sincere desire of obliging , gave graces to their behaviour which ceremony but poorly imitates .


These were Sophia 's observations to Mr. Herbert , who seized the first opportunity of speaking to her apart , to ask her opinion of her new companions .
He was rejoiced to hear her express great satisfaction in her new situation , and not doubting but time and absence , assisted by her own good sense and virtue , would banish Sir Charles Stanley entirely from her remembrance  he scrupled not to leave her at the end of three days , after having tenderly recommended her to the care of this little worthy family , every individual of which already loved her with extreme affection .


Sophia was indeed so much delighted with the new scene of life she had entered upon , and her fancy was at first so struck with the novelty of all the objects she beheld , that the continual dissipation of her thoughts left no room for the idea of the baronet : but this deceitful calm lasted not long .
She soon found by experience , that the silence and solitude of the country were more proper to nourish love than to destroy it  and that groves and meads , the nightingale 's song , and the rivulet 's murmur , were food for tender melancholy .


 Mt. Lawson 's house was most romanticly situated on the borders of a spacious park  from whose opulent owner he rented a small farm , which supplied his family with almost all the necessaries of life .
Mrs. Lawson his wife , brought him a very small fortune , but a great stock of virtue , good sense , and prudence .
She had seen enough of the world to polish her manners without corrupting her heart  and having lived most part of her time in the country , she understood rural affairs perfectly well , and superintended all the business of their little farm .
Their two daughters were at once the best house-wifes , and the most accomplished young women in that part of the country .
Mr. Lawson took upon himself the delightful task of improving their minds , and giving them a taste for useful knowledge : and their mother , besides instructing them in all the economical duties suitable to their humble fortunes , formed them to those decencies of manners and propriety of behaviour , which she had acquired by a genteel education , and the conversation of persons of rank .
In the affairs of the family , each of the young women had their particular province assigned them .
Dolly , the eldest , presided in the dairy  and Fanny , so was the youngest called , assisted in the management of the house .
Sophia soon entertained a friendship for them both  but a powerful inclination attached her particularly to Dolly .
There was in the countenance of this young woman a certain sweetness and sensibility that pleased Sophia extremely  and though she had all that chearfulness which youth , health , and innocence inspire ,  yet the pensiveness that would sometimes steal over her sweet features , the gentle sighs that would now and then escape her , excited a partial tenderness for her in the heart of Sophia .


She took pleasure in assisting her in her little employments .
Dolly insensibly lost that care which the presence of the fair Londoner first inspired , and repaid her tenderness with all that warmth of affection which only young and innocent minds are capable of feeling .


Sophia , instructed by her own experience , soon discovered that her young friend was in love  but neither of them disclosed the secret of their hearts to each other .
Dolly was with-held by bashful timidity , Sophia by delicate reserve .
Fond as they were of each other 's company , yet the want of this mutual confidence made them sometimes chuse to be alone .
Sophia having one evening strayed in the wood , wholly absorbed in melancholy thoughts , lost her way , and was in some perplexity how to recover the path that led to Mr. Lawson 's house  when looking anxiously around her , she saw Dolly at a distance , sitting under a tree .
Overjoyed to meet her so luckily , she was running up to her , but stopped upon the appearance of a young man , who , seeing Dolly , flew towards her with the utmost eagerness , and with such an expression of joyful surprize in his countenance as persuaded her this meeting was accidental .


Sophia , not willing to interrupt their conversation , passed on softly behind the trees , unobserved by Dolly , who continued in the same pensive attitude   but being now nearer to her , she perceived she was weeping excessively .


Sophia , who was greatly affected at this sight , could not help accompanying her tears with some of her own  and not daring to stir a step farther for fear of being seen by the youth , she resolved to take advantage of her situation , to know the occasion of Dolly 's extraordinary affliction .


The poor girl was so wrapt in thought , that she neither saw nor heard the approach of her lover , who called to her in the tenderest accent imaginable , `` My dear Dolly , is it you ?
Wo n't you look at me ?
Wo n't you speak to me ?
What have I done to make you angry , my love ?
Dont go ( for upon hearing his voice she started from her seat , and seemed desirous to avoid him ) do n't go , my dear Dolly , said he , following her ( and she went slowly enough ) do n't drive me to despair . ''


`` What would you have me do , Mr. William , said she , stopping and turning gently towards him , you know my father has forbid me to speak to you , and I would die rather than disoblige him : you may thank your proud rich aunt for all this .
Pray let me go , pursued she , making some faint efforts to withdraw her hand , which he had seized and held fast in his , you must forget me , William , as I have resolved to forget you , '' added she sighing , and turning away her head lest he should see the tears that fell from her eyes .


Cruel as these words founded in the ears of the passionate William , yet he found something in her voice and actions that comforted him  `` No , my dear Dolly , said he , endeavouring to look in her averted  face , I will not believe that you have resolved to forget me  you can no more forget me than I can you , and I shall love you as long as I live - I know you say this only to grieve me  you do not mean it . ''


`` Yes I do mean it , replied Dolly , in a peevish accent , vexed that he had seen her tears .
I know my duty , and you shall find that I can obey my father . ''
While she spoke this , she struggled so much in earnest to free her hand from his , that fearing to offend her , he dropped it with a submissive air .


Dolly having now no pretence for staying any longer , bid him farewell in a faltering voice , and went on , tho ' with a slow pace , towards her father 's house .
The youth continued for a moment motionless as a statue , with a countenance as pale as death , and his eyes , which were suffused with tears , fixed on the parting virgin .


` What , cried he at last , in the most plaintive tone imaginable , can you really leave me thus ?
go then , my dear unkind Dolly , I will trouble you no more with my hateful presence  I wish you happy , but if you hear that any strange mischief has befallen me , be assured you are the cause of it . '


He followed her as he spoke , and Dolly no longer able to continue her assumed rigour , stopped when he approached her , and burst into tears .
The lover felt all his hopes revive at this sight , and taking her hand , which he killed a thousand times , he uttered the tenderest vows of love and constancy  to which she listened in silence , only now and then  softly sighing  at length she disengaged her hand , and gently begged him to leave her , lest he should be seen by any of the family .
The happy youth , once more convinced of her affection for him , obeyed without a murmur .


Dolly , as soon as he had quitted her , ran hastily towards home  but he , as if every step was leading him to his grave , moved slowly on , often looking back , and often stopping : so that Sophia who was afraid she would not be able to overtake her friend , was obliged to hazard being seen by him , and followed Dolly with all the speed she could .


As soon as she was near enough to be heard she called out to her to stay .
Dolly stopt , but was in so much confusion at the thought of having been seen by Miss Darnley , with her lover , that she had not courage to go and meet her .
` Ah Miss Dolly , said Sophia smiling , I have made a discovery  but I do assure you it was as accidental as your meeting with that handsome youth , who I find is your lover . '


` Yes , indeed , replied Dolly , whose face was covered with blushes , my meeting with that young man was not designed , at least on my part : but surely you jest , Miss Darnley , when you call him handsome : do you really think him handsome ? '


` Upon my word I do , said Sophia  he is one of the prettiest youths I ever saw  and if the professions of men may be relied on , added she , with a sigh , he certainly loves you  but , my dear Dolly , by what I could learn from your conversation , he has not your father 's consent to make  his addresses to you  I was sorry to hear that , Dolly , because I perceive , my dear , that you like him . '


Dolly now held down her head , and blushed more than before , but continued silent .
` Perhaps you will think me impertinent , resumed Sophia , for speaking so freely about your affairs  but I love you dearly , Miss Dolly . '
- ` And I , interupted Dolly , throwing one of her arms about Sophia 's neck , and kissing her cheek , love you , Miss Darnley , better a thousand times than ever I loved any body , except my father and mother and sister . '


` Well , well , said Sophia , I wo n't dispute that point with you now  but if you love me so much as you say , my dear Dolly , why have you made a secret of this affair ?
friends do not use to be so reserved with each other . '


` Perhaps , said Dolly , smiling a little archly , you have taught me to be reserved by your example  but indeed , added she , with a graver look and accent , I am not worthy to be your confidant  you are my superior in every thing : It would be presumption in me to desire to know your secrets . '


` You shall know every thing that concerns me , interupted Sophia , which can be of use to you , and add weight to that advice I shall take the liberty to give you upon this occasion : I am far from being happy , my dear Dolly , and I blush to say it  it has been in the power of a deceitful man greatly to disturb my peace . '


Sophia here wiped her charming eyes , and Dolly who wept sympathetically for her , and for herself ,  exclaimed , ` Is there a man in the world who could be false to you ?
alas !
what have I to expect ? '


` Come , my dear , said Sophia , leading her to the root of a large tree , let us sit down here , we shall not be called to supper yet , you have time enough to give me some account of this young man , whom I should be glad to find worthy of you : tell me how your acquaintance began , and what are your father 's reasons for forbidding your correspondence . '


[ To be continued . ]
 Figure 1 .
Dolly relating her Story to Sophia .
-  MADAM ,


I HAVE lately been at one of the most awful solemnities in this kingdom , or perhaps in any kingdom in the world  the trial of a peer of England for felony and murder .
The more attrocious the crime , or the more dignified the criminal , the higher must curiosity be raised in every breast .
Having a desire not to lose any circumstance of the behaviour of the several noble actors in this deep tragedy , I placed myself early on Wednesday morning in Westminster-hall , in a situation that at once might allow me a sight of the prisoner , his counsel , and particularly of his great and right honourable judges .
I know full well the duty which I owe to the supreme court of judicature , at whose bar the prisoner stood arraigned  nor shall I even by any iota , or much less by any inuendo , break in upon the privileges , which they so justly assume of making their own proceedings sacred and invulnerable to improper publications , and the licentiousness of too bold , I will not venture to say too free a press  yet surely I may , nay , I must declare , that this high court of judicature did upon this , as in every other point , and upon  every other occasion , act like itself .
All the spectators , who were splendidly numerous of both sexes , saw , heard , and confessed that justice was concomitant with mercy , enquiry was diverted of rigour , indulgence appeared without condescension , humanity displayed itself without weakness , judgment without partiality , and uprightness without severity .


About eleven o'clock in the morning , as soon as the peers , with the lord high steward * at their head , were situated in their order , and rank of place , lord Ferrers was brought to the bar .
But what shall I say of this unfortunate nobleman ?
He had neither dignity in his countenance , nor sufficient gracefulness in his manner to draw companion on his misery , or reverence to his person : down-cast eyes , an unmeaning face , a low stature , rather despicable than a gentleman-like appearance , must in all other circumstances and situations have drawn a biass against him , and must have compelled his beholders , on the first impression , to have pronounced him an ill-favoured disagreeable-looking man .


Placed at the bar of Westminster-hall , a miserable helpless prisoner , with all his crimes upon his head , we naturally rejected the prejudices that were arising against his outward demeanour , and joined with the clerk of the crown , in wishing that God might send him a good deliverance


The several particulars of the attrocious crime for which his lordship is to suffer , will appear in  the printed trial  they will appear , I am afraid , shocking and barbarous .
The trials of the Old Baily have scarce produced a parallel .
It was a murder planned , concerted , and executed with deliberation , cruelty , and determined malice .
Neither drunkenness nor madness excited the immediate execution of it .
Several persons were sent out of the way , on purpose to leave the wretched victim beyond a possibility of assistance or rescue .
The poor man was defenceless , without arms , and even without the least suspicion of his fate .
He was locked into the parlour by the inhuman earl , was compelled to kneel down on one knee , and in that posture was shot , the ball remaining in his body .
A glimpse of repenting humanity then took place .
The earl first caused him to be carried and put into a bed , and then sent for a surgeon to assist him in his agony .
But soon after the arrival of the surgeon , all humanity vanished , a fresh blast of fury arose , and it was with difficulty that his lordship could be hindered from tearing the agonizing Mr. Johnson * out of bed , dragging him on the floor , and putting the finishing stroke to a life already gasping out its last painful moments .
Here indeed was the excuse of ebriety .
The earl by this time had dozed himself , by brandy , into all the heat of rage and violence : from brandy he descended to Port wine , and continued drinking till nature was sufficiently drowned by liquor to sink into a sound sleep , and a temporary oblivion of the  horrid action which he had committed .
Poor Johnson , terrified to be under the roof of his murderer , was by his earnest desire carried to his own house , where , in a few hours , he expired , amidst the tears and lamentations of his miserable family .


It was a most affecting part of the trial to see Miss Johnson , daughter of the deceased , dressed in mourning , and giving testimony of her father 's catastrophe .


All compassion towards the earl is much curbed , if not totally suppressed , when we consider the miserable situatibn into which this unhappy family is thrown .
Yet I must confess that I found myself deeply moved when the earl gave in that paper of his defence , which with great uneasiness he urged as the strongest , perhaps the only plea in his favour . '
I am , said he , importuned , and indeed constrained , my lords , by my family , to plead to your lordships , by way of mitigation and excuse of my crime , the unhappy state of mind under which I frequently labour , and with which I must have been particularly visited when I committed the crime that has been laid open to your lordships . '
Words to this purpose were pronounced by him in the greatest perturbation of spirit , in a confusion and uneasiness not to be described , and with a difficulty of respiration that evidently discovered the inward workings of his soul .
Unhappy man !
could he have proved that he had committed the murder whilst he was visited by the sorest disease to which human nature is liable ,  death would not have been his portion .
But even his own witnesses testified his intervals of sanity to have been too many , and too constant to admit of any such plea .
The earl was indulged in producing any witnesses to the purpose he desired : two were heard , but the evening coming on , the trial was adjourned till next day .


On Thursday afternoon , the noble judges came into Westminster-hall .
The earl pursued his plea of lunacy , and to that purport examined a fresh string of witnesses , nine , I think , in number , of which two were his own brothers .
This seemed to me , and probably to most of the audience , a very shocking scene  a noble family exposed , persons long since in their graves conjured up , like ghosts , only to be proved lunatics  younger brothers , as an instance of the strongest fraternal affection , endeavouring to denounce their elder brother mad .
Relations , acquaintance , and even servants , giving various instances of the earl 's frenzy  wildness and distraction .
Yet all to no purpose .
None of these instances came up to the point .


The unfortunate prisoner might have been sometimes wild , sometimes frantic , but never totally deprived of sense .
Johnson was killed in an hour of sanity .
Johnson fell by malice prepense .
A short speech concluded all the earl had to say : it was read by the clerk of the house of lords , and was evidently a composition as well put together as if the author of it had never , in the whole of his life-time , been visited by the least degree of madness .
 The counsel for the crown * then summed up , and observed upon the whole evidence , and ended as they began , in the most tender , clear , impartial , generous , but just manner , that nature could demonstrate , or human abilities display .


The lords returned to the parliament-chamber , and after some time came back to Westminster-Hall , where each of their lordships severally , and for himself , pronounced earl Ferrers , guilty of the felony and murder of which he stood indicted


The number of peers who gave their votes were one hundred and sixteen , twenty one bishops , and four temporal lords being absent at the time when lord Ferrers received his doom .
The number of spiritual and temporal lords who attended the first day , were one hundred and forty one .
The number happened to be exactly the same as had attended lord Lovat 's trial .
The prisoner was then summoned to the bar , the judgment of the lords was declared to him , and as he was to receive sentence of death the next day , he was immediately remanded to the Tower .


The lords came into Westminster-Hall about noon on Friday , and Laurence earl Ferrers was asked , according to the usual form , Why judgment of death should not pass upon him , according to law ?
His lordship produced a written speech , which was read by the clerk , and was drawn up in a most proper decent manner , still regretting the plea he  had been forced to offer of lunacy , and submitting entirely to the judgment of the house of peers .


The lord high steward then pronounced his sentence , having introduced it by a most proper exordium .
The sentence was , that earl Ferrers should be hanged till he was dead , and his body should be delivered to the surgeons to be anatomized When he heard the sentence of hanging pronounced , he said , in a low voice , God 's will be done  but when he heard he was to be anatomized , he said , with great emotion , God forbid  however , both parts of the sentence must be absolutely fulfilled .
The law that enacts it passed no longer ago than the year 1752 , and has no respect of persons  not even the king can commute the sentence .
His majesty may reprieve from time to time , or he may pardon , but his majesty can not alter the letter of the law .
All the indulgence within the power of the lords in their legislative capacity was shewn to the prisoner  without that indulgence he must have been hanged on Monday the twenty-first instant , and till his execution , must have been sustained solely by bread and water , nor could any person be permitted to converse with him : instead of these severities ( by a power vested in the judges of the court where the felon is tried ) his death is postponed to the fifth of May , and his diet and manner of custody are entirely left to the discretion of the noble lord who presides * over the prisoners in the Tower , to their great happiness , and to his own great honour .


 Thus concluded the trial of Lawrence earl Ferrers , who drew upon himself his own dismal catastrophe .
Here let us close the scene , but not without remembring , that the last trial of any peer for murder was in the year 1699 , above threescore years ago , when Edward , earl of Warwick and Holland , and Charles lord Mohun , were each severally tried for the murder of Richard Coote , Esq Lord Warwick was found guilty of manslaughter  lord Mohun was entirely acquitted .
Lord Warwick claimed and received the benefit of his peerage , upon the statute of Edward VI .
Lord Mohun ( who in the year 1692 had been tried and acquitted , for the murder of Mr. Mountford the player ) towards the latter part of queen Anne 's reign , ended his life in a duel with the duke of Hamilton in Hyde-park .


I am , madam , Your most obedient , humble servant , A. B .


April 21 , 1760 .
 MADAM ,


WHEN I sent you an account of the trial and condemnation of Lawrence , late earl Ferrers , I did not imagine that I should have been enabled to add to it an account of his execution  but my curiosity having conquered all other sensations , I was present at the catastrophe of that nobleman .


The particulars of his lordship 's behaviour from the Tower to the place of execution , are published by order or permission of the sheriffs .
To repeat those particulars would be needless  but give me leave , madam , by way of postscript to my last letter , to animadvert upon some passages of the earl 's appearance and demeanour , which , except in one instance , drew pity and compassion from all the spectators .
The instance I hint at , was his lordship 's dress , of which he himself took notice to Mr. sheriff Vaillant .
You may perhaps , Sir , said the earl , think it strange to see me in this dress , but I have my particular reasons for it Mr. Vaillant prest not to know those particular reasons , and they seemingly died with the noble criminal .


But the people , ever busy and inquisitive to fathom the deepest secrets , and to expose to light the most inward recesses of the soul , have loudly and unanimously declared , that the clothes which the earl  wore , light cloth embroidered with silver , was the suit in which he was married , and that his lordship dated the source of his misfortunes from the day of his marriage .
Unhappy wretched man !
filled with whim , error , suspicions , malevolence , and a kind of insult , by no means to be excused , except as proceeding from a depraved imagination .
At his trial , he had brought in his plea of lunacy .
By his dress , he appeared to continue on that plea at the gallows .
He forgave the executioner , he forgave all the world , but as he seems to have been a kind of fatalist , he forgave not his fate , which , according to his own wild imagination , led him by a suit of clothes to his ruin .


How erroneously do the thoughts stray , and how irregular and tempestuous are the passions , when the seat of sense and judgment is ever so little dislocated ?
or when the cool calm dictates of the christian religion are thrown aside or trampled upon ?


The printed account continues to say , that his lordship asked the sheriff , if he had ever seen so great a concourse of people before ?
and upon his answering that he had not  I suppose , said his lordship , it is because they never saw a lord hanged before It is certain that no lord within the memory of the present age , had undergone the same catastrophe as was allotted to earl Ferrers .
The executions of noblemen , during a great length of time , had been always performed by beheading , sometimes within the Tower gates , sometimes upon Tower-hill .
In the reign of queen Mary the first , a lord was hanged at Salisbury .
One peer only had ever preceded lord Ferrers at Tyburn , and as he was executed above  four hundred years ago , his lordship was almost forgotten , although very particularly mentioned by most , if not all of our English historians .
They inform us , that Roger Mortimer , earl of March , was treated with the utmost rigour  his impeachment , says Rapin , was brought before the parliament .
By the expression , brought before the parliament , I presume the author means , that the commons had brought up an impeachment against him to the bar of the house of lords .
The earl of March 's crimes had long been so notorious and arbitrary , that he was condemned to die without any evidence being called to witness against him .
It must have appeared therefore that the articles of his impeachment were universally known and acknowledged to be true , and the weight of them supplied every other evidence that could be wanted .
How different were those times from these ?
Now , the meanest subject in the kingdom knows that when he is tried for his life , he can not be tried but by the strictest , the fairest , and the minutest rules of equity , law , and justice .
Then , the highest peer in the realm might be hurried and persecuted to his death , without any other legal authority than the outcry of the people , and the violence of an enraged parliament .
Roger Mortimer , earl of March , was hanged on the common gallows at Tyburn , November 29 , 1330 , in the reign of Edward the third .
The place of execution was then called Elms , his body continued hanging two days and two nights  a spectacle probably intended for the populace , who had justly held him in the utmost degree of abhorrence .


 As the unfortunate earl Ferrers has not only paid the debt of nature , but of the law , humanity ought to dispose us to believe his lordship 's asseveration , that he had not entertained the least malice against Mr. Johnson , whom he murdered .
The reasons which he gave , support his lordship 's assertion .
I was , said the earl , under particular circumstances , I had met with so many crosses and vexations that I scarce knew what I did Where vexations and disappointments , joined to a lunatic disposition , affect the mind they often pervert the temper from chearfulness to melancholy , from freedom to suspicions , from calmness to rage , acrimony , and revenge .
The blood becomes black and bilious , strange thoughts arise , continual uneasiness succeeds , rash actions follow , cruelties , murders , and suicide .
Ah !
wretched human kind !
more wretched than the beasts of the field , more despicable than the reptiles of the earth  if deprived of reason , subject to lunacy , and visited by returning fits of madness .


Here let me close the scene , and only add that earl Ferrers died a christian without knowing that he was such .
He devoutly repeated the Lord 's Prayer , and his last words to the executioner were , I freely forgive you as I do all mankind , and hope myself to be forgiven He would have died an hero , had he expired in a virtuous cause  for , according to the sheriff 's paper , From the time of his lordship 's ascending the scaffold until his execution , his countenance did not change nor his tongue faulter .
The prospect of death did not at all shake the composure of his mind .


I am , Madam , Your most humble servant , A. B .


28 .
ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN CONTINUED .


 FROM this time may be dated the subjection of our island to the Roman emperors , or , more properly perhaps , to their legates , and propraetors .
It is true , that the greater part of the island yet remained unconquered  but the defeat of Caractacus , and the constant torrent of success with which the Romans bore down all who resisted them , had at least struck an universal consternation , if not a terror , throughout the whole nation .
The aversion which every British prince bore to his neighbours was often greater than the love which he bore to his country : the passion of hatred being in general more violent , and of longer duration , than the passion of love .
Thus Carismantua betrayed Caractacus , not so much from the motives of fear or treachery , as from a desire of gaining the protection and assistance of the Romans against her husband Venutius and his whole family , whom she held in the utmost detestation .


 The behaviour of Caractacus at Rome , when led in triumph , and as a public spectacle , was truly great .
He appeared before the emperor with a decent , manly , composed countenance  and if we are to believe Cornelius Tacitus , he made a speech to this purpose :


If in my prosperity , the moderation of my conduct had been equivalent to my birth and fortune , I should have come into this city , not as a captive , but as a friend : nor would you , Caesar , have disdained to have entered into an alliance with a man born of illustrious ancestors , and powerful in the command of many colonies .
My present fate is to me dishonourable : to you magnificently glorious .
I once had horses  I once had men  I once had arms  I once had riches .
Can you wonder , if I have lost all these unwillingly ?
although , as Romans , you may aim at the conquest of all mankind , it does not follow , that all mankind must submit to be your slaves .
If I had immediately yielded without resistance , neither the perverseness of my fortune , nor the glory of your triumph had been so remarkable .
Punish me with death , and I shall be forgotten .
Suffer me to live , and I shall remain an eternal example of your clemency .


Much struck and awakened by the appearance of such a prisoner , the emperor ordered the chains of Caractacus and his family to be taken off  and Agrippina , who was more than an equal associate in the empire , not only received the captive Britons with great marks of kindness and compassion , but confirmed to them the enjoyment of their present liberty .


 During the remainder of Claudius Caesar 's reign , the Romans and the Britons went on in the same offensive and defensive manner , which they had practised for some years past .
Skirmish succeeded skirmish .
The victories were alternate  but the advantages were generally more on the Roman , than on the British side .


Nero , the son of Agrippina , by her second husband Caius Domitius Aenobarbus , succeeded Claudius , and ascended the imperial throne .
In the beginning of Nero 's reign , the government of our island was conducted in the same tract that had been pursued for some years past .
Legate was sent after legate : procurator followed procurator  and as the wealth of the island increased , each governor became more tyrannical and rapacious .


At the landing of the first Caesar , the Britons were a people without riches , without commerce , without agriculture .
At the accession of Nero , they were sufficiently rich to pay the tributes imposed upon them by the Romans : their present opulency arose from the number of their herds , from their experience in agriculture , and from the produce of their wool .
Their herds of cattle were always numerous , and are mentioned as such by Caesar .
Their improvements in agriculture were acquired by their intercourse with the continent  and their wool was reckoned of so fine a texture , that it was much esteemed , and sought after by foreigners .
Our wool remains in the same degree of repute at this day .


From the defeat of Caractacus , the Britons were no longer looked upon as allies , but as tributary  provincials to the empire of Rome : they were permitted indeed , in all controversies and rights , as were purely relative to themselves , to be determined by their own laws , and to be governed by their own princes  but in all public assessments , in levies for the army , and in many other instances , both the princes and the people , as far as the Roman arms had yet prevailed in the island , were equally subject to their conquerors .
Their situation was particularly unhappy under Nero 's government .
The vices of that emperor soon grew to such a height , that the riches of the whole earth were insufficient to answer his demands .
Every kingdom , every province in the world was taxed with great rigour  but the taxations imposed upon the Britons were more sensibly grievous and oppressive .
Their state of bondage grew so very intolerable , that in the fifth year of Nero 's reign , the Iceni , whose queen Boadicea and her two daughters had been treated in a most vicious , cruel , and ignominious manner , resolved to rise up in arms against the Romans .
The Iceni were joined by the Trinobantes  and both these colonies put themselves under the command of the injured and outrageous Boadicea .
Dio and Tacitus make the British army amount to an incredible number .
There is no doubt that their forces were more numerous than had ever yet been assembled in Britain : and they judiciously chose to make this bold effort for their laws and liberty , at a time when Paulinus Suetonius , the Roman governor of Britain , was engaged in an attempt upon  Mona * , and had withdrawn all his forces into that island .


Boadicea , and her army were , at first successful  but alas !
how very intoxicating qualities has success !
The British heroine and her followers threw aside every sentiment of compassion , and became more inhumanly savage than their ancestors in the time of Julius Caesar .
Their actions , as related by Dion Cassius , are too shocking to be related .
Let us pass over them in silence , and if possible bury them in eternal oblivion .


Paulinus Suetonius , upon the alarm of such a sudden and extraordinary insurrection , reimbarked his troops  and , without the least loss of time , marched to London , which was then only inhabited by merchants  but , as Tacitus informs us , was a city remarkably well supplied with all kinds of provisions .
Suetonius pressed forward with unwearied expedition , fully resolved to take the earliest opportunity of forcing the enemy to a general battle .
The exact spot where the battle was fought is not known  but we are told , that Suetonius , by choosing a very advantageous piece of ground , and by drawing up his men with all the military conduct of an experienced commander , gained so compleat a victory , that Tacitus equals it to any of the glorious conquests obtained by the antient Romans .


Boadicea , as Dio represents her , was of a majestic presence , of a masculine countenance , tall in stature , with yellow hair .


 This unfortunate Thalestris seems to have been a woman of a most intrepid spirit , and of a peculiar pride and fierceness , amounting even to barbarity .
It is certain that she had received great injuries , such as might have provoked a milder disposition : but she had shewn herself so utterly void of pity , and had put in practice such cruelties against the Romans , that she drew upon her own subjects in some degree an equal portion of revenge .
Not a Briton received quarter : not even the women * , who had attended their husbands to the battle .
Boadicea could not bear the thoughts of submission : as soon as the victory was determined , she put an end to her life by poison  and this , I believe , was the first instance , in which the Romans saw themselves imitated in suicide by a Briton  would to God it had been the last !


The Britons were now again subjected to the government , the disposal , and the tyranny of Rome .
They remained so during the reign of Nero , without any material alteration , except the unhappy consequence taken notice of by Tacitus , who in his life of Agricola , says , ` Even these barbarians began to relish now the softness of vice . '


What a bewitching power must luxury possess when it becomes too mighty , not only for the greatest fortitude , but the greatest fierceness of mind ?


 The Roman emperors who alternatively succeeded Nero , were Galba , Otho , and Vitellius .
Their reigns were short , and during that space of time scarce any alteration happened in the government of Britain .


To Vespesian and his son Titus was reserved the glory of making a greater progress towards the entire conquest of the whole island than had been hitherto made by any of his predecessors .
Wise princes chuse wise ministers .
Vespasian appointed Petilius Cerealis , Julius Frontinus , and Cnaeus Julius Agricola , successively , to the government of Britain .
They were three Romans of remarkable eminence , in dignity and reputation .
The character of Agricola is drawn by his son in law Cornelius Tacitus .
It is the most masterly performance of that historian 's pencil .
The picture is painted in the liveliest and the strongest colours , the attitudes are beautiful , and the outlines are just .


Agricola resided near eight years in Britain .
He was established in that government by three successive emperors , Vespasian , and his two sons Titus and Domitian * .


The political conduct of Agricola was not in the least inferior to his military prowess .
He found the Britons already yielding to the temptations of luxury .
He artfully encreased those temptations .
 He introduced the sciences of eloquence and architecture  and the islanders were so enchanted by the manners and customs of their enemies , that they not only applied themselves to learn the Roman language , but many of them even wore the Roman dress .
It was a fortunate circumstance to Agricola , that in the very earliest part of his life , he had served in Britain under the command of some of the most eminent Roman governors , parcularly Paulinus Suetonius , and Petilius Cerealis , by both of whom he was personally esteemed and distinguished : nor was it less fortunate , that he had dedicated that part of his youth to speculative knowledge , and had diligently studied the genius and disposition of our forefathers .
He had already observed , from experience , that the Britons were much more difficult to be forced than to be induced to yield .
Generosity drew them into friendship and compliance  severity drove them into obstinacy and rebellion .
They were extremely apt to imbibe and to imitate the manners of foreign nations .
Those who were nearest to Gaul assumed the Gallic fashions and behaviour : and as the Romans were still a politer people , their national customs and elegancies were again more acceptable to the Britons  so that in some few years after Agricola 's arrival as governor , he had the pride and satisfaction of seeing the Roman porticos , their baths and other buildings of magnificence imitated , and in a manner transferred into various parts of Britain .
Tacitus makes a very true observation upon these improvements .
He says , ` The ignorant looked upon this as the beginning  of humanity  the wise knew it to be one of the chief roots of slavery . '


But Agricola was , by no means , absolutely devoted to the arts of peace .
He made use of policy only at those seasons , and in those places , where he could not exert his military conduct .
He knew that the natural fierceness of the nation was too great , and too universal to be entirely reduced by any arts but arms .
He began , although he had landed very late in the summer * , by conquering the Ordovices  and as he had remembered them a perverse , mutinous , ungovernable people , he almost destroyed the whole colony : and then proceeded to Mona , with a resolution fully to complete the conquest of that island .
This was a work which had been intended by Paulinus Suetonius , but it was left unfinished , upon account of Boadicea 's insurrection .


Mona was originally inhabited by the Druids , and consequently was held in a most idolatrous veneration by the rest of the Britons It is separated from the greater island by a very narrow channel .
Suetonius had invaded it with some degree of success .
He had landed his soldiers in flat-bottom boats , and had utterly destroyed the temples , groves , and other places of worship , which the Druids had dedicated to religious murders , and to sacrifices of human victims .
These holy seers , who , unfortunately for mankind , professed the art of divination , consulted the mysterious decrees of heaven , from the entrails of such  ill-fated strangers , who by shipwreck , or any other accident , had been thrown upon their island  and from these impious rites , the British nation in general , was characterized as cruelly inhospitable to strangers .


The reduction of Mona was no very difficult task .
The Roman soldiers swam over the river Maene , a sight that struck such terror into the inhabitants * , that they surrendered the island without the least attempt towards an opposition .


The winter was employed by Agricola in an administration of justice , throughout the several provinces which he had conquered .
He began by a strict reformation in his own houshold and dependents .
He proceeded to as strict a disquisition into the conduct and discipline of the army .
He excused faults , but he never failed to punish crimes .
He was severe , but he was not cruel .
He rather required than exacted taxes .
He regulated the inequality of assessments , and by preventing all kinds of corruption , he suffered no iniquitous impositions to take place .
He chose the obedience flowing from devotion , not the submission arising from fear .
In veneration of such virtues , a real attachment to his person , and an humble imitation of his conduct , universally prevailed .
His common soldiers became modest and regular : his chief officers generous and humane .
The Britons found themselves happy under his government .
 He was their master , not their tyrant  and they so far complied wich his private advice and encouragement , especially as he pretended no command over their particular oeconomy , that they began , as has been already hinted , to build houses , erect temples , and exhibit various edifices of public resort .


The winter and the spring passed in works of this kind .
Early in the summer , Agricola took the field .
He made a farther progress into the island than had been attempted by any of his predecessors .
He marched northward , and conquered the Brigantes and the Ottodini .


When he returned to his winter-quarters , he resumed his former plan of politics , and endeavoured to reconcile the ancient Britons , not only to the laws , the interest , and the power of the Roman Empire , but to the several refinements which the Romans had made in the more polite , or in truth , the more luxurious branches of their state .


The ensuing summer produced fresh laurels to Agricola .
He penetrated into Scotland , and he advanced as far as the Frith * of Jay á .
In his march he did not meet with any opposition  but was so entirely unmolested , that he had sufficient leisure to build forts in the most advantageous situations .
Tacitus says , that not one of the forts which had been erected by Agricola was ever  taken , surrendered , or abandoned to the enemy .
Such was the strength and perfection of these buildings .


The fourth year of Agricola 's goverment , and the last of the reign of Titus , was passed in securing from invasions the most southern parts of Scotland , or what we may call the most northern parts of England .


The fifth summer was employed differently from any of the former .
Agricola set sail with his army , not so much with an intention of conquering new nations , as of viewing the coasts and ports of Scotland , and of visiting the several little islands that lie dispersed in the Atlantic and Caledonian seas .
In this expedition he had a view of Ireland  an island , says Tacitus , which in the soil and temperature of the air , and in the dispositions and fashions of the people , bears a near resemblance to Britain .


Agricola looked upon the conquest of Ireland as a step of importance to the Roman Empire .
He represented it as such in his letters to Rome : and he positively intended a future descent upon that kingdom  but all his great designs were frustrated : Domitian reigned .


The remaining years of Agricola 's government were passed very much in the same manner with the former .
Skirmishes by land , and expeditions by sea , in summer  buildings and administration of justice during the other seasons .
In most places , as soon as Agricola appeared he conquered .
His reputation , and his high name , seem to have been as effectual as his arms  and indeed the records of history have scarce produced a greater man .


 Domitian was of a most envious suspicious temper .
He grew jealous of his propraetor 's character : but the timidity and hypocrisy of his nature hindered him from an open , or an immediate declaration of his spleen .
He suffered Agricola to hold the government till the year of Rome 837 , and then he appointed Salustius Lucullus governor in his stead .


In this place our history becomes very obscure .
The anecdotes of the state are almost as fabulous as the anecdotes of the church : but as we may be tolerably certain of the exact bounds of the Roman conquests in England and Scotland , they are a point worthy of remembrance .


A line or wall of fortifications was constructed by Agricola from the mouth of the river Forth to the mouth of the river Clyde .
The several colonies on the south of that line had been entirely subdued , and were within the Roman pale : all the land beyond that line remained in a state of freedom , and was called Caledonia .


Domitian died in the year of Rome , 848 .
He was the last of the family of Vespasian , and of that set of emperors who were looked upon as most nearly allied in affinity to Julius Caesar .
It is scarce worth while to take a retrospect of our ancestors at this particular period .
The space of time indeed since the first invasion by the Romans amounts to near a century and a half  but the improvements of the Britons in literature are , by no means , equal to that interval .
Their chief , and perhaps their only characteristic , was courage .
Tacitus indeed lets drop one sentence that seems to reflect some  little degree of honour upon the genius of the natives : he says , ` Agricola took care , that the young British princes should be instructed in the liberal sciences  and in his own opinion , he preferred the natural faculties of the Britons to the acquired studies of the Gauls , as the former were now earnestly desirous to learn the art of eloquence , although they had lately shewn a dislike to the Roman language . '
Or in other words , ` The Britons had long since wished to be taught , but till now they had detested their teachers . '


A thirst of knowledge is always reputed commendable  at least we are sure it is natural : but if we reject prejudice and speak truth , must not we own , that the arts and sciences are so many leading avenues to luxury ?
They instruct and they delight , but they soften and they enervate .
They can not conquer the causes of vice : they can only disguise the effects .
Nay , even if we suppose , that they triumph over some passions  are they not apt to raise others of a worse tendency ?
Enquire into the original inhabitants of any nation  the inhabitants will be constantly and truly represented as courageous and indefatigable , because they were bred in woods , and accustomed to hardships .
As soon as they were brought into cities  as soon as they had tasted pleasures , their alertness languished , and their courage melted away .
This was the fate of the antient Britons .
Agricola had sagaciously observed the errors of his predecessors , and he was determined to win his enemies by methods which no other governor had pursued .
He  recollected the fable of the traveller , who , while the wind blustered , and blew violently , kept on his cloak in defiance of Boreas , but when the sun appeared , when he felt the rays of Phoebus , he not only threw aside his cloak , but as the heat encreased , divested himself of every other garment .
The successors of Agricola acted the part of Boreas .
They were stormy and boisterous , but not successful .
They afforded no sunshine .


The Caledonians , a brave and an unconquered people , lost no opportunities of driving back the Romans into the more southern parts of Britain .
They were led on by Galgacus , who was a north Britain of great valour , and of high birth : he had made a considerable resistance , even against Agricola .
It is a record for ever to the honour of the Caledonians , that they were not in the least infected by the contagious habits which had been introduced into South Britain .
Their bravery was undaunted , and their manners were uncorrupted .
The force of numbers had lately compelled them to take refuge amidst the Grampian mountains *  but as soon as Agricola was departed , they came forward in all their native valour  and , by their example and encouragement , animated the Britons to resume the spirit of their ancestors , and to join in the common cause of extirpating the Romans out of the kingdom .
To execute so great a work could only be the effect of time .
Roman colonies had been planted  intermarriages had been made   fortresses had been built  and what was the greatest impediment , luxury had been established , as so many preventive bulwarks against all essays of liberty and national prerogative : yet if we can gather any degree of truth from the slight and incongruous accounts of these times , the Britons and the Caledonians , during the reigns of Nerva and Trajan , had made some important efforts towards the principal design for which they had associated .
Their progress , if we may believe the Scotch historians , was considerable  and they must soon have freed themselves from the Roman yoke , if the Emperor Adrian * had not come over in person .


The Roman general , Lucius Antonius , had been dangerously wounded , and his troops had been repulsed in a battle against the Caledonians .
This was a circumstance of sufficient consequence to hasten Adrian to England : but neither the exact time of his arrival , nor his military actions in the island , can by any means be ascertained .


Two medals of this Emperor appear to be strong evidences , that he reduced the Britons to obedience .


On the reverse of one of the medals , is inscribed Britannicus On the reverse of the other , Restitutor Britanniae


During the reigns of the successive emperors , Antonius Pius , M. Aurelius , Commodus , Pertinax , and Didius Julianus .
The few circumstances which are relative to Britain , differ only in  names , as they are sometimes called battles , sometimes skirmishes , sometimes inroads , sometimes invasions .
They may be said to continue the chain of the history  but it is an iron chain continued by wisps of straw .


[ To be continued . ]
MADAM ,


YOUR receiving and publishing the letters of other people , when without foreign assistance your Museum would be much more to the pleasure of your readers , shews that you resemble your predecessor , Mr. Bickerstaff , no less in candour than in wit  and now occasions this address to you , from an old maid , owes who no other favour to fortune than a noble birth , which , as it happened many years ago , intitled me to a good education  and produced me an agreeable reception for certain periods of time , among many families of my great relations  here as it was safest , I always preserved the character of a spectator only , in all domestic occurences : this has enabled me to judge a little to what effect the first principles , either inculcated in young minds , or taken up by them have upon their manners and conduct in maturer years .


 The letter in the month of May signed W. M. after affirming that all women , and ( for ought he knows all men ) think grandeur and happiness synonomous terms , remarks with more justice , that the polite accomplishments are too promiscuously aimed at by all degrees of people for their daughters  but does not assign ( in my humble opinion ) the real , and more material reasons against it , but turns back to his first proposition , and displays the wide difference there is between riches , power , and titles , and heart-felt satisfaction : where I shall leave him at free liberty , to gather as many flowers as he pleases , out of so well stocked a garden as he has chosen to walk in  and only make some additional observations on the education of young ladies .


It has been my misfortune to see quite the reverse of what that gentleman complains of  not insignificant girls taught too much , but great ladies taught too little .


When I was about five and thirty , my cousin german , the countess of - , desired me to come and pass a year with her , in which she proposed going to Spa  and as her daughters were too young , she said , to be any amusement to her , she would leave them behind her .
My situation in life , and inclinations for travelling , made me very readily accept her offer : and I took leave of my good aunt , Mrs. Ashgrove , who was almost as much delighted as myself with what she saw pleased , and hoped might be of service to me .


When I came to town , I was very much surprised to see two fine girls , the one about twelve , and the other ten , that did not open their mouths  before their mother , and as I soon found very seldom saw her .
My cousin was a very fine lady , dressed perfectly well , and gave the most elegant entertainments  she frequented the drawing-room every court-day , and generally preceded two assemblies , by a play , or opera , in the evening .
My day was far advanced before hers began , who gave me an opportunity to see more of my young relations than she did .
I observed they had about them a very ordinary Swiss woman , who was called their French governess : she treated them with insolence , and taught them a jargon no body else could understand .
Their only reading was the news-papers , when the upper servants had done with them  as for writing or dancing , it was thought they were too young , and that their acquaintance with any of their own rank would only make them impatient , and wish for more liberty than their mother cared to give them .
On talking to them , I found they did not want understanding  but was so perverted with the knowledge of their birth , and feeling of their slavery , that they were continually insulting , or insulted by the domestics they were obliged to converse with .
The eldest had a great spirit , and was always saying , that when she married she would keep her servants in subjection , and no person should dare , tho ' ever so great , to be impertinent to her .
She always listened with great relish to any reflections made on her mother 's conduct , in regard to the neglect of her children  which , to flatter the young ladies , the lower people would sometimes throw out , and treasured up a sufficient quantity of disobedience  and contempt for her parents , whenever she should have an opportunity of shewing it .
The youngest was of a gentler nature : she submitted to her fate , and made court to her mother 's woman , whenever she wanted , or wished for a new cap , or a new coat , and to the groom of the chambers for lemonade and cakes , on those assembly nights which she spent above stairs .


I could not but grieve to see two creatures , that might have been the blessing of the countess 's declining years , merely by her own fault , give such dreadful indications of proving the contrary .
I endeavoured all I could to persuade her to carry them with us to Spa , which I knew would break thro ' their present course of life , and force her to grow a little more acquainted with them , and they to be more informed what behaviour suited them : but it was all in vain .
They were aukward hoydening things , she said , and so young , there was no making any thing of them .


Some years after , I heard that the eldest , being left at her father 's country-seat , while he and her mother made a visit into a distant country , had run away with , and married an officer that came to raise recruits in the neighbourhood  and the younger had the next year a child by the butler .


Now , madam , is it not obvious to you , I am sure it was to me , that had both been better taught , better they would have acted ?
I must add , this gay , this accomplished woman , had both a sense of honour and chastity  and in a few weeks after the last misfortune I mentioned happened in the family , died of a broken heart .
Oh ,  had she had religion enough to have taught it to her daughters !
both by example and precept , might they not have repaid her ten fold , in gratitude and filial love ?
Had they learned their own and other languages in proper books , how delightfully might their time have been employed , in reading the stories of all ages and countries , where truth and propriety of conduct is proved to be our only happiness  and vice and folly , however long they totter on , are sure to fall , from whence they never can emerge again .
Had she introduced them properly into the world , and given them the accomplishments suitable to the figure they ought to have made in it , might she not , like my lady Harvest ( to whom I have the honour to stand in the same relation ) have lived in continual thankfulness to the Almighty for preserving her , to find a new spring of joy revive in the autumn of her days , by seeing her children practise the prudent and tender virtues of a wife , and mother , fill the station of great ladies with dignity in themselves , obliging and entertaining conversation with their equals , kind and generous offices ( without affected condescension ) to their less prosperous acquaintance , humanity to their servants , and universal benevolence to all their fellow creatures .


Believe me , 't is not ignorance , but knowledge , that produces these characters in life .


I am , madam , Your sincere admirer And humble servant , AGNES WOODBINE .


30 .
[ The following Treatise on the Education of Daughters is written by the celebrated Archbishop of Cambray , and translated by a Friend of the Author of the Museum . ]


 30.1 .
CHAP .
I. Of the Importance of the Education of Daughters .


NOTHING is more neglected than the education of daughters  custom , and the caprice of mothers , are for the most part absolutely decisive on that point .
It is taken for granted , that a very little instruction is sufficient for the sex  whereas , the education of sons is looked upon as of principal concern to the public  and although there is scarce less mismanagement in this than in the bringing up of daughters , nevertheless people are fully persuaded that no small degree of discernment is requisite to insure success .
How many masters do we see ?
how many colleges ?
what expence for impressions of books , for researches into the sciences , methods of learning languages , and choice of professors ?


All these grand preparations have frequently more shew than solidity  however , they indicate the high notion people have of the education of boys .
As for girls , say they , what necessity is their for them to be scholars  curiosity makes them vain and conceited  it is sufficient they learn in time how to govern their families , and to submit to their  husbands without debate : and here they are ready to produce a number of known instances of women grown ridiculous by pretence to scholarship  after this they think themselves justified in blindly abandoning girls to the management of ignorant and indiscreet mothers : it is true we ought to be very cautious of making pedantick ladies .
Women , for the most part , have less strength of understanding than men , but more curiosity  wherefore it is not proper to engage them in studies likely to disturb their heads .
It is not for them to govern the state , direct the operations of war , or to interfere in the administration of religious affairs .
Thus they may stand excused from those extensive articles of knowledge relative to politics , the art military , jurisprudence , theology : even the far greater part of the mechanic arts are not suitable to them .
They are formed for gentler occupations : their bodies , as their understanding , are less vigorous , less robust than those of men  but nature , in compensation , has appropriated to them industry , neatness , and economy , and hence arises their taste for the calm duties of domestic life - But what are we to conclude from the natural weakness of women ?
the weaker they are , of the greater moment it is to give them strength .
Have they not duties to fulfil , nay , duties on which the life of society depends ?
Is it not by them that families are ruined or upheld ?
they , who have the regulation of the whole train of domestic affairs , who have a general influence upon manners , and by consequence the sway in what most nearly affects all mankind .


 A woman of judgment , application , and real piety , is the soul of a whole great family : she inspires that order , that prudence , and purity of manners which secure happiness here and hereafter .
It is not in the power of men , tho ' vested with all public authority , by their deliberations , to make any establishments effectually good , unless women are aiding in the execution .


The world is not a phantome : it is an assemblage of families  and who can adjust the government of them with more exactness than the women ?
They , besides their natural authority , and assiduity in their houses , have the further advantage of being born careful , minutely attentive , industrious , insinuating , and persuasive .


As for mankind , where else must they look for the comforts of life , if marriage , that closest of all alliances , shall be converted into bitterness ?
and children , who in their turn will be called mankind , what will become of them , if spoiled by their mothers from their infancy .


Observe the parts women have to act , they are not of less moment than those of the men  inasmuch as they have a house to regulate , a husband to make happy , children to bring up well  add that public virtue is no less necessary for the women than for the men .
Without insisting on the good or evil import they may be of to the world , they are half of the human species redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ , and destined to life eternal .
Finally , to omit the good influence of women well brought up , let us consider the evils they are productive of , in defect of an education  inspiring them with virtue .
It is certain this defect in them is more mischievous than in men , because the irregularities of men frequently proceed from the bad education they have imbibed from their mothers , and from those passions other women have inspired them with in their riper years .
What intrigues does history present to our view ?
What subversion of laws and morals ?
What bloody wars , innovations of religion , revolutions of state ?
all caused by the vices of women .
These are proofs of the importance of a good education for girls .
Let us next consider the means .


[ To be continued . ]
31 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 I passed the night in the utmost agitation , and after having formed a thousand different projects , all equally fruitless and impracticable , it came suddenly into my mind to burn the writings which were still in my possession , those now hated writings that proved our claim to the estates of the family of Lussan .
I was astonished that I had not hit upon this expedient sooner , since it was the most effectual method I could take to put an end to a suit , the consequence of which I had so much dreaded .


It was not impossible but my father who had proceeded very far might be induced to terminate the affair amicably by my marriage with Adelaida  but although there should be no foundation for so pleasing a hope , yet I could not consent to furnish arms against what I loved .
I reproached myself for having so long kept papers in my possession which ought to have been sooner sacrificed to my tenderness .


 The reflection of the injury I did my father could not stop me a moment from the execution of this design .
This estate was entailed upon me , and I inherited one left me by my mother 's brother , which I could resign to him to procure his pardon , and which was much more considerable than that I was the cause of his losing .


There needed no more arguments to convince a man in love , and already determined .
I went instantly to my closet for the little box which contained these papers .
Never had I in my whole life experienced so happy a moment , as that in which I committed them to the flames .
I was transported into rapture at the thoughts of so effectually serving the object of my passion .


If she loves me , said I , she shall one day know the sacrifice I have made for her  but if I am not so happy as to touch her heart , she shall always remain in ignorance of it .
Why should I make her sensible of an obligation she would be sorry to owe to me ?
I would have Adelaida love me , but I would not have her think herself indebted to me .
I confess , however , that after this action , I found myself imboldened to declare my sentiments to her , and the freedom with which I visited at her mother 's , gave me an opportunity that very day .


' I am going to leave you , charming Adelaida , said I , will you have the goodness to think sometimes of a man whose happiness , or whose misery you only can make ? '
I had not power to go on : she seemed alarmed and confused , I thought also that I saw grief in her eyes .


 ` You have heard me , resumed I trembling  give me some answer , I implore it of your compassion , speak one word to me . '


` What would you have me say to you ?
replied she , with visible emotion  I ought not to have heard you , and still less ought I to answer you . '


Scarce did she give herself time to pronounce these words , she left me so suddenly .
I stayed the rest of the day there , but I found it impossible again to speak to her alone .
She avoided me carefully  she had an air of perplexity and confusion  how lovely did she appear to me with that perplexed air , and that sweet innocent confusion .
My respect for her was equal to my love  I could not look on her without trembling , I dreaded lest my presumption had made her repent of her goodness towards me .


I should longer have observed a conduct so conformable to my respect for her , and to the delicacy of my own sentiments , if the necessity I was under of leaving her had not forced me to speak .
I was willing to tell Adelaida my true name before I went away  but I dreaded this declaration even more than my former .


' I perceive you avoid me , madam , said I to her .
Alas !
what will you do when you know all my crimes , or rather my misfortunes ?
I have imposed upon you by a false name , I am not the person you think me  I am , pursued I , trembling , with the violence of my apprehensions , the son of the count de Comminge . '


` The son of the count de Comminge !
cried Adelaida , with astonishment and grief in her face ,  our enemy , our persecutor !
do not you and your father urge the ruin of mine ? '


` Oh do not wound me with so cruel a thought !
interrupted I , tears in spite of myself , streaming from my eyes  in me , charming Adelaida , you behold a lover ready to sacrifice all for you  my father will never injure yours  my love secures him in your interest . '


` But why , replied Adelaida , recovering from her surprize , why have you deceived me ?
why did you conceal your true name ?
Had I known it , pursued she , softly sighing , it would have warned me to fly from you . '


` Oh , do not , madam , said I , taking her hand which I forcibly kissed , do not repent of your goodness towards me . '


` Leave me , said she withdrawing her hand , the more I see you the more inevitable I render those misfortunes I too justly apprehend . '


The latent meaning of these words filled me with a transport that suffered nothing but hope to appear .
I flattered myself that I should be able to render my father favourable to my passion .
This belief so wholly possessed me , that I thought every one should think as I did .
I spoke to Adelaida of my projects like one who is secure of success .


' I know not , said she with a melancholy air , why my heart refuses to yield to the hopes you endeavour to inspire .
I foresee nothing but misery in the course of this affair  yet I find a pleasure in feeling what I do for you : I have not hid my sentiments from you  I am willing  you should know them , but remember that if there is a necessity for it , I am capable of sacrificing them to my duty . '


I had several conversations with Adelaida before my departure , and always found new cause to congratulate myself on my good fortune  the pleasure of loving and knowing that I was beloved , filled my whole heart  no suspicion , no fear for the future could disturb the tender softness of our interviews .
We were secure of each other 's affection , because esteem was the basis of it  and this certainty far from diminishing the ardour of our passion , added to it all the sweets of hope , and all the charms of confidence .


' I should die with grief , said she to me , if I bring upon you the displeasure of your father  I would have you love me , but oh , I would rather have you happy ! '


I parted from her at length , full of the most tender and most ardent passion that ever man felt , and my whole soul intent upon the design of rendering my father favourable to it .


In the mean time he was informed of every thing that had passed at the baths .
The servant whom he had put about me had secret orders to observe my conduct  this man had left him ignorant of nothing , neither of my love , nor my quarrel with the chevalier de Saint Oden .
Unfortunately the chevalier was the only son of one of my father 's most intimate friends  this circumstance , and the danger to which he was reduced by his wound , turned every thing against me .
The servant who  had given him such exact informations , represented me to be much happier than I was .
He described madam and mademoiselle de Lussan as full of artifice and design , as having always known me for the count de Comminge , and had spared no pains to seduce me .


Thus prejudiced , my father , naturally severe and passionate , treated me at my return with great harshness : he reproached me with my passion as with a crime of the blackest dye .


` You have been base enough , said he to me , to love my enemies , and without reflecting what you owed either to me or to yourself , you have entered into engagements with those I hate , and I know not , added he , whether you have not done something still more worthy of my resentment ! '


` Yes , Sir , answered I , throwing myself at his feet , I am guilty , I confess , but I am so in spite of myself .
At this very moment when I implore your pardon , I feel that no power on earth can tear from my heart that passion which offends you .
Have pity on me , and oh !
suffer me to say it , have pity on yourself , put an end to that hatred which disturbs the tranquillity of your life .
The tenderness which the daughter of monsieur de Lussan and I felt for each other at first sight , seems a warning from heaven to you .
Alas !
my dear father , you have no other child but me !
would you make me miserable and load me with misfortunes so much the more unsupportable as they will come from a hand I must  ever love and revere ?
Suffer yourself , my dear father to be softened into forgiveness of a son , who has offended you only by a fatality for which he could not be answerable . '


My father , who had suffered me to continue kneeling during the whole time I was speaking to him , looked on me for a moment with mingled scorn and indignation .


' I have , said he , heard you with a patience I am myself astonished at : I will still preserve composure enough to tell you what is the only favour you are to expect from me  you must renounce your ill-placed passion , or the quality of my son .
Take your choice , and this instant deliver me the writings you have in your custody  you are no longer worthy of my confidence . '


If my father had suffered himself to be moved by my supplications , the demand he made of the papers would have greatly distressed me : but his harshness gave me courage .


` Those writings , said I , rising , are no longer in my possession , I have burned them : but the estate I inherit of my uncle 's shall be yours , instead of those they would have given you . '


I had scarce time to pronounce these few words .
My father , mad with rage , drew his sword , and would doubtless have run me through , for I made not the least effort to avoid him , if my mother had not entered the room that instant , and threw herself , half dead with terror , between us .


` Ah !
what would you do , said she , gasping with the violence of her fears , is he not your son ?
 Then forcing me out of the room , she ordered me to expect her in her own apartment . '


I waited there a long time before she appeared : she came at length .
I had no longer rage , exclamation , and menaces to combat  but a tender mother , who entered into all my griefs , and intreated me with tears , to have companion on the condition to which I had reduced her .


` What , my son , said she to me , shall a mistress , and a mistress whom you have known so short a time , be preferred to your mother ?
Alas !
if your happiness depended upon me , I would sacrifice every thing to secure it  but you have a father who will be obeyed .
He is upon the point of taking the most violent resolutions against you .
Oh , my son !
if you would not make me miserable , suppress a passion that will render us all unhappy . '


I remained some moments silent : how difficult was it to resist such a plea , so tenderly urged by a mother for whom I had the highest filial affection ?
but love was still more powerful .


[ To be continued . ]
32 .
PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONTINUED .


 32.1 .
Of the Metamorphoses of ANIMALS , and the several Changes observable in ANIMAL LIFE .


BUT the most complete , and at the same time the most universal of all these metamorphoses is that wherein the animal appears in four several shapes : which is the case with much the greatest part of the winged inhabitants of the air of the infect tribe  some of which in their different states have been by turns tenants of earth , air , and water .
Endless would it be to enumerate all the various genera of infects who undergo these changes .
We shall therefore content ourselves , as in the last case , with only mentioning one of each sort , viz .
Of those whose origin is water , and of those whose rise is from the earth .


Of the first , let the common gnat be taken for our example .
This little delicate tender insect , which the gentlest touch will destroy , the least breath of  wind waft upon its bosom , and the least drop of rain buries in its waves , yet first sees existence in that rough and turbulent element the water .
There it is the parent lays her egg , which is hatched by some means we can little comprehend , ( for heat can have no influence at the bottom of the water ) comes out a little groveling worm , minute and unobservable  changing from this , however , it soon arises towards the surface of the water , where , hanging suspended on an air-bubble , no bad emblem of the general dependence of human affairs , it passes thro ' a thousand fluctuations  now hurried onwards by the rapid power of tides , or the uncertain gust of winds varying at every moment , and now gliding smoothly on the calm even surface of a glassy dream , till at length seizing on the happy moment for deliverance from this suspence , it drops the slough which now envelops it , and mounting into air , quits and disdains alike its helpless state of infancy , and its precarious anxious situation when brought to somewhat more apparent ripeness .
Reflect on this , oh man , and think what art thou but a poor insect , crushed before the moth !


As to the land metamorphosis of this compleatest kind , we need go no further to illustrate it , than to that useful animal the silk-worm , as he is perhaps the most perfect of this class of insects .
His first state is , as that of all others of his kind , the egg .
From this he issues a small black maggot , which , after having shifted many various coats , and increased his bulk to upwards of a thousand times its original size , weaves out of his own bowels a  silken monument in which he lies interred for a short space , and then sallies forth an elegant fly , compleat in every part , and as different from the worm it sprung from as fire from earth , or any the most pure can be from the grossest being .
In this most perfect state , he ranges through creation , seems to be diverted even of the necessities of nature ( for in the fly-state none of those creatures take any food ) and in short appears to be transformed into a perfect sylph , destined to nothing but the perpetuating of its species , which being once insured , it resigns its life as no longer worth the preservation .


To the first class of these changes may be referred every one of the gnat , midge , dragon-fly , and ichneumon class  and to the latter all the fly , moth , and butterfly species .
Were we to enter into particulars , the detail would be endless .
This sketch , however , may suffice to turn the soul of man to a reflection on the vicissitude and fluctuation of his own state , and to remind him that after the alterations he meets with in this life , which only lead him to that state of insensibility , that even the minutest insect seems obliged to pass thro ' ere it can reach its limited degree of perfection  there must be some final state superior to them all , and which , with him , has the advantage denied to these symbols of his happiness , that it shall last to all eternity .


 Figure 2 .
The LION PISMIRE , or Formica-Leo in it 's Several States .
32.2 .
The Natural HISTORY of the FORMICA-LEO , or LION-PISMIRE .


 Nature who has with the utmost care allotted to every species of animals its peculiar place of residence and its peculiar kind of food , has also with equal wisdom furnished every individual with the means of rendering such habitation the most commodious , and of procuring such food with the greatest ease .
Numberless expedients , numberless stratagems has she instructed even the minutest insects in , for the ensnaring and over-powering those animals which she has destined to be his prey .
Of these we shall in the course of this work relate many , of which , however , there are few more curious , and at the same time more simple than that of the little animal which now falls under our consideration .


The formica-leo , or lion-pismire , is a very small insect , not much bigger than a large emmet , which , however , notwithstanding its name , bears no resemblance to the pismire class , either in its figure or disposition .
On the contrary , as the laborious ant ranges about every where with the greatest industry to find its food in the summer-time , and lay it up in storehouses for the winter  the animal we are speaking of keeps itself ever confined to a single spot , waiting with a most amazing degree of patience and perseverance for the supply of the present moment , as chance shall throw it in its way  nay , even when that chance has so far favoured him as to bring some devoted victim towards his cell , he instead of advancing forwards to  lay hold on it , constantly retires from it , as if he seemed to make it a point that the destruction of it should be entirely its own act , or unavoidable misfortune .


The form of the lion-pismire is that represented at Fig .
I. and II .
in the plate annexed to this work , of which the first represents the back , and the other the belly , although both about four times as big as life .
The body of it is of an annular texture , by which means the tail is rendered extremely pliable and apt for the use which we shall hereafter describe .
It has six legs , placed as those of most insects are in the thorax .
Its head is small and flat , and from the forepart of it two pretty long horns shoot out , and between them a pair of serrated or saw-like forcipes , wherewith it destroys and tears to pieces those creatures which are unfortunate enough to fall within its reach .
The horns are about the sixth part of an inch in length , and bend like hooks in the extremity .
Towards their insertion appear two small eyes very black and lively , and which are extremely serviceable to the creature , for he starts from the smallest objects he discovers .
Other animals are furnished with wings , or feet at least , to render them expeditious in the pursuit of their prey .
But this creature seems to make use of his legs for little more purpose than to bear him backwards from his prey , which as we have before observed must come to him .
He is , however , provided with means of causing it to fall into the ambuscade he prepares for it .
This is the only resource he has for subsistence , the only piece of skill that he is master of .
That power , however , which has provided for every one whatever may  be needful , has rendered this one knowledge sufficient for all his purposes whilst in his terrestrial state  for this creature , as we shall farther relate , undergoes some of those metamorphoses which we have before given an account of .
His method of obtaining food is then as follows :


The place which he always chuses as fittest for the scene of action is a bed of dry sand , at the foot of a wall , or under some shelter where no rain can come at it , either to disconcert his work , or prevent the effect of his operations  which could by no means answer their intended purpose , were they to be attempted either in a solid soil , or in a moist sand , neither of which would be tractable to his tools , or become serviceable to the completion of his design .


He begins to work then , by bending the hinder part of his body which tapers into a point , and then plunging it like a plough-share into the sand , which he throws up in his rear with a backward motion of his body  and thus by repeating his efforts , and taking several rounds , he at last traces out a circular furrow , whose diameter always equals the depth which he intends to sink it .
Near the edge of the first furrow he opens a second , and then a third , and so on to a great number , every one of which is smaller then the preceding one  sinking himself from time to time deeper and deeper in the sand , which he throws wide with his horns , still casting it up behind him with his rail as with a spade , and by the repeated strokes of his head whirling it out of the circle till he has compleatly  formed his cell , which is a cavity in the form of an inverted cone , or the inside of a funnel .


This cell is larger or smaller in proportion to the growth , and consequently to the size of the animal  but in a full grown one , is sometimes upwards of two inches in diameter and as much in depth .


When this loose and unstable fabrick is thus finished , he forms his ambuscade in the center of it , concealing himself in such a manner under the sand , that his horns form an exact circle round the central termination , or apex of the cone .
In this situation he remains entirely motionless watching for his prey , which is composed of small insects of many kinds , more especially the female ant , who being unprovided with wings , like the generality of insects , is less able to escape when once me falls into the snare .
Other animals , however , are far from being safe from the dexterity of this skillful hunter .
Fatal is the moment in which any one is so indiscreet as to venture near the edge of this precipice , which descending in a steep slope , and that formed of a light loose sand , immediately gives way , and hurries it down instantly to the center .
But lest its own weight should not be sufficient to prevent its recovering a first false step , no sooner does our ambuscader perceive by the fall of some few grains of sand that a prize is near , than by shrinking back he removes the lower sand , and undermining the more extreme parts obliges the bank to break and roll down , bringing down with it , and at the same time overwhelming whatsoever happens to be near its verge .


 It sometimes , however happens , that the insect thus entrapped being endowed with peculiar agility , or provided with wings , is able to rise above this first envelopement .
In this case the lion-pismire defeats its efforts by whirling a large quantity of sand into the air by means of his tail above the height of the rising animal .
This falling again in what to so tender a creature as a gnat , fly , or emmet , is equal to a dreadful shower of stones , the unfortunate insect beat down , overwhelmed by the tempest that pours down from every quarter , and hurried away by the instability of the sand which rolls from under his feet , falls between the serrated forcipes of his enemy , who plunging them into his body , drags it under the land , and there triumphantly feasts on his thus devoted victim .


This great end being brought about , and our voracious animal thus sated with an ample meal sucked from the juices of his prey , his next care is to remove the carcase , lest the appearance of a dead body should alarm others , and give notice of the fatal and treacherous nature of this seemingly inoffensive cavern .
He therefore extends his horns , and with a sudden spring tosses the light exuvium of the slain to at least half a foot beyond the borders of his trench .
And in case his habitation should in the course of one of these exploits be any way disconcerted or filled up , if the aperture becomes too large for the depth , or the declivity loses its proper slope , he instantly sets himself to work and repairs the whole , rounding , deepening , and clearing the cavity with a most amazing expertness  which done , he again conceals himself in the sand ,  and waits in an apparent state of inactivity for whatever shall fall next into his snare .


In the doing this his patience and perseverance are so great , and nature has provided him with such abilities for abstinence , that he sometimes passes whole weeks , nay months without motion , and what is still more surprizing without food itself .


The lion-pismire , hid at the bottom of his trench , and whirling the sand on an ant to prevent its regaining the bank , is represented at Fig .
III .


The lion-pismire , however , as I have observed before , does not pass his whole life under the form we have here described .
He is to become a fly  but before he can undergo so great and extraordinary a metamorphosis , it is necessary that he should pass through a period of temporary death , for which state he prepares in the following manner , building to himself a secure and convenient tomb , wherein he lies decently inurned till the appointed moment when he is to arise from his inactive state , and become the inhabitant of another element .


When the time comes for this resignation of his first life , he troubles himself no further about the order and form of his trench , but falls to work in the sand , striking out a great number of irregular tracks in it , with an eagerness that appears as if it was designed to throw him into a sweat .
Be this as it will , it is certain that his body becomes at this time covered over with a viscous moisture , which as he rolls himself about in the sand , wherein he plunges himself in every direction , fixes and  unites all the grains he touches .
With these sandy particles and the dried glew that consolidates them , he forms a crust which encompasses his whole body like a little ball of five or six twelfths of an inch diameter ( Vid .
fig .
IV . )
Within this ball , however , he reserves to himself a sufficient space to move about  and as a bare wall of sand would be too harsh and cold for him to remain happily in , he lines it throughout with a kind of silk tapestry of his own weaving , composed of threads formed from his bowels , of a beautiful pearl colour , and infinitely surpassing in fineness that of the silk-worm .
Yet whilst it is thus commodiously and elegantly furnished within-side , the exterior still retains the same rugged and undesirable appearance , by which it escapes the notice of birds and other animals of prey , who might perhaps be tempted by a more alluring outside .


In this situation he lives secluded from the world , for six weeks or two months , and sometimes more : at the end of which period nature having performed her secret work , he divests himself of his horns , paws , and skin , his spoils sink to the bottom of the ball , like a suit of cast-off cloathing , and his figure is then that of the nympha , represented greatly magnified , and in two different directions at Fig .
V. and VI .
when tearing away his tapestry and bursting his rocky enclosure , he comes out a perfect animal of the dragon-fly kind , furnished with four large filmy wings , with which he quits the obscurity of his former state  becomes divested of his barbarity and subtile inclinations , as well as of his cumbersome weight , and in short appears  entirely a new animal , as is shewn in Fig .
VII .


The animal before us , however , is not the only example of this kind of subtilty in the insect world .
There has heen discovered another creature , which from the resemblance it has to the lion-pismire in the method of digging a trench for intrapping its prey , has been distinguished by the authors who have described it by the name of the vermis-leo , or lion-worm .
But as what we have said of the formica-leo , will equally describe the method of this creatures procuring its food , we shall not trouble our readers with any farther detail concerning it  but content ourselves with only presenting them a drawing of it at Fig .
VIII .
in the annexed copperplate , in which a and b represent the worm in its first state , c shews the nympha , or second period of its life , and d the form of the fly , or last transformation .


33 .
THE LADY 's GEOGRAPHY CONTINUED .


 33.1 .
Of the MANNERS and CUSTOMS of the Inhabitants of AMBOYNA .


THE men and women do not go together to these feasts , as there are apartments in their houses appropriated to each sex , these islanders having certain laws which do not suffer all the relations of the husband to see his wife .
The father , mother , and children of the same family , may indeed feed together , but not the father with the daughter-in-law , or with his grand daughters when grown up : the mother with her son-in-law or grandsons , or the brother and sister-in-law together .
Nay more , they are not even permitted to see each other when eating , and if a man surprises a woman in that situation , by accident , for by design it never happens , he acquires a scandal which is not to be wiped away but by the means of making her some considerable present .
The reason of this custom with respect to relations it is not easy to guess at  but as to the separation of the sexes in general , it may be supposed that jealousy , of which these people have a considerable share , must be the sole cause of it .


 One of the principal dishes which the Amboynians make use of in their feasts , is a hog 's head , with a lemon fixed between the jaws , and adorned with a number of flowers of a very beautiful red , called Bongayraya .
This dish is always placed before those persons who stand in the highest estimamation  the other parts of their pork is dressed in many different ways , but in every one of them with exceeding high and savory seasonings .
If they have fish , the head is always presented to the king of the feast , who is himself for that reason called Kapalakan , or Fish-Head  of which , when he has taken as much as he thinks proper , he distributes the remainder among those who sit near him .
The turtle is one of their great delicacies , which they stew at a distance from the fire , without any other liquor than the juices of the animal : but they afterwards add to it a great quantity of seasoning .
The cocoa , seago , and rice also , prepared in various methods , form several dishes in their entertainments  and of the two latter their bread is composed .


They have great quantities of venison and wild-fowl , of which they are very fond , as also of the bat , dressed after a particular manner .
There is a kind of white worm , which is found in the rotten wood of the seago tree , of about the length and thickness of the first joint of a man 's thumb , which they roast on little skewers , and eat very greedily  as they do also the wawos , or reddish worms we mentioned to be sound on the sea coast .
These are to be met with in great abundance along the shore , especially in stony places , about the season of the April full moon .
 In the night time they give a light like the glow-worm , which seems to invite people to go in search of them  which they do , every one laying in his stock at once , because they make their appearance only for about three or four days in the whole year .


In these feasts , the victuals are ever dressed by the women , but they are always served in by men .
The principal care of the master of the feast , is that there may be no want of victuals  every guest has one large vessel set before him , containing several little dishes which are filled with all kinds of food , and after he has eaten his fill of this allowance , the rest is carried home to his house by the servants .


Their chief drink is spring water , or the milk of the cocoa-nut .
By way of wine they make use of the towak or sin , which is extracted from a tree of that name , and the saguweer which distils from another , and has nearly the taste of wormwood-wine .
Their stronger liquors are the rack and brom made from rice , and two other kinds of spirit , which they get from Japan and China .
They are very fond of the French and Spanish wines , but do not greatly relish the German .
The women keep mostly to water , although they are by no means averse to the drinking of Spanish wine , were the means of procuring it more accessible to them .
The use of tea and coffee is not very familiar to the Amboynians  yet they sometimes take the former , especially when they are visited by the Dutch , to whose customs , whenever they come to any of their repasts , they accommodate themselves as much as possible .


 Their manner of kindling fires is much readier than ours  they rub two pieces of wood against each other , the one hard , the other soft and hollow , near which they hold a bit of lint , which kindles in an instant .
For the making of salt , they take the pieces of old worm-eaten wood which the sea throws up on the shore : these they dry and reduce to ashes , sprinkling them continually with sea-water , till they form a mass of salt underneath them , or else boil up the same water in a pot with the ashes of certain leaves for two or three days successively , at the end of which they find a quantity of very good salt at the bottom of the vessel .


34 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER V. ]


 THE Arabian proverb , Shut the windows that the house may be light , is supposed to contain some great mystery  and indeed it must be confessed that it has very much the air of a paradox : but whatever explication the wise and the learned may give to this sentence , it seems not unaptly applied to that gay part of my own sex so improperly called fine ladies , the business of whose lives it is to dress , to play at cards , to simper in the drawing-room , to languish at an opera , and coquet at a play , whose eyes being perpetually dazzled by the glare of folly and impertinence , are too weak to bear the steady ray of reason : their minds therefore are always dark  and ignorance , like a thick cloud , wraps them  up in impenetrable gloom .
To such as these then I will suppose the Arabian sage cries , Shut the windows that the house may be light


The fine lady has no other use for her eyes but to sparkle and languish  reading would spoil their lustre , and incroach upon that precious time which is all devoted to pleasure .
What advantage can she derive from books ?
will they teach her how to improve her complexion , and repair the ravages made by time in her face ?
Can morality , learning , and wit , instruct one who exercises her memory only upon cards , and has sufficient employment for her judgment , in chusing a suit of ribbons , or a brocade ?
Who never knew , what it was to think seriously for a single moment  and whose mind can entertain no other ideas but what dress and quadrille inspire .


Yet of such poor materials as these a coquet is made , one who lays claim to boundless dominion , who expects to subject all hearts to her sway , and dispense happiness and misery , life and death , with a smile or frown .


That a creature so despicable as this is capable of doing a great deal of mischief , the following letter will shew  and I do not doubt but by publishing it I shall oblige my readers as much as the unhappy writer who makes it her request .


 MADAM ,


I Thank you for publishing the letter signed Perdita : it was a prelude to my unhappy story , which I am desirous the world should know  yet for the sake of him , who in spite of all the wrongs he has done me will be ever dear to me , I shall disguise the names of persons and places .


The facts I relate will point out the guilty only to themselves  but they will display a character , which of all others is the most dangerous to the peace of families , and to which all my misfortunes are owing .


At sixteen I was taken from the boarding-school by my mother , to have my education finished by a commerce with the fashionable world  but I received much less improvement from those lessons of politeness than from the solid instructions of my father , who was a man of sense and learning , and who took pleasure in cultivating my mind .


As my fortune was very considerable , I soon had a sufficient number of admirers  and I thought myself extremely happy in being able to touch the heart of a young gentleman , who , even before he declared his passion , had engaged my tenderest affection .


He soon obtained my consent to demand me of my parents  his birth was at least equal to mine ,  his fortune superior , and his character unexceptionable : my parents therefore thought they disposed of me very happily by giving me to him .


A few weeks after our marriage my husband carried me to his country-seat  the beauty of the place , my taste for retirement , and the tender behaviour of the man I passionately loved , left me nothing to wish for , and I could have been content to spend my whole life in this delightful abode .


We had lived here near a year without my husband expressing the least inclination to return to town , when I took it into my head to surprise him agreeably with the company of a young lady who had been my school-fellow , and for whom I had a very great friendship .


I wrote to her , and invited her to spend a few months with me  the spring was now far advanced , and I gave her a most romantic description of my charming retreat , in order to induce her to comply , with my request .


She answered my letter with a great deal of common place rallery upon the country , and my rusticated taste , and positively refused to come .


I shewed her letter to Alcander , so let me call my husband : he smiled when he read it .
` This is a fine modish lady , said he , bewitched with the pleasures of the town  pray insist upon her coming hither , that we may make a convert of her . '


Charmed to have it in my power to oblige him , I wrote to her immediately in such pressing terms to favour me with a visit , that I drew a promise  from her to comply , and a few days afterwards her maid arrived early in the morning , and told me her lady was following in a post-chaise , and had sent her before to spread her toilet and prepare every thing for her dressing as soon as she arrived .


I observed Alcander smile archly at these words , and at the sight of a great number of trunks and band-boxes , which the servant had brought with her .
From several things that were said by this girl , I observed that her lady was grown extremely fantastical  and I was a little out of countenance when I reflected , that I had done no honour to my judgment , by introducing her as my friend to Alcander .
Alas !
madam , how little did I then imagine that this flighty creature was to rob me of my husband 's affections !


When she arrived , her appearance did not contradict the opinion we had formed of her  every look and motion , the sound of her voice , and the turn of her expressions , were calculated to suit , by a pretty effronterie , the masculine graces she derived from her hat and feather .


I perceived that she was struck with my husband 's figure , and my vanity was soothed by it .
Doubtless she did not expect to see the fine gentleman and the tender husband united in the person of my then faithful Alcander .
Ah , how dearly have I since paid for the short triumph I then enjoyed !


I attended Belinda , so let me call her , to her apartment  and here , being witness to a great deal of lively impertinence which escaped her , I could not help telling her , with an ironical smile , ` That  she was prodigiously improved since she left the boarding-school . '


I was afraid she would have been offended by the manner in which I spoke these words  but , to my great surprize , she answered , with a low courtesy and a smile of self-approbation , ` My dear , I am vastly obliged to you . '
I left her in her dressing-room , to join Alcander in the garden , who diverted himself extremely with her ridiculous affectation .


We did not see her till dinner was served  and then she appeared in full dress , curled , powdered , and patched , as if she had been going to an assembly .
The moment she saw Alcander her eyes fell to work , and there was nothing but ogling all dinner-time  whenever she spoke to him , her voice was softened , and her mouth screwed into a thousand different forms .


I might perhaps have been early alarmed at this solicitude to attract the notice of my husband , had I not observed her practice the same airs upon the fellow that waited behind her chair , who , whenever he helped her to any thing , was sure to be met with a sparkling glance , that seemed to solicit his admiration also  for vanity will , as the poet says , Prey upon garbage


I have now brought my story to that point from whence I may date all my sufferings : my heart is too full at present to permit me to proceed  I will take another opportunity to give you the sequel , and am , Madam ,


Your obliged Humble Servant , PERDITA .


36 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT and SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 DOLLY , though encouraged by the sweet condescension of Sophia , who , to inspire her with confidence , freely acknowledged the situation of her own heart , blushed so much , and was in such apparent confusion , that Sophia was concerned at having made her a request which gave her so much pain to comply with .


At length the innocent girl , looking up to her with a bashful air , said , ' I should be ashamed , dear Miss , to own my weakness to you , if I did not know that you are too generous to think the worse of me for it : to be sure I have a great value for Mr. William  but I was not so foolish as to be taken with his handsomeness only , tho ' indeed he is very handsome , and I am delighted to find that you think him so  but Mr. William , as my father can tell you , madam , is a very fine scholar : he was educated in a great school at London , and there is not a young squire in all this country who has half his learning , or knows how to behave himself so genteely as he  does , though his father is but a farmer : however , he is rich , and he has but one child besides Mr. William , and that is a sickly boy , and not likely to live  so that Mr. William , it is thought , will have all . '


' I should imagine then , said Sophia , that this young man would not be a bad match for you ? '


' A bad match , replied Dolly , sighing : no certainly  but his aunt looks higher for him : yet there was a time when she was well enough pleased with his liking me . '


` What is his aunt , said Sophia , and how does it happen that she has any authority over him ? '


` Why you must know , madam , answered Dolly , that his aunt is very rich  when she was a young woman , a great lady took a fancy to her , and kept her as her companion a great many years , and when she died , she left her all her cloaths and jewels , and a prodigious deal of money : she never would marry  for she was crossed in love , they say , in her youth , and that makes her so ill natured and spiteful , I believe , to young people  but notwithstanding that , I can not help loving her , because she was always so fond of Mr. William : she is his god-mother , and when he was about ten years old she sent for him to London , and declared she would provide for him as her own  and indeed she acted like a mother towards him : she put him to school , and maintained him like a gentleman  and when he grew up , she would have made a gentleman of him  for she had a great desire that he should be an officer . '


 ` Mr. William at that time was very fond of being an officer too  but as he was very dutiful and obedient to his father , indeed Miss Sophia he is one of the best young men in the world , he desired leave to consult him first  so about a year ago he came to visit his father , and has never been at London since  and he had not been long in the country before he changed his mind as to being an officer , and declared he would be a farmer like his father , and live a country life . '


` Ah Dolly , said Sophia smiling , I suspect you were the cause of this change , my friend . '


` Why indeed , replied Dolly , he has since told me so : but perhaps he flattered me when he said it  for , ah my dear Miss , I remember what you said just now about the deceitfulness of men , and I tremble lest Mr. William should be like the rest . '


` Well , my dear , interupted Sophia , go on with your story  I am impatient to know when you saw each other first , and how your acquaintance began . '


` You know , madam , said Dolly , my father keeps us very retired : I had no opportunity of seeing Mr. William but at church  we had heard that farmer Gibbons had a fine son come from London , and the Sunday afterwards when we were at church , my sister , who is a giddy wild girl , as you know , kept staring about , in hopes of seeing him .
At last she pulled me hastily , and whispered , look , look , Dolly , there is farmer Gibbons just come in , and I am sure he has got  his London son with him , see what a handsome young man he is , and how genteely he is drest ! '


` Well , madam , I looked up , and to be sure I met Mr. William 's eyes full upon me  I felt my face glow like fire  for as soon as I looked upon him , he made me a low bow .
My sister courtesied  but for my part , I do n't know whether I courtesied or not : I was never so confused in my life , and during the whole time we were at church , I scarce ever durst raise my eyes  for I was sure to find Mr. William looking into our pew . '


' I suppose you was not displeased with him , said Sophia , for taking so much notice of you ? '


' I do not know whether I was or not , replied Dolly  but I know that I was in a strange confusion during all church-time  yet I observed that Mr. William did not go out when the rest of the congregation did , but staid behind , which made my sister laugh  for he looked foolish enough standing alone .
But he staid to have an opportunity of making us another bow  for it is my father 's custom , as soon as he has dismissed the people , to come into our pew and take us home with him .
I never shall forget how respectfully Mr. William saluted my father as he passed him .
I now made amends for my former neglect of him , and returned the bow he made me with a very low courtesy . '


` Fanny and I talked of him all the way home : I took delight in hearing her praise him  and although I was never used to disguise my thoughts before , yet I knew not how it was , but I was  ashamed to speak so freely of him as she did , and yet I am sure I thought as well of him . '


' I dare say you did , said Sophia , smiling  but my dear , pursued she in a graver accent , this was a very sudden impression .
Suppose this young man whose person captivated you so much , had been wild and dissolute , as many young men are  how would you have excused yourself for that early prejudice in his favour , which you took in so readily at your eyes , without consulting your judgment in the least ? '


Dolly , fixing her bashful looks on the ground , remained silent for a moment  then sighing , answered , ' I am sure if I had not believed Mr. William good and virtuous , I should never have liked him , tho ' he had been a hundred times handsomer than he is  but it was impossible to look on him and think him otherwise  and if you had observed him well , Miss Darnley , his countenance has so much sweetness and candor in it , as my father once said , that you could not have thought ill of him . '


` It is not always safe , said Sophia , sighing likewise , to trust to appearances : men 's actions as well as their looks often deceive us  and you must allow , my dear Dolly , that there is danger in these sudden attachments  but when did you see this pretty youth again ? '


` Not till the next Sunday , replied Dolly  and tho ' you should chide me never so much , yet I must tell you that this seemed the longest week I ever knew in my life .
I did not doubt but he would be at church again , and I longed impatiently  for Sunday .
At last Sunday came  we went with my father as usual to church , and would you believe it , Miss Darnley , tho ' I wish'd so much to see Mr. William , yet now I dreaded meeting him , and trembled so when I came into church , that I was obliged to take hold of Fanny to keep me from falling .
She soon discovered him , and pulled me in order to make me look up : he had placed himself in our way , so that we passed close by him .
He made us a very low bow , and my mother , who had not seen him before , smiled , and looked extremely pleased with him  for to be sure , Madam , she could not help admiring him . '


` Well , I was very uneasy all the time we were in church  for Fanny whispered me that my sweet-heart , for so she called Mr. William , minded nothing but me .
This made me blush excessively , and I was afraid my mother would take notice of his staring and my confusion  so that ( heaven forgive me ) I was glad when the sermon was ended .
He made us his usual compliment at our going out , but I did not look up : however , I was impatient to be alone with Fanny , that I might talk of him , and in the evening we walked towards the Park .
Just as we had placed ourselves under a tree , we saw a fine drest gentleman , a visitor of the Squire 's as we supposed , coming up to us : upon which we rose and walked homewards  but the gentleman followed us , and coming close to me , stared impudently under my hat , and swearing a great oath , said I was a pretty girl , and he would have a kiss .
Fanny seeing him  take me by the arm , screamed aloud  but I , pretending not to be frightened , tho ' I trembled sadly , civilly begg'd him to let me go .
He did not regard what I said , but was extremely rude  so that I now began to scream as loud as Fanny , struggling all the time to get from him , but in vain , and now who should come to my assistance but Mr. William : I saw him flying across a field , and my heart told me it was he , before he came near enough for me to know him . '


` As soon as Fanny perceived him , she ran to him and beg'd him to help me  but he did not need intreaty : he flew like a bird to the place where I was , and left Fanny far behind .
The rude gentleman bad him be gone , and threatened him severely  for he had taken the hand I had at liberty , which I gladly gave him , and insisted upon his letting me go : and now , my dear Miss Darnley , all my fears were for him , for the gentleman declared if he did not go about his business he would run him through the body , and actually drew his sword  I thought I should have died at that terrible sight  my sister run towards home crying like one distracted  as for me , tho ' the man had let go my hand , and I might have run away , yet I could not bear to leave Mr. William to the mercy of that cruel wretch  and I did what at another time I should have blushed to have done .
I took his hand , and pulled him with all my force away  but he , enraged at being called puppy by the gentleman , who continued swearing , that he would do him a mischief , if he did not leave the place , begged me to make the  best of my way home  and turning furiously to him who was brandishing his sword about , he knocked him down with one stroke of a cudgel which he fortunately had in his hand , and snatching his sword from him , he threw it among the bushes . '


` Upon my word ( said Sophia ) your William 's character rises upon me every moment  this was a very gallant action , and I do not wonder at your liking him now . '


` Ah , Miss ( cried Dolly ) if you had seen how he looked when he came back to me , if you had heard the tender things he said - Well , you may imagine I thanked him for the kindness he had done me , and he protested he would with pleasure lose his life for my sake .
I think I could have listened to him for ever  but now my father appeared in sight .
My sister had alarmed him greatly with her account of what had happened , and he was coming hastily to my assistance , followed by my mother and all the family .
As soon as we perceived them coming we mended our pace  for we had walked very slowly hitherto : then it was that Mr. William , who had not spoke so plainly before , told me how much he loved me , and begg'd I would give him leave to see me sometimes .
I replied , that depended upon my father , and this was prudent , was it not , my dear Miss Darnley ? '


` Indeed it was , answered Sophia , but what said your lover ? '


` He sighed , Madam , resumed Dolly , and said he was afraid my father would not think him  worthy of me : he owned he was no otherwise worthy of me than from the great affection he bore me , and then - But here I fear you will think him too bold and perhaps blame me . '


`` I hope not , said Sophia . ''


` Why , Madam , continued Dolly , he took my hand and kissed it a thousand times  and tho ' I did all I could to be sure to pull it away , yet he would not part with it , till my father was so near that he was afraid he would observe him  and then he let it go , and begg'd me in a whisper not to hate him .
Bless me , what a strange request that was , Miss Darnely !
how could I hate one to whom I had been so greatly obliged !
I was ready to burst into tears at the very thought , and told him I was so far from hating him , that - '


` Pray go on , my dear ( said Sophia ) observing she hesitated and was silent . '


' I told him , Madam , resumed she , that I would always regard him as long as I lived .
- I did not say too much , did I ? '


' I suppose , said Sophia , you gave him to understand that it was in gratitude for the service he had done you . '


` To be sure , said Dolly , I put it in that light .
Well I am glad you approve of my behaviour , Miss Darnley  so , as I was telling you , my father came up to us , and thanked Mr. William for having rescued his daughter  he then asked him what he had done with the rude fellow ?
Mr. William told him he had given him a lucky stroke with his cudgel , which had made him  measure his length on the ground  but , said he ( and sure that showed excessive good nature ) I hope I have not hurt him much : '


` My father said he would go and see  and then shaking Mr. William kindly by the hand , he called him a brave youth , and said he hoped they should be better acquainted - Oh !
how glad was I to hear him say so : My mother too was vastly civil to him  and as for Fanny , I thought she would have hugg'd him , she was so pleased with him for his kindness to me .
My mother insisted upon his staying to drink tea with us , and as soon as my father came back , we all went in together . '


` Pray what became of the poor vanquished knight ?
said Sophia , smiling . '


` Oh , I forgot to tell you , resumed Dolly , that my father said he saw him creeping along as if he was sorely bruised with his fall , supporting himself with his sword , which it seems he had found .
We were all glad it was no worse , and Mr. William having accepted my mother 's invitation , he staid with us till the evening was pretty far advanced  and then my father accompanied him part of his way home , and at parting , as he told us , desired to see him often . '


` He was not backward , you may be sure , in complying with his request : he came so often , that my father was surprised  and besides , my sister and I scarce ever went out to walk but we met him  so that one would have imagined he lived in the fields about our house .
My mother at last suspected the truth , and questioned me  about him , and I told her all that he had ever said to me  and not long afterwards he took an opportunity to open his heart to my father , and asked his permission to make his addresses to me .
With such modesty and good sense he spoke , that my father was extremely pleased with him  but told him that he must consult his friends , and know whether they approved of it , and then he would consider of his proposal .
Mr. William , as he afterwards told me , wrote to his aunt first  for he was well assured that his father would agree to any thing that she thought for his advantage . '


` He had a very favourable answer from Mrs. Gibbons , for she had changed her mind also , with regard to his being an officer , as war was then talked of  and she was afraid of his being sent abroad .
He shewed me her letter , and she told him in it , that since he was resolved to settle in the country , she approved of his marrying  and was glad he had not fixed his affections upon some homespun farmer 's daughter  but had chosen a gentlewoman , and one who was well brought up .
She added , that she intended to come into the country , in a few weeks  and if she found the young lady ( so she called me ) answered his description , she would hasten the marriage , and settle us handsomely .
- Oh !
how pleased was I with this letter , and how did it rejoice Mr. William ! '


' I should never have done , were I to tell you all the tender things he said to me .
Mr. Gibbons ,  at his son 's desire , came to my father , and begged him to give his consent , which he obtained  for my father had well considered the affair before : and nothing was wanting but Mrs. Gibbons 's arrival to make us all happy .
Mr. William thought every hour an age till she came , and prest her continually in his letters to hasten her journey . '


` Alas !
if he had known what was to happen , he would not have been so impatient  for soon after she came , all our fine hopes were blasted  and I have now nothing to expect but misery . '


Poor Dolly was so oppressed with grief , when she came to this part of her story , that she was unable to proceed , and burst into tears .
The tender Sophia , who was greatly affected with the anguish she saw her in , employed every soothing art to comfort her .
And Dolly being a little composed , was going to continue her story , when she saw her sister looking about for them  Sophia and she immediately rose up and joined Fanny , who rallied them both upon their fondness for lonely places  but perceiving that Dolly had been weeping , she immediately became grave , and accommodated her looks and behaviour to the gentle melancholy of her sister .


Sophia , from the state of her own mind , was but too much disposed to sympathize with the love-sick Dolly : these softning conversations were ill calculated to banish from her remembrance , the first object of her innocent affections  and who , with all his faults , she still loved .
Dolly 's story  awakened a thousand tender ideas , and recalled to her memory every part of Sir Charles 's conduct , which had any resemblance to that of the faithful and passionate William .


She dwelt with tender regret upon these pleasing images , and for a while forgot how necessary it was for her peace , to suppress every thought of Sir Charles , that tended to lessen her just resentment against him .


But , good and pious as she was , the passion she could not wholly subdue she regulated by reason and by virtue  for , as an eminent Divine says , ` Although it is not in our power to make affliction no affliction  yet we may take off the edge of it , by a steady view of those divine joys prepared for us in another state '


It was quite otherwise with Sir Charles : for the guilty , if unhappy , are doubly so  because they are deprived of those resources of comfort , which the virtuous are sure to find , in the consciousness of having acted well .


Sir Charles , upon finding his settlement sent back to him , in such a manner , as shewed not only the most obstinate resolution to reject his offers , but also a settled contempt for the offerer , became a prey to the most violent passions : rage , grief , affronted pride , love ill requited , and disappointed hope , tormented him by turns  nor was jealousy without a place in his heart  the chaste , the innocent , the reserved Sophia , became suspected by the man , who in vain attempted to corrupt her  so true it is , that libertinism gives such a colour to the actions  of others , as takes away all distinction between virtue and vice .


Love , he argued , is either rewarded with a reciprocal affection , or with an inward and secret contempt  therefore he imputed Sophia 's rejection of his offers , not to her disapprobation of the intention of them , but to want of affection for his person  and from her youth , and the tender sensibility of her heart , he concluded , that since he had failed in making an impression on it , it was already bestowed on another  one while he resolved to think no more of her , and repay her indifference and disdain , with silence and neglect  the next moment , dreading lest he had lost her for ever , he regretted his having alarmed her with too early a discovery of his intentions , and sometimes his passion transported him so far , as to make him think seriously of offering her his hand : then starting at his own weakness , and apprehensive of the consequences , he sought to arm himself against that tenderness which suggested so mad a design , by reflecting on her indifference towards him , and accounting for it in such a manner , as fixed the sharpest stings of jealousy in his mind .


Thus various and perplexed were his thoughts and designs  and he was incapable of resolving upon any thing , except to see her  and so great was his impatience , that he would have set out for London , the moment he received the fatal paper , but decency would not permit him to leave his uncle , who was in a dying condition , and wished only to expire in his arms .


 The poor man , however , lingered a week longer , during which Sir Charles passed some of the most melancholly hours he had ever known  at length , his uncle 's death left him at liberty to return to London , which he did immediately , and alighted at Mrs. Darnley 's house .
Upon hearing she was at home , he did not send in his name , but walked up stairs with a beating heart  he found Mrs. Darnley , and Harriot together , but not seeing the person , whom he only wished to see , he cast a melancholy look round the room , and answering , in a confused , and dejected manner , the mother 's excessive politeness , and the cold civility of the daughter , he threw himself into a chair , with a deep sigh , and was silent .


So evident a discomposure pleased Mrs. Darnley as much as it mortified Harriot .
As for Sir Charles , pride and resentment hindered him at first from enquiring for Sophia  but his anxiety and impatience to hear of her , soon prevailed over all other considerations  and tho ' he asked for her with an affected carelessness , yet his eyes , and the tone of his voice betrayed him .


Mrs. Darnley told him , that she was gone into the country : ` Very much against my inclination , said she : but Mr. Herbert , who you know , Sir , has great power over her , more I think , than I have , would have it so . '


Sir Charles turning as pale as death , replied , in great emotion , ` What !
gone into the country  where is she gone , to whom , why did she go ?
Against your inclination , did you say , Madam ,  what could possibly induce her to this ?
You surprise me excessively . '


Harriot , who did not chuse to be present at the explanation of this affair , now rose up , and went out of the room , smiling sarcastically , as she passed by Sir Charles , and bridling with all the triumph of conscious beauty .
He , who was in a bad humour , beheld her airs not only with indifference but contempt , which he suffered to appear pretty plain in his countenance  for he thought it but just to mortify her for her ill-usage of her sister , without considering that he himself was far more guilty , in that respect , towards the amiable Sophia , and equally deserved to be hated by her .


When Harriot was gone , Mrs. Darnley instantly renewed the conversation concerning Sophia  and finding that the young baronet listened to her , with eager attention , she gave him a full account of all that had happened , during his absence : she represented Sophia , as having followed implicitly the directions of Mr. Herbert , whom she called a busy , meddling , officious , old man  and as the behaviour of her daughter , at her going away , gave sufficient room to believe , that her heart suffered greatly by the effort she made , she dwelt upon every circumstance that tended to shew the concern she was under  and did not scruple to exaggerate , where she thought it would be pleasing .


Sir Charles , tho ' he inwardly rejoiced at what he heard , yet dissembled so well , that no signs of it appeared in his countenance .
He now seemed to listen with much indifference , and coldly said , he  was sorry Miss Sophia would not permit him to make her easy .


The tranquillity he affected alarmed Mrs. Darnley : she who was ever ready to judge by appearances , concluded that all was over , and that the baronet was irrecoverably lost  but had her judgment been more acute , she would have perceived , that he was still deeply interested in every thing that related to Sophia .
The questions he asked were not such as curiosity suggests , but the tender anxiety of doubting love : Mrs. Darnley informed him of all he wish'd to hear  Sophia had indeed fled from him , but not without reluctance and grief : she was at present removed from his sight , but she was removed to silence and solitude  and she carried with her a fond impression , which solitude would not fail to encrease .


Thus satisfied , he put an end to his visit , with all imaginable composure , leaving Mrs. Darnley in doubt , whether she should see him again , and more enraged than ever with Mr. Herbert , whose fatal counsels had overthrown all her hopes .


[ To be continued . ]
 MADAM ,


BEING born a Florentine , though by my marriage and long residence here , I am now become English  I can not without some jealousy observe , that in your useful and entertaining Museum , you have yet admitted no foreigners but those of France , to make their appearance  therefore I take the liberty to recommend to your notice , the inclosed translation from the Italian , of a piece of history , perhaps as extraordinary and exemplary as can be found in those of any nation whatever  and whilst it presents to your readers the power and fate of beauty , at the same time gives them some insight into the characters and manners of the Italians , in that century in which it happened .
I am , Madam ,


Your constant Reader , And Humble Servant , OFFARIA CELLINI .


38 .
THE HISTORY OF BIANCA CAPELLO .


 ABOUT the middle of the sixteenth century , amongst many Florentine merchants , who resided in the celebrated city of Venice , was , a company of bankers , called the Salviati  whose business being great , they were obliged to keep many young men in their service , for writing , negotiating , and other offices .
The principal of these was one Pietro Buonaventuri , a citizen of Florence , young , handsome , and genteel , whom they employed as cashier .


Over against this bank lived a noble Venetian , the name of whose family was Capello  he had amongst other children a daughter called Bianca , extremely beautiful , and of so winning and graceful behaviour as enhanced the lustre of her charms .
This lady , the before-mentioned Buonaventuri , became desperately enamoured with  the violence of his passion , by the frequent opportunities their near neighbourhood gave them of seeing each other , in time found means to discover itself to his mistress  who believing him the master , or at least the partner of that great bank , began to regard with some attention the attractive graces of his person and manner , till this new reciprocal love augmenting  every day , became sanctified at length by a private marriage , followed by many secret meetings , with the knowledge only of an old matron , governess to the lady , who had been both confidant and mediatrix throughout the whole affair .


Thus for some time did the lovers continue their intercourse  the bride going every night to her husband 's apartment , which being on the ground floor , she could easily pass from her father 's house and return to it unobserved , being but four paces distant from that of the Salviati .
Her method was , when she came out , to leave the dor unlocked  so that returning early , she was received by her governess , before the rest of the family was stirring  but one unlucky morning , the baker coming sooner than usual , to tell the servants it was time to make the bread , and being answered , they were about it , he perceived the lock of the door was open , and thinking it was proper to fallen it , he did so , before he went away , as the young lady found to her great surprize and grief , when having taken leave of her husband , ( who accompanied her to the door of his master 's house ) she returned home  whereupon not knowing from whence this accident could happen , trembling like a leaf , and half dead with fear , she went back to her lover , who endeavoured to comfort her as well as he could , and went himself into the street , making signs , whistling , and calling to the old confidant  yet all his endeavours were to no purpose , and unable to make himself heard , without a thorough discovery , he came back to his wife  when now the day was so far advanced , that it left no hopes of concealment for these unfortunate lovers ,  who were sure to die by the rage of her relations , if once their affair was known .
As the last remedy they resolved on flight  he taking what little money and cloaths the shortness of time would permit him to get together , and she having only a thin taffata robe over her shift , ( it being the height of summer ) they hastily embarked on board a vessel , and in the most secret manner that was possible , pursued their journey till they arrived at Florence , where they came to the house of Pietro 's father , which stood in the place of St. Mark , not far from the church of the Annunciation .
The elder Buonaventuri , though a citizen , was in so low a degree of fortune , that these two being added to his family , he could no otherwise maintain them , than by turning off his only servant , in whose place the poor young lady was obliged to do all those offices , that in her former state , many had been kept to do for her : and the old man being informed by his son , that she was his wife , and his own being grown in years , and very peevish , he entrusted her with the management of the household likewise : all which she performed for many months , with great patience and alacrity .


The flight of the two lovers was no sooner discovered at Venice , than the father and relations of Bianca , furious with indignation , and great in power , caused an edict to be published , by which , whoever should kill them in any country , was entitled to a large sum of money .
This cruel order coming to the ears of the fugitive pair , gave them great apprehensions  and the young lady never suffered herself to be seen , but stayed always at  home , employing herself in the affairs of her family .


Whilst they remained in this miserable situation , it happened one day , that the grand Duke Francisco , son of Cosmo the first , was passing in his coach under the window .
Bianca having a curiosity to see him , lifted up the lattice , in order to have a better view  and he chancing at the same time to turn his face that way , their eyes met  which was no sooner perceived by her , than she immediately let down the lattice and retired  but the grand duke , unsatisfied with so momentary a view , kept his head still out of the coach , turn'd , though in vain , towards the window .


This hasty , and unthought of encounter , created in the mind of Francisco a restless desire to know who she was , and every particular concerning her  which once known , produced so tender a pity in his heart , that it made him more than an equal sharer in all her misfortunes  and increased so much his curiosity again to see her , that he either went every day to a house of his , in that quarter of the town , called the Casino , or to hear mass , either at the Annunciation , or St. Mark 's , in hopes to procure another sight of her  but all this only served to make him more eager , for a nearer and longer view  and , in order to attain his wish , he made it known to a Spanish gentleman , named Mandragone , who in his infancy had been placed about him by his father , and who , ever attentive to the desires of his master , readily undertook the enterprize  and that it might succeed the better , engaged his wife to form an intimacy with the old woman , mother  of Bianca 's husband , instructing her in what manner she should bring it about .


In observance to his orders , she placed herself next to her at church , where , according to the custom too much in use , they soon began to enter into discourse , in which the Spanish lady having artfully brought it about , to ask if her son Pietro was married ?


She answered , Yes , madam , but very unfortunately  and then proceeded to give her the whole history of what had happened in Venice .
When she had finished , Signora Mandragona very compassionately , and with great eagerness , desired she would come one day to her house , and bring her daughter-in law with her , whom , she said , she was extremely desirous to be acquainted with  and should esteem it a happiness to do every thing in her power to serve her .


To this the old woman replied , that it would be very difficult to persuade her daughter , who never went abroad , to come with her  because , added she , our circumstances do not permit us to buy her new cloaths  and at present she has only those which she brought with her  so that she , who still retains a noble soul in all her poverty , will never bear to be exposed .
This , replied the Spaniard , I can easily find a remedy for : I will send her a suit of mine , and in those she need not fear being known .


I do not know , says the good old mother , whether she will consent without the leave of her husband : however , I will do all I can to obey you  but I fear I shall not be able to bring it about  for she chuses retirement , and is desirous to avoid the  sight of every one  so that though my son has often spoke to her to go with me to hear mass at St. Mark 's , she never could be prevailed on to do it  insomuch , that from the blessed hour in which she entered our house , to this time , she has never stirred out of it .


Try all your power , I desire , said the Spanish lady , to bring her with you  and I will send my coach to fetch you both .
Tell her too , that my friendship will be not disagreeable to her  but , on the contrary , perhaps may do her some service .
The good old woman concluded the conversation with reiterated promises , to use her utmost endeavours to make her daughter comply with the obliging request , and so they parted .


As soon as she was got home , she began to discourse with her daughter-in-law , telling her exactly what had passed between the Spaniard and herself  to which she added , this lady , my child , is wife to the chief favourite of the great duke  therefore her friendship is no indifferent thing : the intercession of her husband being the most likely means to gain you the protection or safe-conduct that you here so earnestly desired , and by which you may live in Florence free from the persecution of your relations , who , as you say , endeavour by all the methods they can use , to get you into their hands .


When the poor young creature heard her talk of the safe-conduct , though she had no inclination to go abroad any more to know , than to be known by others  yet , moved with the hopes of security , she yielded , provided her husband gave his consent , who that very night she consulted upon  it  and he , that no less than herself stood in need of protection , judging that by this lady it would be easily obtained , ( being sensible how great her husband 's interest was with the prince , ) told her , she should go  which leave having informed her mother-in-law of , she immediately sent word to Signora Mandragona , that when it was convenient for her to send her coach for them , they would be ready to attend her .
Accordingly it soon came , into which the two ladies entering , shut themselves up close , and in that manner arrived at the palace of the Spanish lady , where they were received with many caresses and great joy  and being conducted into a most magnificent and beautiful apartment , they discoursed together on several subjects  and upon that of the safe-conduct , the Spaniard did not fail to offer all the power and interest she was mistress of with her husband to obtain it .


In the midst of their conversation , entered ( as by chance , ) the master of the house , who , after having bowed to the ladies , seemed not to know who they were  and turning to his wife , asked her ?
These , said me , are persons who are in want of your interest with your master  and then pretending to inform him , in few words , of the Venetian lady 's story , which he knew better than herself , she concluded with an earnest desire , that he would intercede in her behalf to the grand duke , who from another room heard and saw every thing that passed .


All the time the Spanish lady was speaking to her husband , Bianca remained silent , with her eyes cast down , and full of tears , that pleaded more in  her favour than all the eloquence of Cicero could have done : so that Mandragone , having heard his wife out , turning to the Venetian lady , said , ` What you desire , Madam , is a very trifling service in respect of many greater I shall be proud to do you , and can without the least difficulty .
The grand duke , my master , being a prince so generous and benign , that he knows not how to deny any one , provided the request be just , much more such a lady as you , being obliged , not only by his natural inclination to goodness , but also by the laws of knighthood , to succour the distressed : be assured then , that your desires will be accomplished . '
And so saying , he took his leave , and went away .


[ To be continued . ]
39 .
ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN , CONTINUED .


 IN the reign of Commodus , or as Beda places it , in the reign of Aurelius , we are told of Lucius , the first British monarch who became a christian .
The legendary stories of him are not in the least worthy of insertion .


In the reign of Septimus Severus , the twenty-first emperor of Rome , we learn some particulars of the old Britons that are too remarkable to be passed over .
Their persons and their manners are thus described by Dion Cassius .


`` The two most considerable colonies of Britons are the Caledonians , and the Maeatae .
Under these denominations may be included the rest of the inhabitants .
The Maeatae live near the wall that divides the island into two parts  the Caledonians live beyond the wall .
Both these people inhabit the wildest mountains , where no water is to be found : they also inhabit desert plains , and grounds that are full of marshes : they have neither walls , towns , nor cultivated lands : wild fruits , and the game that they take in hunting are their choicest food : they  never taste fish , although they have great quantities * .
They pass their lives in tents , naked , and even without shoes : they live in a promiscuous manner with their wives : the children are brought up in common : their government is democratical and popular : they take great delight in plunder : they fight in chariots : their horses are small , but very swift : they are a people remarkable for velocity in running , and they stand firmly on their legs : their defensive arms are a buckler and a short spear  at the lower extremity of the spear is hung an apple made of brass , with the noise of which they terrify their enemies in battle : they also make use of daggers : they can endure hunger , cold , and every kind of hardship : they can remain for several days together in marshes without eating , and only with their heads above the water .
In their woods they feed upon roots , and the bark of trees : they have a certain kind of food † which they prepare upon all occasions , and of which , if they take a quantity no bigger than the size of a bean , they no longer feel the effects of hunger , nor of thirst .
Such is the island of Britain . ''


This must not be looked upon either as a perfect or a general representation .
It is a mixture of truth , fable , and improbabilities  and it is confined entirely to the Caledonians , and to the northern part of Britain .
The southern colonies were nearer the sun , and by that situation , were possibly of a softer nature and of a less robust constitution .
That savages were inclined to rapine and every sort  of robbery , is by no means a matter of astonishment , and scarce a subject of censure  but that the Maeatae and the Caledonii , so late as in the reign of Severus , were totally ignorant of agriculture , and every rudiment of tillage , must appear a shameful instance of laziness , if their unsettled situation , and the want of property and security in their possessions , did not plead their excuse .
Cain , the first savage upon record , was a tiller of the ground .
Noah , as soon as he found himself in possession of the earth , began to be a husbandman : but Cain had put to death his only adversary , and Noah was perfectly secure from foreign invasions .
The distressed Britons could not promise themselves an hour 's peace , from enemies and invaders .


Severus had two sons , Bassianus , sirnamed Caracalla , and Geta .
The luxurious pleasures of Rome had enervated these young men , and had rendered them , especially the eldest , unworthy of such a father .
To exercise his army , and to withdraw his sons from a scene of vice and inactivity , the emperor in the fifteenth year of his reign undertook a journey into Btitain .
He was at that time old , infirm , and much afflicted with the gout  but the strength of his spirit was far superior to the strength of his body : wherever his army marched , he appeared at the head of it , on horseback , or in his chariot , or sometimes , when his distemper was particularly violent , in a litter .
His progress into Caledonia was at the utmost hazard , and even with a considerable destruction of his troops .
The country was mountainous , woody , and sull of marshes  so that his soldiers underwent excessive  fatigue , without taking a fortress , and excessive danger , without seeing an enemy .
They had forests to cut down , mountains to level , morasses to dry up , and bridges to build .
Dio says , that in this progress , the Romans lost fifty thousand men .
No distresses could alarm , no difficulties could deter Severus : he continued his enterprize , and at last became successful .
The terms of an alliance were agreed upon and ratified  but were soon afterwards broken by the Scots : a breach of faith which Severus determined to resent , not only with rigour , but with inhumanity .
He delivered his orders to his army , in these lines from Homer :


Not one of all the race , nor sex , nor age , Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage  Ilion shall perish whole , and bury all Her babes , her insants at the breast shall fall * .
But he lived not to see his orders executed : his distemper was his most powerful enemy : it conquered him when he was almost sixty-seven years of age , and when he had reigned about eighteen years , of which the three last he passed in Britain .
He died at York , and his funeral obsequies were solemnized with a pomp and magnificence suitable to the character of Severus , and the greatness of the people of Rome .


The virtues of this emperor were great  however they were not without their alloy .
As a private man , he was covetous  as a commander , he was too susceptible of revenge .
Wherever he conquered  he ruined : a cruel disposition , which the people of Bizantium most unhappily experienced , and from which the Scots had a very narrow escape .
On the other hand , his spirit was dauntless , and superior not only to danger but fatigue : he defied lassitude , and was never wearied by the most minute enquiry into every article of his government : to his personal friends he was extremely grateful : to his personal enemies he was contemptuously disdainful : he was moderate in his expences as an emperor , but magnificent in the public buildings of every kind * : he heard causes not only with exactness , but with patience : he entered the courts of justice by break of day , and he staid there till noon : his abilities were excellent , and they were improved by learning : he had more than the tenderness of a father : he forgave Caracalla 's repeated attempts upon his life : he was careful in the education of both his sons  and at his death , he jointly bequeathed to them his empire .


Caracalla and his brother Geta , each inferior in every respect to their father , hastened from a country of barbarians to that theatre of delicacy , the court of Rome .
They concluded a peace with the Caledonians , and left our island early in the year of Christ 211 .


From henceforward it will be extremely proper to draw a veil over the particular characters of the  Roman emperors : not even to name their names , unless where the affairs of Britain require it .
The perpetual chasmi in our history happen to be so great , and the anecdotes are so few and trifling , so uncertain or indecent , that till the reign of the joint emperors Diocletianus , and Maximianus , ( sirnamed Herculeus ) in the year of Christ † 286 , a space of seventy five years , the deepest ignorance is scarce to be lamented .


The Romans had been many years immersed in the greatest confusion : their kingdom was divided against itself : Britain was still under their subjection , and was harrassed and torn to pieces by factions and divisions , which took rise within the island itself .
I mean particularly the invincible hatred that the Picts and Caledonians , who were now in a manner become one people , bore to the more southern parts of Britain .


Dioclesian , a man of low birth , had passed through many considerable offices before he was raised to the empire : he had acquired a high reputation as a soldier , and had acquitted himself with great political sagacity in the civil parts of government : his personal accomplishments seemed so suitable to the imperial dignity , that in a time of less universal warfare and confusion , he might singly have sustained the weight of government , with honour to himself , and with advantage to the commonwealth .
In the present juncture , the hands  of Briareus were scarce too many to hold the reins of the Roman empire : consequently Dioclesian shewed much prudence in gaining the assistance of a partner in the throne .
Maximian did not possess all the accomplishments of Dioclesian  but he had courage and activity , which were of greater present use to the public , than virtues more delicately illustrious , or more morally refined .


Anarchy and confusion prevailed throughout the world .
The times were such as are described before the flood , when God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth  and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart , was only evil continually The continent was filled with rebels : the sea was covered by pyrates .
In the last class were the Franks and the Saxons , two nations of Germany , who gave continual annoyance to the coasts of Normandy , Picardy , and Bretagne .
To prevent the depredations of these corsairs , and to awe and subdue the maritime robbers of every kind , Carausius was appointed commander of the Roman fleet , and was generally stationed at Boulogne : a station near enough the coast of England , to render him well acquainted with the ports , the shores , and the inhabitants of the island : he was a man of mean birth * , but of high ambition : he found himself at the head of a great fleet  and he was sufficiently wise to know the weight , power , and dignity of his office : he resolved therefore to extend the limits of his authority in such a manner ,  as to be the indisputable sovereign of the seas  and from thence , to stretch his influence over the land so effectually , as to be a nominal and acknowledged emperor of Rome : his methods in pursuance of his design were bold and profligate : he began by a breach of trust : he seized great numbers of prizes , and he took great numbers of prisoners  but he accounted to himself alone , not to his imperial masters , for the profits of his captors : he permitted Franks , Saxons , or any other pyrates to practice inciscriminately all kinds of violence upon the Gallic coasts  but in their return homewards , he intercepted their vessels , and applied to his own use the riches and plunder which those vessels contained .
Such proceedings justly alarmed the reigning emperors  and orders were given that Carausius should be immediately seized and executed : but he had foreseen his danger , and had already secured to himself such an interest among the officers of the fleet , that the whole navy was unanimously determined to obey him .


A mariner only can command mariners : the element is formed for the people , or rather , the people , like the fish , are formed for the element .
Had Carausius been a land-officer , all his schemes must have proved abortive : but from those particulars of his life which have reached our times , he appears to have been as successful as he was wicked , as bold at he was powerful , and as sit to command as he was ready to execute .


It is to him we owe the first dawnings of our naval power : a power which has since appeared in all its meridian glory .
From his conduct we  were apprized of our natural strength as an island : a strength that can not fail us , if properly exerted , to the end of the world .


Carausius had most judiciously fixed his eye upon Britain , as a sure place of refuge and security , whenever the Romans were in pursuit of him  so that as soon as he heard that he had been publicly proclaimed as a traitor , he made himself master of Boulogne , and immediately sailed from thence with his whole fleet to the British coast .


The previous steps which had been taken by Carausius , and the private correspondence which he had of late carried on with the Britons , rendered his arrival in the island not only easy but joyful .
The people came out beyond their shores to meet him , and as soon as he was landed , the Roman legion † , and the auxiliary troops that had been quartered within the kingdom , acknowledged and saluted him emperor .
Thus from a pyrate , he became at once a Caesar , and fulfilled the aphorism , wittily made by one of the Grecian corsairs to Alexander the Great , That a man with a single ship was a pyrate , but with a fleet was a great prince


A triumverate of emperors was an unusual phenomenon : but the state of the continent was so very tottering and precarious , that neither Dioclesian nor Maximian were in any degree strong enough to dismantle the atchievements of Carausius .
 Some faint preparations of resistance were attempted by Maximian  but necessity compelled the Romans soon to withdraw all hostilities , and to enter into articles of peace : by which inglorious treaty , this proclaimed pyrate was declared Pius  this maritime robber was acknowledged Felix  and this avowed usurper , was sirnamed Augustus : as appears from the medal in Camden 's Britannia , thus inscribed : IMP .
C. CARAUSIUS .
PF .
AUG. on the reverse , PAX AUG. with the letters S C. Senatus consulto , By order of the senate .


Carausius was not only a nominal emperor of Rome , but he personally established himself a real monarch of Briton : he reigned and resided in the island between six and seven years  and during that time , our ancestors were entirely freed from their obedience to the Roman empire , and were only subject to the laws and government of their own sovereign .
Curiosity would lead us to enquire what were the political institutes of a pyrate .
Some civil policy must have been regularly maintained  but no certain records of it are to be discovered .
In general , we know , that his fleet was mighty , and that his marines and sailors were drawn from all nations , and out of all professions .
In this light as in every other , his abilities must appear extraordinary , since he could keep in subjection and obedience a set of people extracted from different kingdoms , and mingled together from various and distant parts of the world .
But before he had compleated the seventh year of his sovereign jurisdiction , he was murdered by Alectus , one of the chief officers in his army .


 Alectus seized the government  but his desire of grasping the sovereignty was far greater than his power of holding it .
He maintained his usurpation only three years : nor would he have maintained it so long , if the Romans had not taken that time to consider in what manner they might recover Britain .
Flavius Constantius Chlorus , who was already emperor elect , and entitled Caesar , undertook the expedition .
As soon as he landed , he burnt his ships  a sure presage that he was resolutely determined upon conquest , or upon death .
The Britons were pleased with the nobleness of this action  and as they were much oppressed by the dominion of their present tyrant , they resorted in great numbers to the standard of Constantine , and voluntarily enlisted themselves into his service .
A battle ensued , in which Alectus was slain .
His army was mostly composed of Franks , and such of them who escaped from the furious slaughter of the Romans , retired to London , desperately determined to pillage that city , and immediately to sail away with their plunder .
But the design was frustrated by a reinforcement of Romans , who landed at London at this important crisis , and who immediately put almost every one of the Franks to the sword .
Thus was the chief city of our island delivered from rapine and destruction , and the island itself again subjected to the empire of Rome .
Constantine made an expedition into the northern parts of Britain , to establish under the Roman government , those colonies which were most mutinous , and untractable .
He staid about four years in the kingdom , and then returned to Italy , leaving behind  him the strongest impressions , and the truest veneration of his many remarkable virtues , particularly of his clemency and his justice .


As soon as Constantine arrived at Rome , Dioclesian and Maximian wearied with the weight of government , and desirous to retire from the pomp and fatigue of business , resigned the empire to him and to Galerius Armentarius .
The kingdoms which fell to the share of Constantine , were Italy , Spain , Africa , and Gaul  to which latter was always annexed the island of Britain .
Constantine preferred it to any part of the continent  and the Britons , who had already experienced many instances of his goodness and protection , were much rejoiced at his return .
He made York his seat of residence , and died there in the year 306 , in the 56th year of his age .


He was succeeded by his eldest son , Constantinus , sirnamed the Great : a passage in Eumenius , allows room to imagine , that this second Constantine was born in Britain .
The words of the panegyrist are these  O fortunata et nunc omnibus beatior terris Britannia , quae Constantinum Caesarem prima vidisti ! '
O fortunate Britain !
now happier than all other parts of the earth , since in your island Constantine Caesar was first beheld . '
His birth was undoubtedly an honour to the country in which he was born : but the actions of his life are the points most important to history .
Bishop Stillingfleet tells us from Lactantius , that one of Constantine 's first acts of government , was to secure full liberty to the Christians From this reign we may  date the open and triumphant appearance of Christianity in Britain .
All accounts till this time seem dark and intricate  the stories of king Lucius and his twenty-eight churches are fabulous and improbable .
The Britons had their Druids , the Romans had their Flamines , and each had their Pontifex Maximus .
Thus idolatry in two different forms of worship was prevalent throughout the whole island , till Constantine the Great declared himself a Christian .
He had been educated in that faith by his mother Helena , who is recorded as a saint of the first magnitude , in the ecclesiastic chronicles of the pontifical church of Rome .


The example of a sovereign will always have a powerful influence upon his people .
Constantine , by his public declaration of the christian faith , gave a mortal blow to idolatry  and the Flamines and the Druids melted away before the cross of Christ , like waxen images before the sun .


Alterations of another kind were instituted in the state .
They are at present of little consequence : changes of names , as from Propraetor to Vicarius , or different divisions of the kingdom  such as making the two provinces three , or as some say , four , and all particulars so differently told , that they must rather weary than entertain a reader .
It is in a great measure to save the many fatiguing accounts , where neither exactness nor instruction can be found , that these papers have been put together  which , if not sufficiently minute , and satisfactory to the persons into whose hands they may fall , will be always amply dilated and supplied  by a search into the many folio volumes that load all the historical shelves in England .


Many scenes of Constantine 's greatest actions were performed in France and Germany .
He entirely subdued the Franks , who were become powerful and numerous : they inhabited that part of Gaul , which from them was called Franconia , or Francia Orientalis .
He crossed the Rhine , and laid waste the country of the Bructeri  and he removed the seat of empire from Rome to Constantinople .
He died May the 22d , in the year of Christ 337 .


From the accession of Dioclesian in the year 284 , or rather from the seizure of the island by Carausius in the year 287 , to the death of Constantine in 337 , the Britons had made very great improvements in their mercantile trade , and in various arts and sciences * .
This last half century was of more benefit to the island , than all the years that had passed before .
As the strength and power of antient Rome diminished , the strength and power of Britain encreased  and the inhabitants were no longer looked upon or treated as slaves or savages , but as allies and confederates of the Roman state .


By the light that may be collected , or the reasonable inferences that may be deduced from this particular part of our history , our ancestors seem to have acquiesed , if not chearfully , at least prudently , in their present situation .
No disturbances , no insurrections arose throughout the whole reign of Constantine the Great .
It may be asked from  what motives this obedience , and submission to the Roman power , or rather let us say , to the will of Providence , could arise ?
Certainly from the flourishing condition of the Christian religion , the doctrines of which it is to be hoped were then preached and practised in some degree of purity .


The greatest dangers , or the most sudden molestations , to which the Britons were at this time liable , proceeded solely from their neighbours the Caledonians , who in the beginning of Constantine 's government , or just before the death of his father Constantine the first , had made several rapacious incursions beyond their borders .
They were soon conquered by Constantine the second , and driven back to their inmost bounds  and they remained tolerably quiet during that Emperor 's reign .


[ To be continued . ]
40 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS .


 40.1 .
CHAP .
II .
The Inconveniences of the common Methods of Education .


IT is owing to ignorance that a girl is weary of herself , and knows not how to relieve that languor by innocent employments : when she is arrived to a certain age without ever having applied to things solid , she is void of taste or esteem for them  every thing serious is sad  every thing that requires a continued attention is fatigue  the biass of pleasure , so strong in the days of youth  the example of other persons of the same age , plunged in amusement , tends to create an abhorrence of a life of regularity and diligence .
In these early days , she wants the experience and authority necessary for superintending any thing in her father 's house  she is not so much as sensible of what importance it is to apply herself that way , unless her mother has happened to take care to point out to her the several particulars .
Is she of rank ?
she is exempt from working with her hands : she will not work therefore , except for some little time in  the day , because she was heard say , she knows not why , that it is reputable for ladies to do something : but this is often mere pretence  she can not accustom herself to application .


In this situation what will she do ?
The company of a mother who watches all her motions , and is chiding her incessantly , who thinks she brings her up well in excusing nothing , who looks grave upon her , who forces her to endure her humours , who seems ever burdened with domestic cares , is what both constrains and dispirits her  she has about her a set of flattering females , who , with a view to insinuate themselves , by a base and pernicious complacency , fall in with all her fancies , and entertain her with every thing that is likely to give distaste to what is right .
Piety appears a tiresome business , a rule incompatible with every idea of pleasure .
What then will she be doing ?
Nothing serviceable  and this very inapplication grows at length into an incurable habit .
In the mean time , behold a void which there is no hopes of filling up with things solid  therefore the frivolous must take place .
In this idle state , a young lady abandons herself to laziness , the languor of the soul , and inexhaustible source of irksomeness .


She uses herself to more sleep than is confident with true health : this serves but to weaken her , to make her tender and more liable to bodily indisposition  whereas moderate sleep , with the use of regular exercise , produces liveliness , vigour , and strength , in which undoubtedly a perfect state of body consists , not to mention the advantages resulting to the mind .


 From this union of softness and idleness , with ignorance , proceeds a pernicious sensibility for diversions and public shews  nay , it excites an indiscreet and insatiable curiosity .
People versed and occupied in things of a serious nature , have in general but a moderate degree of curiosity  the knowledge they possess gives them a contempt for many things they do not know  they perceive the inutility , the ridiculousness of the most part of those things which little minds that know nothing , and have nothing to do , are eager to be acquainted with : on the contrary , the imagination of girls , ill instructed and unattentive , is perpetually wandering for want of solid nourishment  their curiosity turns with eagerness upon objects of an empty and dangerous nature .
Those of genius set themselves up for extraordinary women , and read all the books that can feed their vanity  they are passionately fond of romances , of plays , of stories , of chimerical adventures , wherewith much profane love is intermixed  they give a visionary turn to their understanding , by using it to the magnificent language of the heroes of romance  they even spoil themselves for the world , because all these fine airy sentiments , these generous passions , these adventures which the author of the romance has invented merely to please , have not the least relation to the real motives of action in the world , or to those that decide its affairs , nor yet to the false views discoverable in every undertaking .


A poor girl , full of the tender and the marvellous which have so charmed her in her studies , is  astonished not to find the world afford any real personages resembling her heroes .
She fain would live like the imaginary princesses , ever charming , ever adored , ever above all wants : alas !
what mortification for her to descend from a state of heroism to the little cares of domestic life .


Some give their curiosity greater scope , and take upon them to decide on religious subjects , though beyond their reach : some with an understanding not large enough to entertain these ideas , have others proportionate to their capacity  they are violently inquisitive concerning what is said , what is done , about a song , a piece of news , an intrigue  eager to receive letters , to read those received by others  they will be told all , they will tell all  they are vain , and vanity makes them talkative  they are light , and lightness obstructs reflection , which would often teach them to be silent .


40.2 .
CHAP .
III .
What are the first Grounds of Education .


TOwards remedying all these evils , it is of great advantage to be able to begin the education of girls from their earliest infancy .
That age which is often given up to the direction of women indiscrete , and sometimes depraved , is nevertheless the age which receives the deepest impressions , and which consequently affects their whole life .


Infants , before they can speak plain , may be prepared for instruction : some may think this is saying too much  let us only consider what a child does before it can speak : it learns a language ,  which it will shortly speak with more accuracy than scholars can the dead languages they have so painfully studied in riper years .
Now what is learning a language ?
is it not to register in the memory a great number of words ?
It is moreover , saith Augustin , to observe the sense of each of those words : an infant , saith he , amidst its noises and play , takes notice of what object each word is the sign , and this he does sometimes by observing the natural motion of bodies that come into contact , or that shew the objects spoken of  sometimes by being struck with the frequent repetition of the same words , denoting the same objects : true it is , the temperament of the brain of infants affords a wonderful facility for receiving all these images  but how great attention of mind must there be to distinguish and connect them each with its object ?


Consider next how much infants , even at that age , take to those who humour them , and dislike those who oppose them : how well they know when to cry and when to be still , in order to gain their ends : how cunning , how jealous they can be even at this time .
I have seen , saith Austin , a child full of jealousy  though not yet able to speak , he eyed with furious looks , and a pale countenance , the child that sucked along with him .
Hence then one may conclude that they have more sense at that time than is generally supposed  so that it is possible by means of words , assisted by proper tones and gestures , to give them an inclination rather to be with the decent and virtuous part of those they see , than with other indiscrete persons whom they  may be in danger of loving .
Thus by the different air of your face and tone of voice , may you represent to them with horror the behaviour of persons , they have beheld in a transport of anger , or any other disorder  and , on the other hand , assuming the softest tones and accents , and mildest looks , act over with admiration whatever passages they have seen , wherein wisdom and modesty were observable .


I do not mean to set forth these little matters for important , but yet such distant preparations are beginnings not to be neglected  and this early prevention sensibly forms them to receive their education .
If there remains any doubt of the influence of first prejudices upon men , let us but observe how lively , how affecting , the remembrance of things we loved in our childhood , remains in our advanced age : if , instead of inspiring children with vain terrors of apparitions and spirits , which by too violently shocking the brain , yet tender , serves only to weaken it  if instead of suffering them to be directed by every fancy of their nurses , to objects of their love or aversion , we were to make it our care to give them a pleasant idea of what is good , and a frightful one of whatever is evil , this prevention would in its consequence greatly facilitate their progress in all the virtues .
Quite contrary to this , they are taught to be frightned at a priest dressed in black  the word Death is never mentioned unless to scare them  they are told how dead people walk at night in horrible shapes  the consequence of all which is to make the mind weak and fearful , and prejudice it against better things .


 In the first years of infancy , no greater service can be done the child than to manage its health  to endeavour to furnish it with a mild blood , by a well chosen diet , and simple regimen  so to regulate its meals that it may eat nearly at the same hours , and as often as is requisite  but not between meals , for that is loading the stomach again before digestion is perfected  not to eat seasoned things , that will provoke him to eat more than he has occasion for , and give a disrelish for the sort of victuals most wholsome for him  in fine , not to supply him with variety , for a variety of food in succession keeps up the appetite after genuine hunger is satisfied .


Another thing of great moment is to wait till the organs are grown strong , without pressing instruction upon him  to avoid all occasions of rowzing the passions  to use him , with gentleness , to being deprived of such things as he has shewn himself too eager for , this will prevent the confidence of obtaining his desires .
- If their dispositions be in any degree good , it is possible by these means to render them docile , patient , steady , gay , and tranquil : on the contrary , where this early age is neglected , they become violent and restless all their lives , their blood heats , habits are formed in the young and tender body  the soul as yet unbiassed takes a bent to evil , a sort of second original-sin springs up , which is to prove the source of a thousand disorders , as they grow bigger .
From the moment they arrive at the age wherein reason has unfolded itself , nothing should be said but what has  a tendency to give them a love for virtue , and a contempt of all dissimulation : therefore ought we to use no feints , in order to appease and bring them to do as we would have them  for that would be to teach them a cunning they will never forget : let us as much as possible lead them on by reason .


We will take a nearer view of the state of infants , in order to see more particularly what is proper for them : the substance of their brain is very soft , it hardens day by day  as for their mind it knows nothing : this softness of brain is the reason why every thing makes strong impressions , as is the surprise of noveity why they are so apt to admire and be inquisitive .
It is also true , that the brain by its humidity and softness , together with much heat , is given to be in continual motion  whence proceeds that restlessness in children , whereby they can no more confine their minds to one object than their bodies to one place : on the other hand , infants , while yet incapable of thought or action of themselves , remark all that passes , and they speak but little , unless we use them to talk much , which we ought carefully to avoid doing  for the pleasure taken in pretty children helps frequently to spoil them .
We accustom them to venture to speak whatever comes into their thoughts , and of things of which hitherto they have no distinct comprehension : from this they acquire a lasting habit of judging with precipitation , and of talking on subjects of which they have no clear ideas  this forms a mind of a very bad stamp - this pleasure has yet another effect , a pernicious one , children perceiving that people look on them with complacency , take notice of all  they do , and are pleased to hear all they say , get a custom of believing they shall ever be the concern of the world .
During this age of applause , and unacquainted with contradiction , chimerical hopes are conceived , which open a way for infinite mistakes through life .
I have known children , who , whenever persons were talking in private , always concluded they were the subject , because they had observed it to be often so  they imagined every thing in themselves to be extraordinary and admirable : therefore they ought to be taken care of , without being suffered to know that we think much about them  shew them that it is out of kindness , and through their great need of assistance , not from any admiration of their qualities , that we are so attentive to their conduct .


Be content to form them step by step , as occasions naturally offer .
Even when it is possible to bring the understanding of a child very forward without surcharging it , we should be cautious of doing this  for the danger of vanity and presumption is always greater than the fruits of theie forc'd educations , that make so much noise .


We should be content I say , to follow and assist nature  we should not urge them to talk .
As they are very ignorant , they have a multitude of questions to ask , and do ask a great many  suffice it to answer them with precision , adding sometimes certain little comparisons , to make our explanations the easier comprehended .
If they pass judgment upon any thing without thoroughly understanding it , embarrass them by some new question , which may shew them their fault , without roughly confounding  them  and at the same time , one should let them see , not by vague commendations , but by some effectual mark of esteem , that we much more approve of their doubting and enquiring into what they are ignorant of , than of their very best decisions .


This is the true way of forming their minds , after a polite manner , with a genuine modesty , and a thorough contempt of those disputations so common among young people a little enlightened .


As soon as their reason has apparently made some progress , it will be proper to make use of that very experience to arm them against presumption .
You see , may one say , you are more a master of reason at this time than a year ago , in another year you will perceive things which at present you can not  if a year ago , you had undertaken to judge of things , which now you are well acquainted with , but then was not , you must have judged weakly .
You would have been much to blame in pretending to know what was then out of your reach  and thus it is with regard to things you are still to learn : hereafter you will discover how imperfect your present judgment is  in the mean time rely upon the judgment of those who judge now as yourself will do , when arrived at their age and experience .


The natural curiosity of children is the forerunner of instruction  fail not to profit by it , for example , in the country they see a windmill , and want to know what it is , we ought to describe to them by what method the food of man is prepared .
They  observe mowers at work  we should explain what they are doing , how corn is sown , and how it encreases upon the ground .
In the city they behold shops , where many arts are carried on , and various sorts of merchandise sold : we ought never to think their questions troublesome  they are overtures which nature makes for the readier admission of instruction : shew you take a pleasure in them , and by this means you will insensibly teach them , how every thing is prepared that is useful for man , and upon which commerce is founded .


By degrees , and without making a study of it , they will come to understand the best manner of executing things of use , and the true value of each , which is the sure ground of oeconomy .
This knowledge , which no one ought to despise , because it is very fit people should not be deceived in their expences , is more especially necessary for young women .


[ To be continued . ]
41 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 ' I Would die , said I , rather than displease you  and I will die if you have no pity on me .
What can I do ?
It is easier for me to take away my own life , than to forget Adelaida .
Shall I be perjured , and violate the vows I have made to her ?
vows which have engaged her early affections .
Shall I abandon her when I know I have gained her heart ?
Oh !
my dear mother , do not wish your son to become the basest of men . '


I then related to her all that had passed between us .
` She loves you , said I , and you , I am sure , will not be able to help loving her .
She has your sweetness , your candour , your generosity .
How is it possible for me to cease loving her ? '


` But what do you propose by indulging this passion , said my mother ?
Your father is resolved to have you marry another , and commands you to retire into the country till everything is settled .
 It is absolutely necessary that you should appear willing to obey him , unless you mean to be my death .
He expects you will depart to-morrow under the conduct of a person in whom he has great confidence .
Absence will do more for you than you can yet imagine  but be that as it will , do not irritate Monsieur de Comminge still more by your refusal : ask for time , and I will do every thing in my power to accomplish your wishes .
Your father 's anger can not last always : he will relent , and you may be yet happy  but you have been greatly to blame in burning the writings .
He is persuaded that you sacrificed them to madame de Lussan , who ordered her daughter to require that proof of your love . '


` Oh heavens !
cried I , is it possible that my father can be so unjust ?
Both madame de Lussan and Adelaida are ignorant of what I have done  and I am very sure , had they suspected my intention , they would have used all their power over me to have prevented it . '


My mother and I afterwards took measures to convey letters to each other , and , encouraged by her indulgence , I durst presume to intreat she would transmit to me those of Adelaida , who was soon to be at Bourdeaux .
My mother had the goodness to promise she would gratify me  but at the same time  insisted , that if I found Adelaida had altered her sentiments , I should submit to what my father required of me .
We spent great part of the night in this conversation  and as soon as day appeared my conductor came to inform me that it was time to set on horseback .


 The estate where I was to pass the time of my banishment lay in the mountains , some leagues from Bagniers  so that we took the same road I had so lately passed through .
The second day of our journey we came early in the evening to the village where we were to lie .
While supper was preparing I went to take a walk along the great road , and at a distance saw a coach which drove very fast , and when it came within a few paces of me overturned .
My heart , by its throbbing , acquainted me with the part I had in this accident .
I eagerly flew towards the coach  two men on horseback , who attended it , alighted and joined me , to assist the persons who were within .
It will be easily guessed that those persons were Adelaida and her mother  in effect it was they .
Adelaida was very much hurt in one of her feet  but the joy at seeing me seemed to leave her no sense of her pain .


What pleasure did I taste that happy moment !
After so many afflictions , and at the distance of so many years , it is still present to my remembrance .
Adelaida not being able to walk , I took her in my arms to carry her to the inn  her charming arms were thrown round my neck , and one of her hands touched my mouth .
I was in a transport that scarce suffered me to breathe .


Adelaida observed it , her delicacy was alarmed , she made a motion to disingage herself from my arms .
Alas !
how little did she know the excess of my love : I was too much transported with my present happiness to think there was any beyond it .


` Set me down , said she to me , in a low and trembling voice  I believe I am able to walk . '


 ` What , replied I , are you so cruel as to envy me the only good fortune I shall perhaps ever enjoy . '
I prest her hand tenderly to my bosom as I pronounced these words .
Adelaida was silent , and a false step which I made on purpose , obliged her to resume her first attitude .


The inn was at so little distance , that I was soon forced to part with my beauteous burden .
I carried her into a room , and laid her on a bed  while their attendants did the same with her mother , who was much more hurt than Adelaida .
Every one being busy about madame de Lussan , I had time to acquaint Adelaida with part of what had passed between my father and me .
I supprest the article of the burnt writings .
I knew not whether I most wished that me should be ignorant of it , or know it from another person  it was in some degree imposing upon her the necessity of loving me , and I was desirous of owing all to her own heart .
I durst not describe my father to her such as he really was .
Adelaida was strictly virtuous  and I was sensible , that to resign herself to the inclinations she felt for me , it was necessary that she should hope we might be one day united .
I seemed to have great dependance upon my mother 's tenderness for me , and the favourable disposition she was in towards us .
I intreated Adelaida to see her .


` Speak to my mother , said she  she knows your sentiments , I have acknowledged mine to her .
I found that her authority was necessary to give me strength to combat them if I should be obliged to it , or to justify me for resigning myself up to them without scruple .
She will use her  utmost endeavours to prevail upon my father to propose an accommodation , and to engage the interposition of our common relations for that purpose . '


The tranquillity with which Adelaida rested upon these hopes made me feel my misfortune more sensibly .
` What if our fathers should be inexorable , said I to her , pressing her hand , will not you have compassion on a miserable wretch who adores you ? '


' I will do all that I can , answered she , to regulate my inclinations by my duty  but I feel that I shall be wretched , if that duty is against you . '


The persons who had been employed about Madame de Lussan then approaching her daughter , our discourse was interrupted .
I went to the bed-side of the mother  she received me kindly , and assured me she would use every method in her power to reconcile our families .
I then went out of their chamber to leave them at liberty to take some repose .
My conductor , who waited for me in my own apartment , had made no enquiry about these new guests  so that I had an opportunity of being a few moments with Adelaida before I proceeded on my journey .


I entered her chamber in a condition easier to be imagined than described .
I dreaded that this was the last time I should see her .
I approached the mother first , my grief pleaded for me , and she was so moved with it , that she expressed herself in still kinder terms than she had done the evening before .
Adelaida was at another end of the room  I went  to her trembling : `` I leave you my dear Adelaida , '' said I. Two or three times I repeated the same words : my tears , which I could not restrain , spoke the rest .
She wept likewise .


' I shew you my whole heart , said she - I do not wish to disguise it from you  you deserve my tenderness .
I know not what will be our fate  but I am resolved that my parents shall dispose of mine . '


` And why , replied I , should we subject ourselves to the tyranny of our parents ?
let us leave them to hate each other , if they will do it  and let us fly to some distant corner of the world , and be happy in our mutual tenderness , which we may make a superior duty to what we owe them . '


` Never let me hear such a proposal from you again , said she : give me not cause to repent of the sentiments I have entertained for you  my love may make me unhappy , but it shall never make me criminal .
Adieu , added she , giving me her hand , it is by our constancy and virtue that we ought to endeavour to triumph over our misfortunes , but whatever happens , let us resolve to do nothing which may lessen our esteem for each other . '


While she spoke , I killed the dear hand she had given me : I bathed it with my tears . '
I must always love you , replied I  death , if I can not be yours , will free me from my misery . '


My heart was so oppress'd with anguish , that I could with difficulty utter these few words .
I hastily quitted the room , and mounting my horse , arrived  at the place where we were to dine , without having one moment ceased to weep .
I gave free course to my tears .
I found a kind of sweetness in thus indulging my grief .
When the heart is truly affected , it takes pleasure in every thing that discovers to itself its own sensibility .


The remainder of our journey passed as the beginning : I had scarce uttered a word during the whole time .
On the third day we arrived at a castle built near the Pyrenees  nothing was to be seen about it but pines and Cyprus trees , steep rocks , and horrid precipices  and nothing heard but the noise of torrents rushing with violence down those frightful declivities .


This savage dwelling pleased me , because it soothed my melancholy .
I passed whole days in the woods  and when I returned , unloaded my sad heart in letters to my beloved Adelaida .
This was my only employment , and my only pleasure .
I will give them to her one day , thought I : she shall see by them how I have passed the time in her absence .
I sometimes received letters from my mother , in one of which she gave me hopes .
Alas !
that was the only happy moment I ever enjoyed : she informed me that all our relations were labouring to reconcile our families , and that there was room to believe they would succeed .


After this I received no more letters for six weeks  how tedious were those days of doubt and anxiety !
every morning I went into the road through which the messengers passed , and never returned till it was late in the evening : lingering  till hope and expectation had nothing left to feed upon , and always returned more wretched than when I first set out .
At length I saw a man at a distance , riding towards the castle .
I did not doubt but he was a messenger to me , and , instead of that eager impatience I had felt a moment before , I was now seized with apprehension and dread .
I durst not advance to meet him  something which I could not account for , restrained me .
Uncertainty , which had hitherto appeared so tormenting , seemed now a good which I feared to lose .


My heart did not deceive me .
This man brought me letters from my mother , in which she informed me , that my father would listen to no proposals for an accommodation  and , to compleat my miseries , had resolved upon a marriage between me and a daughter of the house of Foix : that the nuptials were to be celebrated in the castle where I then was  and that my father would in a few days come himself to prepare me for what he desired of me .


You will easily judge I did not balance a moment about the resolution I was to take .
I waited for my father 's arrival with tranquility enough .
My grief was soothed with the reflection , that I was able to make another sacrifice to Adelaida : I was convinced she loved me : I loved her too much to doubt it .
True love is always full of confidence .


My mother , who had so many reasons for wishing to see me disengaged from Adelaida , had never in any of her letters given me the least cause to  suspect she was changed  this compleated my security .
How greatly did the constancy of my Adelaida heighten the ardor of my passion !
During the three days which elapsed before the arrival of my father , my imagination was wholly employed on the new proof I was shortly to give Adelaida of my passion .
This idea , notwithstanding my miserable situation , gave me sensations little different from joy .


[ To be continued . ]
42 .
PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONTINUED .


 42.1 .
Of the methods NATURE has furnished various ANIMALS withal , to elude the attacks of , and prevent pursuits from , their enemies .


IN our last Number we gave some account of a remarkable artifice , made use of by a very small animal , to entrap and get into his power such creatures as are his proper prey  and which , by being provided either with wings , or with a superior share of agility , would be otherwise out of the reach of his attacks .
Were we to proceed in relating the various contrivances peculiar to each several species of animals for the discovering , ensnaring , and overcoming their respective enemies , or catching their destined prey , we should greatly encroach on the limits of the plan we have determined to proceed on , of not dwelling too long on any one subject .
Various , therefore as they are , and entertaining and curious as the knowledge of them may be , we shall refer  an account of them to some future periods , in which they may , perhaps , find place with a greater degree of variety  and proceed in this to relate the opposite gift of nature , who , provident and careful of all her works , has , together with every convenience for the procuring of sustenance , and for the attacking of those enemies which stand in some rank of equality , also furnished almost every creature with the means of either eluding the search , or escaping from the seizure of such as are more powerful .


Some of these methods are general , others particular .
The more general means by which different animals elude the search of their powerful and destructive enemies , are the several cells , caverns , nests , and covertures , which nature has taught the different genera of them to find out , and to repair to for shelter , as well against their destroyers , as against the several inclemencies and dangers of the weather .
The general assistances which they meet with for escaping from imminent danger , when attacked , is some peculiar degree of agility , either in running , leaping , flying , or swimming  for which several purposes certain classes of animals are found to be furnished with a particular apparatus and mechanism , such as most justly demand our admiration , and bear the strongest testimony to Almighty wisdom .
Yet these are still properties in common to numbers , even of different species , bearing only some trivial differences peculiar to individuals  but there are other methods , in which the Creator has thought proper to distinguish his care for the preservation of his creatures , and which are some of them limited to particular genera  of animals , and others absolutely confined to separate individuals .


Of this sort , there is none that we find more frequent than the being endowed with a property of assuming , either in colour or form , the general appearance of surrounding objects , in such manner , that being blended and confused with them , a distant eye is rendered incapable of discerning them : and this property we ever find more or less bestowed on those creatures whose natural manner of living obliges them to range abroad for their food in places devoid of shelter  and therefore become the more continually exposed to the attacks of their adversaries .


Thus do we find in Greenland , Nova Zembla , and the colder countries within the polar circles , that in the winter season , when the whole region is covered with indissoluble snow , the hares , rabbits , foxes , c. who , by that means are deprived of their accustomed shelter , and would therefore become an easy prey to the larger animals , change the dark colours , which their summer coats are stained with , into a snowy whiteness  whereby they not only are undiscoverable at any considerable distance , even though lying on the open ground , but also , if by chance they should be seen , their natural swiftness can not but perfectly avail them in their flight , over large plains , in which , from the resemblance of their own colour with that of the surrounding country , their figure is very quickly as much lost therein , as a drop of water falling into the vast expanse of ocean .


 Animals of the serpent , frog , and lizard kind , whose residence is ever amongst grass , corn , and herbage , have for the most part the basis of their cloathing of a green colour .
When they are spotted or striped , the generality of those marks are either formed with yellow , which is the next most universal colour in nature , especially amongst the field flowers , or else with various shades of brown , approaching to the representation of earth , and of the roots and barks of trees .
By this means they easily elude the sight and search of the birds and other animals , which would otherwise destroy them in great quantities , unarmed as they are , and incapable of defending themselves when attacked .


The so much admired cameleon , whose food being small insects , which are borne about in the summer air , not the air itself , as it was formerly imagined , renders it necessary that he should ever remain in places unsheltered and open to every view , is endued with a power of assuming the colour of whatever he happens to lie upon .
But here let us not lead our fair readers into the vulgar error of imagining he is able to change the colour from one to another , any more than in appearance .
In short , what little tinct he really has , which is , indeed very little , is like others of the lizard class , greenish , and consequently not much different from that of the objects amongst which he has the most frequent necessity to take up his station  but besides this , the great transparency of his body , through which the colour of whatever he happens to lie upon , is easily discernible , is the greatest security he has  and by making it almost impossible  for him to be distinguished , has given rise to the opinion , that he assumes a colour , which , in reality , he only suffers to be seen .


Caterpillars , also , which are the natural food of many kinds of birds , are for the most part found to partake of the colours of those plants which they feed on and inhabit .
Nay , there is one particular class of them , well known to the fly-fancier by the name of Loopers , which fixing themselves to the barks of certain branches of trees , and stretching out their bodies therefrom perfectly strait , and in a certain oblique direction , assume so exactly in their colour , form , and rugged contexture , the appearance of the natural sprigs of those branches , that a very discerning eye may look attentively on a branch where hundreds of them are affixed , and if uninformed of their property , may chance not to discover one .


There is an insect , however , very frequent in the West Indies , which is still more extraordinarily sheltered under a feigned appearance .
He is of the locust , or rather of the mantis kind .
His body is long , slender , and knobbed  of a brown colour , and therefore bears a very near resemblance to a broken sprig of wood : but besides this , he has two very large and long wings , which are so formed both as to shape , colour , and markings , that they exactly represent two dried leaves in the fall of autumn , embrowned by the heat of the sun , withered up , and curled about the edges  and , from an intire deficiency of all juices and moisture , every minutest ramification of the fibrous texture , rendered distinctly visible .
It is called the Walking  Leaf , a name that indeed most truly expresses its figure , which is so amazingly like an outcast of the season , that excepting when he moves , he can never attract the notice of any eye whatsoever .


This kind of protection from a resemblance to external objects , extends even so far as into the earth and water .
Worms , grubs , and other insects , whose habitation is under ground , yet are liable to be frequently disturbed by the plough or spade , and brought to the view of their destroyers , are for the most part found to be of a colour nearly resembling the clods of earth amongst which they lie less discernible than they would be , were they of a red , blue , green , or any other bright colour , which would form a more apparent contrast to the surrounding glebe .
Many of the animals whose first state of life is in the waters , and who would therefore be a ready prey to the fishes who inhabit them , are taught by the universal mistress nature a means of forming to themselves a crustaceous covering , which so nearly resembles the small sprigs , pieces of dead bark , straws , c. that are every where to be found at the bottom of brooks and rivers , that they lie secure and unnoticed by those animals , who would be tempted by a figure more resembling life , to seize on and devour them .
Nay , even the fish themselves frequently partake so much of the colours of the mosses , herbage , c. amongst which they harbour , that they are not easily to be distinguished , excepting when in motion .


Such are the means wherewith kind Providence has furnished different creatures to elude almost the strictest search , and thereby to avoid the being attacked .
 Yet , as for the wisest purposes , the whole animal kingdom seems in one perpetual state of warfare within itself , it was also necessary , that certain means of escape should be provided to have recourse to , in case the methods of prevention should prove ineffectual .
Of these , every animal is more or less instructed , and endued with powers for relieving itself , even in the height of the most imminent danger , and when almost in the jaws of its most rapacious enemy .


Of these , some are by very swift and sudden flight  some by the help of a peculiar springiness of limbs , which in high , and unexpected leaps , conveys them instantly out of the reach , or at least out of the ken of their adversary .
Others , as the mole , the ferret , the grillotalpa , c. by an expert rapidity in digging into the bowels of the earth , and at the same time closing up the passage , thro ' which they have forced their way : whilst others , lastly , find means to escape , by taking refuge in an element , whereinto their adversaries dare not , or can not follow them , which is the case with the whole race of amphibious animals .


Some kinds of creatures there are , especially amongst the insect tribe , who , having neither strength to resist , nor agility to fly , deceive their enemies by assuming the appearance of death .
To this stratagem , many of the smaller species of the beetle , or scarabeus class , have immediate resource on the least approach of danger , as any one may easily be convinced , by touching them with a stick , or taking them into the hand  when they instantly turn on their backs , contract all their limbs together ,  Figure 3 .
The CALAMARY or InkFish .
 and lie for a time under the appearance of a little inanimate grain , which they do not shake off , till by the stillness of every thing round them , they are persuaded they can run no risk by reassuming the signs of life  which they do with as much caution and gradual deliberation , as they put on the image of death with presence of mind and ready precipitation .
Many other devices of somewhat a similar nature , are made use of by various creatures , for the purposes above-mentioned  the minutiae of which it would be too tedious here to enter into .
But I think we can not with any propriety close this article , without taking notice of two animals , which possess qualities so eminently singular for repelling and stopping the career of their pursuers , that it is rather more wonderful that they should ever be taken at all , than that the knowledge of them and their properties should be so little known , as in general they are .


The first of these that I shall mention , is the calamary , or ink fish .
This animal , whose singularity of figure has induced me to make it the subject of the copper-plate annexed to this number , is found in great abundance on the coast of the warmer parts of Europe .
He is of the polypus class , and frequently lies on the surface of the water , with the arms which are represented in the figure spread out for the catching of such fish as may happen to come in his way , and which by the means of numberless suckers of a most curious mechanism that are arranged along the arms , are not only secured from escaping him , if once they come within  his touch , but are also impoisoned by it in such a manner , that if they by dint of struggling , should force themselves from his hold , they would die almost immediately .
Thus arm'd , therefore , and provided for attack , he frequently seizes a fish much larger than himself , whose juices he sates himself with , abandoning the remainder to the waves .


There are , however , some kinds of fish to whom he in his turn is a proper prey  whose bulk is too much for him to attack , and their activity too great to fly from .
For his security then , from these powerful enemies , he is furnished with two advantageous properties  the first is a very clear and extensive sight , from a pair of large globular and projecting eyes , which are so placed as to command all objects that can advance from any part round him  the second , and that which is more immediately peculiar to himself , is a certain black fluid , which on the approach of an enemy he ejects from his body in large quantities , and which muddying the water for a very considerable space round him , not only conceals the spot of his immediate residence , but also deters his antagonist from pursuing him .
So careful has nature been for the preservation of every one of her creatures however inconsiderable or apparently useless !


The other instance of providential care , wherewith I shall at present close this department of philosophy , is that of the torpedo , or cramp-fish , a creature which tho ' a very slow swimmer , and in its construction divested of all means of preventing or avoiding any attack made on it  yet is furnished  with a method of rendering such attacks fruitless , and , as it were by a stroke of magic , reducing its enemy to a state of inactivity and impotence .
In short , the skin of this animal is formed of a texture so elastic and powerful , that on the very slightest touch of it , even with the end of a stick , it numbs and destroys the sense of feeling in the same manner as a fit of the cramp would do , enervating the whole frame , and producing such an effect as would , was the fact not so well known , appear incredible .
What then must be the consequence to any animal who should eagerly seize on it , with a design of making it his prey ?
What , but a total deprivation of all sense , for at least time sufficient to enable the destined victim to make his escape , and save himself from the threatening jaws of destruction !


These are some few , among numberless instances , of the infinite wisdom of the great first cause in his works of creation , who has thus contrived it so , that although it is necessary the different species of animals should mutually prey on one another , and that each should find himself surrounded with a host of professed as well as insidious enemies , yet that every kind should be supplied , and that with a variety of invention which nothing less than infinite wisdom could form , with the methods for preventing its race from utter extirpation , and preserving the just and proper balance which the use and the conveniency of man , and often some hidden cause beyond the comprehension of his understanding , require to be maintained amongst the greater and the smaller wheels of this great machine the universe .


43 .
THE LADY 's GEOGRAPHY CONTINUED .


 43.1 .
Of the MANNERS and CUSTOMS of the Inhabitants of AMBOYNA .


AFTER having given some account of the habits , arms , and festivals of these people , it will be proper to give a slight description of those diversions wherewith the feasts we have mentioned constantly conclude , which are those of music , singing , and dancing .


Of their instruments of music , the principal one is the Gongue : this is of very great use throughout the Indies , but is most highly esteemed by the Amboynians , who ever preserve it amongst their most valuable effects .
Of these there are two sorts , the one large , the other small .
Of the latter sort , they arrange six or seven in a row on a bench , which are struck alternately with two sticks covered over with linen cloth .
This instrument , which they call Tataboang , serves by way of accompanyment to the former , but is played much quicker , though ever in cadence therewith .


The Fifa keeps the same time as the larger Gongue , and is properly a drum .
It is distinguished from the Rabana by being of a cylindrical figure ,  Figure 4 .
Divers Instruments of Music made use of by illegible Inhabitants of AMBOYNA with their Method of Playing the illegibleeeillegible -  whereas the other is flat .
Besides which , the manner of touching them is different .
There is also a third sort , which resembles a little barrel , slung by a string round the neck , and is covered with parchment at both ends , whereas the others are only covered at top .
The figure of these instruments together , with the manner of using them may be seen in a plate , annexed to Numb .
III .
of this work .
Their dances keep time to the sound of these instruments , with an exactness , and a degree of agility , that is really surprising .
Their prodigious leaps , their supple turns , and the extraordinary windings and changes of posture , which they bring their joints to execute , surpass all description or idea .
As soon as the feast is over , a man appears drest in the manner of the Alfourians or mountaineers , covered with the branches and leaves of trees , and armed with a large buckler , a sabre or javelin , and a helmet , surmounted with a large plume of feathers of the bird of paradise .
In this singular equipage , he cries out , for some moments in the air , sometimes alone , and sometimes accompanied by a second of the same class , casting around him looks of the utmost fury and perturbation , and making the most terrible efforts , as if he would beat down the whole world under his blows .


This exercise , which they express by the word Tsjakali , is constantly succeeded by their common dances , which each sex severally executes by two or four together , with great gracefulness and address : some holding a naked poignard in each hand , and  sometimes one or two silk handkerchiefs , which they wave around them  others have a fine scarf or sash of the same , or of chintz , which is fastened to the left shoulder , and one end of which trails on the ground .
The men wear besides a turban on the head  and the women decorate their hair with flowers .
Their dancers are always young unmarried people : when they begin , and when they retire , they salute the company by joining their hands over their heads : but on these occasions it is the custom always to make them a present of certain habits of silk , or some rich stuff , in which some one of the spectators runs to enwrap their bodies , whilst they are yet dancing , by the way of intreating them as it were not to fatigue themselves any longer  and this is one of the expences by which the Amboynians ruin themselves .


The men as well as the women usually accompany these dances with their voices .
These songs , which serve as a kind of annals , for want of better historians , contain , among other things , the ancient events of their country  the praises of their heroes  and the glorious deeds of their ancestors .
And this vocal and instrumental music is not only made use of in their great feasts , and on other particular occasions , but also on board their boats and barges , in which the rowers keep the most perfect time to the instruments and voices .


Notes * .
Anne le Fevre , wife of monsieur Dacier .
She translated Florus , Terence , and Homer , and added very learned notes of her own .
† .
Gabriella Emilia de Bréteuil , marchioness du Ch , telet .
She explained Leibnitz , translated Newton , and commented upon him .
We have philosophical institutions of hers , which prove the force of her wonderful genius to all who have learning enough to render them capable of judging of it .
á .
Antoinette Bourignon , a celebrated visionary , who purchased the island of Nordstrand , to establish a sect of mysticks there .
She composed nineteen large volumes , and wasted a very considerable fortune by her attempts to propagate her extravagant dreams .
ß .
The virgin of Venice , an old woman , who , supported by Postel , called herself the Messiah of women .
* .
Madame Guyon , a lady of great beauty and fortune , who in the reign of Louis XIV .
preached the doctrine of pure love , and renewed the extravagances of quietism .
† .
Ninon Lenclos , a woman of gallantry in the last age .
* .
It was by her wit that the Dutchess of Valentinois charmed three successive monarchs , and preserved her influence to an extreme old age .
It was to their wit that Madame de Vérac , Madam Tencin , and several other ladies owed their power of charming when their youth was fled .
The graces of a fine understanding , improved by study , never grow old .
* .
Sully 's Memoirs , Vol .
I. page 343 , the Quarto Edition .
* .
Sully 's Memoirs , Vol .
I. page 383 , Quarto .
* .
Sully 's memoirs , vol .
I. p. 40 .
* .
Sully 's Memoirs , Vol .
I. Page 462 , Quarto .
* .
She was daughter to Charles , Earl of Lennox , who was grandson to Margaret queen of Scotland , eldest sister to Henry VIII .
Her cousin-german , James VI .
king of Scotland , having in 1602 been declared lawful heir to Queen Elizabeth , the following year a conspiracy was formed in her favour , and she died in 1616 , a prisoner in the tower of London .
* .
Louisa Margaret of Lorrain : she was a very beautiful princess .
It was proposed , at the time of the siege of Paris , for her to marry Henry IV .
in order to unite the two parties .
The sarcastical lampoons of that time charge her with carrying on an intrigue with the duke of Bellegarde , master of the horse  and what Henry says here of poulets is taken from a song that was made against mademoiselle de Guise .
† .
The jest turns upon the word poulet , which in French signifies either a chicken or a love-letter .
* .
Sebastian Zamet , a private gentlemen of immense fortune .
He was an Italian , and a native of Lucca , but got himself naturalized in 1581 .
He desired the notary who drew up his daughter 's contract of marriage , to stile him lord of seventeen hundred thousand crowns .
Henry IV .
loved him for his wit and facetious humour , and chose his house for collations and parties of pleasure .
* .
Le Grain tells us , that the king made all his court go into mourning for the Dutchess of Beaufort  he himself was dressed in black the first eight days , and afterwards in violet .
* .
Some authors place the invasion in the year 698 , particularly Lydiat in his series summorum magistratum Romanorum Let the learned chronologists settle the point .
* .
The Portus Itius was near Bologne .
The particular spot is pointed out , but with no absolute certainty .
* .
Caesar , in his Commentaries , has not told us the exact month of his embarkation  but we may be certain , that it was earlier in the summer than his first invasion .
† .
A legion consisted of ten companies , or cohorts .
The number of men were uncertain : sometimes more , sometimes less .
á .
Caesar very particularly describes their manner of fighting , ( ex essedis ) from their chariots : and says , that by continual use they were arrived at such perfection in the management of those vehicles , that they could stop their horses even upon a steep descent : they could run upon the pole , and throw themselves out , or into their chariots , with the utmost nimbleness .
Caesar confesses , that at the first sight of this new method of fighting , the Romans were surprised , or rather astonished .
* .
The territories of Cassivellaunus were extensive : they extended , says Caesar , `` Fourscore miles into the island . ''
Cassivellaunus was originally the king of the Cassi , and became sovereign of the Trinobantes , by treacherously slaying their king Imanuentius .
* .
A little above Walton in Surry .
The translator of Rapin says , that these stakes are now to be seen in the river at low water  and one of them was pulled up , with great difficulty , some years ago .
They are of oak , and by having lain so long in the water ( above eighteen centuries ) are become very hard and very black .
* .
Mandubratius , upon the death of his father , had fled into Gaul to Caesar , who received him with great kindness .
† .
Principes .
* .
Cassivelaunus having been appointed in a solemn assembly of the British princes , the captain general in chief , or the Agamemnon of the English forces , he was empowered to make such offers as he thought proper , in the name of himself , and of the whole people of Britain .
* .
Serves iterum Caesarum in ultimos , Orbis Britannos .
Horat .
Lib .
i. Ode 35 .
` Preserve Caesar , who is going against the Britons , those inhabitants of the farthest part of the world . '


* .
Malden in Essex .
† .
The Trinobantes , inhabitants of Hertfordshire , Essex , and Middlesex .
The Cantii , inhabitants of Kent .
The Regni , inhabitants of Sussex and Surry .
The Atrebates , inhabitants of Berkshire .
* .
Lord Keeper Henley .
* .
His name was William Johnson  he had been many years in the family .
* .
The attorney and sollicitor general  the former had opened the nature of the evidence , the latter concluded it .
* .
Charles , earl Cornwallis .
* .
The isle of Anglesey , in North Wales .
* .
The Britons were so confident of victory , that they carried with them their wives , in waggons , which were plated on the outward borders of the field .
* .
Vespasian died in about a twelvemonth after he had appointed Agricola governor of Britain .
Titus did only out-live his father three years , and was succeeded by his brother Domitian .
* .
A. U. C. 830 .
* .
The inhabitants now consisted not only of Druids , but of the Ordovices , and other neighbouring colonies , who , from time to time , had escaped from the pursuit of the Romans , and had taken refuge within the island .
* .
A Frith signifies the mouth of a river .
á .
The Jay is one of the chief rivers in Scotland : it issues out of Loch Jay in Broadalbin , and running south-west , sails into the sea at Dundee .
* .
Mountains , which run from east to west , from near Aberdeen to Cowal in Argyleshire .
* .
The adopted son and successior of Trajan .
He was by birth a Spaniard , and began his reign in the 118th year of the christian Aera .
* .
In their fens .
† .
A food unknown to their posterity .
* .
Pope 's Iliad , b. 6 .
v. 71 .
* .
While he was in England he is said to have built a wall across the kingdom  but the antiquaries differ so widely in their accounts of the situation , materials , and length of it , and some of them are so doubtful of its existence , that it seems rather to have been the wall of Adrian repaired , than any new wall raised by Severus .
† .
Dioclesian was declared emperor , September 17th .
A. D. 284  but the historians generally agree that he did not appoint Maximian as his partner in the empire till the year 286 .
* .
He was a Menapian .
The Menapii were a people of the Lower Germany .
† .
One Roman legion only , at this time , was quartered in Britain .
No more probably could be spared from the continent , which had been of late years in so rebellious , distressful , and unsettled a state .
* .
Vide Paneg .
Maximian .


VOL .
II .


LONDON , Printed for J. NEWBERY , in St. Paul 's Churchyard  and J. COOTE , in Pater-noster Row


 THE LADY 'S MUSEUM .


1 .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER VI . ]


MADAM ,


I Take up my pen once more to give you the remainder of my sad story  and am pleased to find that many of your female readers express a just abhorrence of the character of Belinda .
I feel my heart too much affected with the remembrance of the sorrows she occasioned me , to enter into a detail of all her little artifices to ensnare the heart of my husband : there was an endless variety in her temper , which kept his attention perpetually awake , and prevended all satiety  and she had so perfect a command of her features , that whatever disposition  she pleased to assume , her countenance expressed it as naturally as if she really felt it .


My husband grew every day more fond of the company of one who always presented a new face to him , sometimes airy and sparkling , sometimes tender and melancholy , now haughty and imperious , then softened into a gentle languishment .
While I was ignorant of her insidious design , I diverted myself with her fantastic behaviour  but Alcander now discovered such an extreme attachment to her , that I began to grow uneasy .
I was afraid of examining into the nature of my own doubts and fears  the suspicion that my Alcander was grown indifferent to me , and loved another , was something so new , so strange , so shocking to my heart , that I rejected it with horror  yet spite of myself I sought the melancholy conviction , and found it in his looks , his words , and every circumstance of his behaviour .


My first thought was to expostulate with him upon his change  but my pride opposed this , and reason told me that upbraidings would not recal his affections : I resolved , therefore to seem ignorant of my misfortune , and flattering myself that when my dangerous guest had left me , the impression she had made would be removed , I patiently waited for her departure .


When she told me of her intention to return to London in a day or two , my heart bounded with joy , and I scorned to dissemble so far as to desire her to stay any longer  but what became of me !
when turning my eyes upon Alcander , I saw him pale as death , and unable to utter a word , so greatly  was he affected with the thoughts of parting .
At length recovering himself , he solicited her to stay some time longer , with such beseeching looks , and such earnestness of intreaty , that finding myself unable to support this scene , I rose up , and complaining of a sudden indisposition , retired to my chamber .


My husband followed me immediately  and I , eager to admit every thought that could give me comfort , considered this as an effect of his tenderness and concern for me  but I was soon undeceived : he came only to reprove me for my incivility to my guest , in not pressing her to stay longer  and he had the cruelty to desire I would use my undeavours to keep her with us .


I answered nothing , but burst into tears .
Alcander , who doubtless knew the cause , and dreaded an explanation , left the room without taking any notice of my disorder .
Oh , how unlike was this to his former behaviour !
I thought I should have died with grief  but pride and resentment came to my aid : I resolved not to add to Belinda 's triumph , by suffering my uneasiness to appear .
I therefore composed my looks  and when she came with an affected solicitude to enquire after my health , she found me in appearance easy and tranquil .


My husband finding me fully determined not to hinder Belinda from leaving us , declared his intention to go to London , and coldly asked me if it would be agreeable to me ?
I replied , that I would certainly accompany him  so we all set out together .
Belinda and I parted with great indifference  on both sides .
I dropt all intercourse with her  and this put my husband into so bad a humour , that he treated me with the most mortifying neglect .


My father was dead : my mother , who loved me tenderly , and was attentive to the behaviour of my husband , soon perceived the estrangement of his affections .
In her bosom I poured out all my sorrows , and regulated my conduct by her prudence : she recommended to me patience and silence  and above all , conjured me to keep the fatal secret from my brother  his temper was rash and impetuous  he was extremely fond of me , and every thing was to be dreaded from his resentment , if my husband 's injurious treatment ever came to his knowledge .
This however it was impossible to prevent  my unhappy situation became generally known , so open was Alcander in his neglect of me , and his gallantries to Belinda .


My brother expostulated with him upon his behaviour : the event was what my mother and I had often apprehended  they fought , Alcander was wounded  he was brought home in a chair , in a very weak condition .
I swooned at the sight of him , and when I recovered I found myself in my mother 's arms : she informed me my brother was not hurt , and that Alcander 's surgeons had assured her he was not in the least danger .
The horrors I had laboured under were relieved by this news , but my peace was lost for ever .
I attended my husband constantly during his illness , which was but of short continuance  he received my cares with a coldness that pierced me to the  heart  and when he was so far recovered as to be able to go into the country , he gave me to understand that he would dispense with my company there .


I was beginning to expostulate with him  but he stopped my mouth , by telling me with a determined air , that he never could pardon me for having exposed him to the insult he had received from my brother  that I had made it impossible for him to alter his conduct , since the world would construe it into a base fear of my brother : he concluded , with advising me to go and reside with my mother , and without waiting for my answer , left me .


I will not attempt to describe the various passions which tortured me by turns  but fond as I still was of my faithless husband , the indignation I felt for his unworthy usage of me , helped to support my spirits , and hindered me from yielding to the violence of my grief .
I put myself under my mother 's protection , and resigned myself quietly to my fate .


My husband a few months afterwards went to Italy , disgusted , as I have heard , with the behaviour of Belinda  who , to recover her reputation , which this affair had greatly sullied , sacrificed him to her mirth upon all occasions , and made her contempt of him as public as his attachment to her had been .
Her triumph however was short : she experienced the greatest misfortune that could happen to a woman who thought beauty the supremest good : she was seized with the small-pox ,  which made such ravage in her face that she was hardly to be known : her passion for admiration still remains , though the power of exciting it is gone .
Hence arises her punishment  and she who delighted in giving pain to others , finds in herself a perpetual source of vexation .
I am ,


Madam ,


Your Obliged Humble Servant , PERDITA .


 TO THE AUTHOR of the TRIFLER .


MADAM ,


AS you confess that you are not superior to trifles , will you accept of a trifling criticism , which if honoured with a place in your Museum , may , for the future , perhaps occasion a different manner of reading and acting one particular passage in Macbeth , that hitherto has been generally , if not always , misunderstood and misapplied .


In the sixth scene of the fourth act , a messenger of some rank , Rosse , comes to let Macduff know that his castle has been surprised , and his wife and children savagely slaughtered .
The young king of Scotland , Malcolm , who had been some time at the English court , solliciting troops and assistance from Edward the Confessor , undertakes to comfort his friend and subject Macduff , who had attended him to England , and was deeply involved in his cause .
Macduff , for some moments , remains thunder-struck and silent .
Malcolm , by way of consolation , says ,


What , man , ne'er pull your hat upon your brows .
Give sorrow words  the grief that does not speak , whispers the o'er fraught heart , and bids it break .


Macduff pays no regard or attention to Malcolm , but turning to Rosse , says , My children too !
 Rosse replies , Wife , children , servants , all that could be found .
Macduff .
And I must be from thence : my wife killed too ?
Rosse .
I 've said .
Macduff makes no immediate answer  but enfolding his arms , and hanging down his head , in all the melancholy silence of inexpressible grief , stands fixed like a statue on the farther side of the stage .
Malcolm , endeavouring to awaken Macduff from this lethargy of woe , approaches near to him , and says , Be comforted , let 's make us medicines of our griefs revenge , to cure this deadly grief .
Macduff still remains motionless and unmoved  but when he looks up , and sees his royal friend Malcolm returned to Rosse , on the other side of the stage , he sighs deeply , and in a low voice expresses himself thus : He has no children .
What all my pretty ones ?
did you say all ?
what all ?
The expression , He has no children , is supposed and understood to refer to Macbeth , who having no children , could not afford to Macduff an adequate revenge .
The supposition undoubtedly is natural .
In cases of injury , the law of retaliation never fails to occur to our minds , and to be the object of our passions : but the fact is not true .
Macbeth had a son , his name was Luthlac .
After the death of his father he was extremely troublesome to Malcolm : he claimed the crown  and though a very weak deficient young man , he answered the intentions of a rebellious party , consisting of such followers as had been attached to the late Macbeth .
They carried him to Scone , and he was there saluted king .
The competition was short , nor had it any very dangerous or extraordinary circumstances .
In less than three  months the usurper Luthlac was slain by Malcolm : then , and not till then , ended the race of Macbeth .


From hence it evidently appears that the sentence , He has no children , can not refer to Macbeth .
At whom then is it pointed ?
At Malcolm .
The heart-struck Macduff heard with patience the consolatory advice , administred by his royal master  but well knew , and could not avoid expressing to himself , that as Malcolm had no children he could little judge of that torrent of grief with which Macduff must naturally be overwhelmed , at the loss of a wife , and all his pretty ones .


Malcolm was not married  he could not feel the throbs of a parent 's heart , or the anguish of an husband 's love .
To him the sweet and inexpressible sensations of nuptial happiness were unknown : he was ignorant of the decent pride , the rising hopes , the alluring prospects , that occupy , and swell alternately a father 's breast .
Young and unexperienced , he had not felt those thilling nerves of nature , which are never strung but by virtuous love and parental palpitations .
The good natured Malcolm offered his advice unseasonably : he broke prematurely in upon sorrow that must require time and reason to sink itself into the gulph of satiety .
The intention of Malcolm was kind to the highest degree .
The effect of that intention was exerted in too hasty and too improper a manner , for Malcolm had no children .


This construction seems supported by a sentence which soon follows , where Malcolm again comes to the friendly charge of consolation , and says ,  Support it like a man .
I shall , says Macduff  but I must also feel it as a man  that is , ' I must feel it as an husband and as a parent : ' or to expatiate upon the thought , Macduff in those few words means thus to express himself : ' I must in the relation of father and husband , suffer the deepest sensations of grief that human nature can imbibe .
Not all the world can repair my loss .
By the cruel murder of my wife , I am deprived , for ever deprived , of the best of all my friends .
Many are dear to me : she was the dearest .
In my children , I have lost the pride of my house , the comforts of my age , the engaging amusements of my domestic hours , the future servants , subjects , and defenders of my king and country .
You must be a father and a husband , Malcolm , ` ere you can measure my grief  for I can not but remember such things were , that were most precious to me . '


According to this interpretation , the actor must shew by some gesture , some motion either of his head or hand , that Malcolm is the person in his thoughts , when he says , He has no children .
After staying some time in the place where he was first struck motionless , he is rouzed at once by indignation and crossing the stage , says to Rosse , What , all my pretty ones ?


In this view , I think , Shakespear displays his own character , and reveals his own sentiments as a parent .
If the sentence had referred solely to Macbeth ( supposing he had no children ) it carries with it rage , fury , and revenge ?
If to Malcolm , it is the reflection of a wise considerate man , who is thankful  to his friend for his advice , but conscious that that advice is , for the present , to no purpose ,


Buchanan in his History of Scotland evidently proves , that Macbeth had a son at the time when Macduff 's wife and children were slain .
Shakespear , the most exact of all dramatic historians , could never intend that he should appear he had none .
The following quotation * will support me in my assertion .


` Whilst these things were transacted at Forfar , they who remained of the faction of Macbeth , carried his son Luthlac to Scone ( who was sirnamed Fatuus from his want of wit ) and there he was saluted king .
Malcolm assaulted him in the valley Bogian , where he was slain three months after he had usurped the name of king  out of respect to the kingly race , his , and his father 's bodies were buried in the royal sepulchres in Ionia . '
I am ,


Madam ,


Your most obedient Humble Servant , C. D .


2 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 IT was not long before Sophia had an account of Sir Charles 's visit from her mother , who , forgetting the part she had acted before , wrote her a letter full of invectives against her obstinacy and disobedience , and bitter upbraidings of her folly , for losing by her ill-timed pride , the heart of such a man as Sir Charles .


She told her , with a kind of exultation , that he had utterly forgot her , and repeated every circumstance of his behaviour while he was with her , and every word he had spoke , as all tending to shew his indifference  but though this was done to mortify Sophia , and make her repent of her precipitate departure , yet her discernment , and that facility which lovers have , in flattering their own wishes , pointed out to her many things in this minute relation , which served rather to nourish hope than destroy it .


Mrs. Darnley added , as the finishing stroke , that Sir Charles looked pale and thin  she attributed this alteration in his health to the efforts he had made  to banish her from his heart , and thence inferred that a resolution which had cost him so much trouble to confirm , would not be easily broke through  and that she had no reason to expect he would ever desire to see her more .


Sophia could not read this part of the letter without tears , tears that flowed from tender sensibility , accompanied with a sensation which was neither grief nor joy , but composed of both : that Sir Charles should resolve to forget her was indeed afflicting , but that this resolution should cost him struggles so painful as to affect his health , could not but raise her depressed hopes , since it shewed the difficulty of the attempt , and consequently that the success was doubtful .


This letter gave so much employment to her thoughts , that to be at liberty to indulge them she took her evening walk without soliciting the company of her beloved Dolly , and wandered far into the wood , attracted by those romantic shades which afford such soothing pleasure to a love-sick mind .
Here , while she meditated on her mother 's letter , and read it over and over , still seeking , and still finding something new in it to engage her attention , she heard the voices of some persons talking behind her , and suddenly recollecting Dolly 's adventure , she began to be alarmed at the distance to which she had unwarily strayed , and turned her steps hastily towards home .


Mean time a sudden gust of wind blew off her hat , and carried it several paces back : she turned , in order to recover it , and saw it taken up by a genteel young man , who on a nearer approach she  knew to be the lover of her young friend .
Pleased at this encounter , she advanced to receive her hat from him , which he gave her with a blushing grace , awed by the dignity of her mein , and that sparkling intelligence which beamed in her eyes , and seemed to penetrate into his inmost soul  for Sophia , who was deeply interested for her innocent and unhappy friend , considered him attentively , and was desirous of entering into some conversation with him , that she might be enabled to form a more exact judgment of his understanding and manners than she could from the accounts of the partial Dolly .


While she was talking to him they were joined by an ancient gentlewoman , who accosting Sophia , told her in an affected style and formal accent , that her nephew was very happy in having had an opportunity to do her this little piece of service .


Sophia , who saw an old woman , apparently opprest with the infirmities of years , drest in all the ridiculous foppery of the last age , was so little pleased with her , that she would have answered this compliment with great coldness , had not the desire and hope of being serviceable to her friend made her conquer her growing disgust  she therefore resolved to improve this opportunity of commencing an acquaintance with the aunt of young William , and met her advances with her usual sweetness and affability , so that the old woman was quite charmed with her  and being very desirous to gain her good opinion , and to shew her breeding , of which she was extremely vain , overwhelmed her with troublesome ceremony  and , to display her understanding ,  of which she was equally proud , murdered so many hard words , that her discourse was scarcely intelligible .


Sophia would fain have drawn in the youth to partake of their conversation , but his aunt 's volubility left him very little to say  yet in that little Sophia thought she discovered both good sense and politeness .


The evening being now pretty far advanced , Sophia thought it time to separate , and took leave of her new acquaintance .
Their parting was protracted by so many courtesies and compliments from the old lady , that her patience was almost wearied out  at last she get free from her , and quickened her pace towards home , when on a sudden she heard her in a tremulous voice calling out , `` Madam , madam , pray stop one moment . ''
Sophia looked back , and seeing Mrs. Gibbons come tottering up to her with mere speed than was consistent with her weakness , she met her half way , and smiling , asked her why she had turned back ?


` Oh , madam , replied she , I am ready to sink with confusion !
what a solsim in good breeding have I committed !
to be sure you will think I have been used to converse with savages only . '
Sophia , not able to guess what this speech tended to , looked at Mr. Gibbons as if she wished for an explanation .


` My aunt , madam , said the youth , ( blushing a little at the old woman 's affectation , ) is concerned that you should walk home alone , and  that I ca n't offer my service to attend you , being obliged to lead her , as you see . '


` That is not all , nephew , said the ceremonious gentlewoman : you do not tell the young lady the true cause of the dilemnia I am in : I would not leave you , madam , pursued she , till I saw you safe home , but you live with a family who has affronted me , and I can not endure to come within sight of the house .
I never can forgive an affront , that would be to shew I do not understand the laws of good breeding : but I thank heaven no body can charge me with that , I was very early instituted into polite life  but some people are not to be assessed with . '


' I hope , said Sophia , ( scarce able to compose her countenance to any tolerable degree of seriousness ) that none of Mr. Lawson 's family have given you cause of complaint : they seem to me incapable of affronting any one , much more a person that . '
-


` Oh , dear madam , interrupted the old lady , courtesying low , you do me a great deal of honour  but you will find , nay you must have observed already , that Mrs. Lawson is vulgar , very vulgar , she knows nothing of decorums . '


' I am very sorry for this misunderstanding between you , said Sophia , and I should think it a very great happiness if I could be any way useful in renewing your friendship . '


` Oh , cried Mrs. Gibbons , you might as well think of joining the Antipoles , madam , as of bringing us together again  and I am grieved  beyond measure when I think that it is impossible for me to wait on you . '


` However , answered Sophia , you will have no objection , I hope , to my coming to see you . '


` By no means , madam , replied Mrs. Gibbons , you came last into the country , and you are entitled to the first visit  I would not for the world break through the laws of politeness  I am sorry you have so indifferent an opinion of my breeding . '


Sophia perceiving that the old gentlewoman was a little discomposed , for this article of good breeding was a tender point with her , endeavoured to bring her into good humour , by some well-timed compliments , and once more took leave of her  but Mrs. Gibbons now insisted upon her nephew 's seeing her safe home , saying , ` She would rest herself under a tree till he came back . '


Sophia but faintly declined this civility , for she feared to offend her again  and the joy that sparkled in William 's eyes when his aunt made this offer of his attendance , made her unwilling to disappoint him of the hope of seeing his mistress  so after much ceremony on the part of Mrs. Gibbons , they separated .


As they walked , Sophia took occasion to express her concern for the violent resentment his aunt had entertained against Mr. Lawson 's family , and which seemed to make a reconciliation hopeless .


The youth told her , that nothing could be more trivial than the accident that had occasioned it  and yet , pursued he , sighing deeply , ` slight as it is , the consequences are likely to be fatal enough . '


 During their conversation Sophia discovered so much good sense and delicacy of sentiment in the young William , that she more than ever pitied the fate of these poor lovers , whose happiness was sacrificed to the capricious temper of an affected old woman : she assured him she would neglect no opportunity to improve her acquaintance with his aunt : ` And perhaps , said she , with an inchanting smile , that expressed the benevolence of her heart , I may be so fortunate as to effect a reconciliation between her and my Dolly 's family . '


Mr. Gibbons thanked her in transports of joy and gratitude  and now Dolly and her sister , who had walked out in search of Sophia , appearing in sight , she mended her pace , in order to come up with them soon  for in the ardent glances that William sent towards his mistress , she read his impatience to speak to her .


Dolly , who was in the utmost surprise , to see Sophia thus accompanied , took no notice of William  but avoiding , with a sweet bashfulness , his earnest and passionate looks : she fixed her eyes on Miss Darnley , as if she wished to hear from her by what chance they had met .


' I know , said Sophia to her smiling , that you did not expect to see me so agreeably engaged  but Mr. Gibbons can inform you how his aunt , whom we left in the forest yonder , and I became acquainted . '
She then addressed some discourse to Fanny , to give the lovers an opportunity of talking to each other .


Dolly asked a thousand questions concerning their meeting , and his aunt 's behaviour to Miss Darnley   but the passionate youth leaving it to Sophia to satisfy her curiosity , employed the few moments he had to stay with her in tender assurances of his own unaltered affection , and complaints of her indifference .


` Surely , said Dolly , with tears in her eyes , I ought not to be blamed for obeying my father . '


` Ah , my dear Dolly , replied William , our affections are not in the power of our fathers  and if you hate me now because your father commands you to do so , you never loved me . '


` Hate you , cried Dolly  no , Mr. William , my father never bid me hate you  and if he had I am sure I could not have obeyed him : he only commanded me to forget you . '


` Only to forget me , repeated William , in a melancholy tone : then you think that little , Dolly  and perhaps you will be able to obey him  but be assured I would rather be hated by you than forgotten . '


`` That is strange , indeed , '' said Dolly , smiling through her tears .


` You would not think it strange , replied the youth , in an accent that expressed at once grief and resentment , if you had ever loved .
Ah Dolly , are all your tender promises come to this !
little did I imagine I should ever see you altered thus !
but I will trouble you no more , added he , sighing , as if his heart would break  I will endeavour to follow your example : perhaps it is not so difficult a thing as I imagined to cure one 's self of love  you have shewn me it is possible , and if I fail in the attempt I can be  but miserable , and that you have made me now . '
As he spoke these words , he turned half from her , and let fall some tears .


Dolly , who had no intention to make him uneasy , was excessively affected with this sight , and not a little alarmed at what he had said : ` And will you try to forget me , said she , in the most moving tone imaginable  then indeed you will be false and perjured too , for you have sworn a thousand times that you would love me for ever . '


` Why should you wish to see me wretched , said he  you have resolved to love me no longer , and it is but reasonable that I should try to forget you . '


He would have proceeded in this strain  but turning to look on her , he saw her sweet face overspread with tears .
` Oh my Dolly , cried he , we are very cruel to each other  but I am most to blame : can you pardon me , my dearest : say you can  alas , I know I do not deserve it . '


Dolly 's heart was so opprest that she was not able to speak  but she held out her hand to her young lover , who seizing it eagerly , prest it to his lips , ` Yes , I will love you , said he , though you should hate me  I will love you to my latest breath . '


Dolly perceiving Sophia and her sister coming up to them , drew away her hand hastily  but looked on him at the same time , with inexpressible tenderness : Sophia told him with a smile , that she was afraid his aunt would be impatient : upon which he made his bow , and hastened back to her .


 Fanny now left her sister alone with Miss Darnley , who perceiving that she had been weeping , asked her tenderly the cause .
` Oh my dear miss , said the poor girl , blushing and pressing her hand , if I had but a little of your prudence and good sense , I should obey my father better  but when one has once given one 's heart , it is very difficult to recal it . '


` Very true , my dear , said Sophia  therefore one ought not to be in haste to give it . '


' I hope , interupted Dolly with an anxious look , you have observed nothing in Mr. William to make you change your good opinion of him . '


` Quite the contrary , said Sophia , I believe him to be a good , and I am sure he is a sensible youth : nay more , I believe he has a sincere regard for you  and that , pursued she , sighing , is saying a great deal , considering what reason I have to judge unfavourably of men : but , my dear , I would have you keep your passion so far subjected to your reason , as to make it not too difficult for you to obey your father , if he is fully determined to refuse his content . '
I know , added she , with a gentle smile , ` That it is easier to be wise for others than for ourselves  but I know it is not impossible for a heart in love to follow the dictates of reason : I think so highly of Mr. Lawson 's understanding and goodness , that I am persuaded he would not lay an unreasonable command upon you , and by what I could collect from some hints dropt by Mrs. Gibbons , and the little discourse I had with your lover , the old gentlewoman is wholly to blame . '


 ` Did Mr. William tell you , said Dolly , what was the occasion of their quarrel ? '


` No , replied Sophia : I should be glad to hear it from yourself . '


` Well , resumed Dolly , taking her under the arm , let us go to our dear oak then , and there we shall be out of sight  but I am impatient to know how you met , and what conversation you had . '
Sophia satisfied her curiosity , diverting herself a little with the old lady 's hard words , and her strict regard to ceremony .


` Ah , said Dolly , it was those hard words , and the clutter she made about ceremony and decorum , that occasioned all our unhappiness  for as I told you , miss , she was well enough pleased with her nephew 's choice , saying , that he was in the right to marry like a gentleman , and prefer person and breeding to money : however , soon after she came into the country , she shewed herself a little dissatisfied with my education , and said , that as my father was a gentleman and a scholar , he ought to have taught his daughters a little Greek and Latin , to have distinguished them from meer country girls . '


` Your mother , I suppose , said Sophia , laughed at this notion . '


` It does not become me , said Dolly , to blame my mother  but to be sure she took great delight in ridiculing Mrs. Gibbons : indeed it was scarce possible to help smiling now and then at her hard words , and her formal politeness  but my mother , as Mr. William often told me with great concern , carried her raillery so far that  his aunt would certainly be offended with it at last  and so indeed she was , and grew every day cooler , with regard to the marriage .
This disgusted my mother more , so every thing wore a melancholy appearance : at length Mrs. Gibbons broke out one day violently , upon my mother 's sending a dish of tea to another gentlewoman before her .
I saw a storm in her countenance , and dreading the consequence , I made haste to carry her , her dish myself , but she refused it scornfully , and then began to attack my mother in her strange language , upon her want of breeding , and ignorance of the rules of precendency , that was her word .
My mother at first only laughed , and rallied  but when the rest of our visitors was gone , and Mrs. Gibbons only remained , the quarrel grew serious .
My mother , who was out of patience with her folly , said some severe things , which provoked Mrs. Gibbons so much , that she rose up in a fury , and declared she would never more have any collection with such vulgar creatures .
At that moment my father and Mr. William , who had been walking together , came into the room : they both were excessively surprised at the disorder that appeared among us  and poor Mr. William , who was most apprehensive , turned as pale as death : he gave me a melancholy look , as fearing what had happened , and had scarce courage enough to ask his aunt what was the matter ?
Mean time , my mother , in a laughing way gave my father an account of what had happened , repeating some of Mrs. Gibbons 's strange words , and made the whole affair appear  so ridiculous , that Mrs. Gibbons in a great fury , flung out of the house , declaring that from that moment she broke off any treatise of marriage between her nephew and me  and that , if he continued to make his addresses to me , she would make a will and leave all her money to a distant relation .
Mr. William was obliged to follow his aunt  but he begged my father 's leave to return as soon as he had seen her safe home .
When he came back , he implor'd my father , with tears in his eyes , not to forbid his seeing me : he said the loss of his aunt 's fortune would give him no concern if he durst hope that it would make no alteration in my father 's resolutions , since his own little inheritance was sufficient to maintain us comfortably .
My father was pleased with his generous affection for me , and said a great many obliging things to him , as did my mother likewise , so that we thought our misfortune not so bad  but the next day old Mr. Gibbons came plodding to our house , and with a great deal of confusion and aukwardness , told my father that he was very sorry for what had happened  but sister had changed her mind , and would not let her nephew marry , and he was afraid if he disobliged her she would leave all her money to strangers  so he begged him to give his son no encouragement , but to tell him plainly he must obey his aunt and his father  and he said he was sure his son would mind what my father said to him more than any body else . '


' I am in pain for poor Mr. Lawson , said Sophia .
What a boorish speech was this ! '


 ` My father , resum'd Dolly , said afterwards , that if it had not been for the concern he felt for me and Mr. William , he would have been excessively diverted with the old man 's simplicity  but he answered him gravely and with great civility : he promised him that the affair should go no farther  that I should receive no more visits from his son  and that he would talk with him , and endeavour to make him submit patiently to what his father and his aunt had determined for him .
The old man thanked my father a thousand times over for his kindness , and after a great many bows and scrapes he went away .
My father was as good as his word : he laid his commands on me to think no more of Mr. William , and forbad me to see or speak to him  and when Mr. William came next , he took him with him into his study and talked to him a long time .
He acknowledged that Mr. William had oftener than once moved him even to tears  but for all that he did not relent , and we were not allowed so much as to speak to each other alone , for fear we should take any measures to meet in private .
This I thought very severe , pursued Dolly , sighing , we might at least have been indulged in taking leave , since we were to be separated for ever . '


' I can not blame your father , said Sophia , he was indispensably obliged to act as he did : it is to be wished indeed that Mrs. Lawson had passed over the poor woman 's follies with more temper  but this can not be helped now : perhaps I may be able to serve you .
The old gentlewoman  seems to have taken a liking to me  I shall endeavour to improve it , that I may have an opportunity to soften her : it is not impossible but this matter may end well yet . '


` Poor Dolly was ready enough to admit a hope so pleasing , and felt her heart more at ease than it had been a long time .
As for William , his aunt 's extravagant praises of Sophia , and some expressions which she dropped , intimating that she should be pleased if he could make himself acceptable to so fine a lady , hinted to him a scheme which might afford him the means of seeing his mistress sometimes : he seemed therefore to listen with satisfaction to these dark overtures made by his aunt , and upon her speaking still plainer , he said it would be presumption in him to think that a young lady so accomplished as Miss Darnley would look down upon him  and besides , he had no opportunity of improving an acquaintance with her , being forbid Mr. Lawson 's house , at her request . '


The old woman , pleased to find he made so little opposition to her desire , told him , ` That he would have opportunities enough of seeing and conversing with the lady  she often walks out , said she , either in the forest or the fields about the house : can not you throw yourself in her way , and accost her politely , as you very well know how  and , to felicitate your success , I will let her know that I am willing to receive the honour of a visit from her , though this is against all the rules of decorum , for it is my part to visit her first , she being the greatest stranger here : you  shall deliver my message to her to-morrow yourself . '


` The youth replied , coldly , that it was possible he might not meet with her to-morrow : nevertheless he would go every day to the forest , and wherever it was likely she would walk , in hopes of seeing her . '


Mrs. Gibbons , exulting in the hope of mortifying Mrs. Lawson , told her nephew , ` That if he could succeed in his addresses to miss Darnley , and give her so fine a lady for a niece , she would settle the best part of her fortune on him immediately . '


William suffered her to please herself with these imaginations , having secured the liberty of going unsuspected , and as often as he pleased , to those places where he could see his beloved Dolly  hitherto he had not dared to indulge himself frequently in these stolen interviews , lest his aunt being informed of them , should take measures to engage Mr. Lawson to keep his daughter under a greater restraint  but now he continually haunted the park , the wood , and the fields about Mr. Lawson 's house : here he could not fail of often seeing his mistress , and sometimes of speaking to her unobserved by any one .


Dolly never failed to chide him as often as this happened , for thus laying her under a necessity of disobeying her father 's injunctions  but she took no pains to shun those places where she was almost sure of meeting him  and her chiding was so gentle , that he was convinced she was not greatly offended .


 Sophia happening to meet him one morning , while he was thus sauntering about , she enquired for his aunt , and hearing from him how desirous the old gentlewoman was of seeing her , she who was full of her benevolent scheme , and eager to put it in execution , delayed her visit no longer than till the afternoon .


Mrs. Gibbons considered this as a proof of her nephew 's sincerity , and was in so good a humour , that she listened without any signs of displeasure , to the praises which Sophia artfully introduced of Dolly  and even sometimes joined in them : Sophia thought this a very favourable beginning , and went away full of hope that she should succed in her design : but while she was thus endeavouring to make others happy , her sister was preparing a new mortification for her .


Sir Charles continued to visit Mrs. Darnley as usual : he passed some hours every day at her house , and while he applauded himself for the steadiness of his resolution , not to follow his mistress , he perceived not his own weakness in seeking every alleviation of her absence .
He went to the house where she had formerly dwelt , because every object he saw in it brought her dear idea to his mind : he loved to turn over the books he had seen her read , to sit in those places where she used to sit : he was transported when he saw any thing that belonged to her  and when he was not observed by the inquisitive eyes of Harriot , he indulged his own in gazing upon Sophia 's picture , faintly as it expressed the attractive graces of the original : he endured the trifling discourse of Mrs , Darnley  and the insipid gaiety of Harriot , and left all other company and amusements to converse with them , that he might hear something concerning Sophia  for he had the art , without seeming to design it , to turn the discourse frequently upon her , and thus drew from the loquacious mother all he desired to know , without appearing to be interested in it .


Mrs. Darnley knew not what judgment to form of his assiduity in visiting her , and vainly endeavoured to penetrate into his views .
As for Harriot , who had no idea of those refinements of tenderness which influenced Sir Charles 's conduct on this occasion , she concluded that her charms had once more enslaved him , and exulted in her fancied conquest the more , as it was a triumph over her sister , who had been the occasion of so many mortifications to her .


Nothing is so easy or so fallacious as the belief that we are beloved and admired  our own vanity helps the deceit , where a deceit is intended : and a coquet who has a double portion of it , willingly deceives herself .


Harriot was now fully persuaded that Sir Charles had forgot Sophia , and was wholly devoted to her .
Impatient to insult her with the news of his change , she proposed to her mother to make her a visit : Mrs. Darnley immediately consented , not because she was very desirous to see her daughter , but because every thing that wore the face of amusement was always acceptable to her .
Sir Charles , upon being made acquainted with their  intention , offered to accommodate them with his chariot  and although he only desired them coldly to present his compliments to Sophia , yet when he reflected that they would soon see and converse with her , he could not help envying their happiness  and it was with great difficulty he conquered himself so far as to forbear going with them .


[ To be continued . ]
3 .
ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN , CONTINUED .


 THE tranquility of Britain perished with Constantine the Great .
He was survived by three of his sons * , all men of worthless , or of infamous characters .
It would be time very , ill employed to notify any particulars of their reigns : let the imperial savages , and one or two of their successors pass by nameless and forgotten .
Be it sufficient to say , that the ministers and officers whom they appointed , were their exact representatives  haughty tyrants , bloody inquisitors , and rapacious governors .
Britain bore the share of burdens imposed upon her by these task-masters  and her inhabitants , like the Israelites , were fruitful , increased abundantly , and waxed exceedingly mighty : otherwise how could they have withstood the inundation of Picts , Scots , Saxons , and Attacotti † , who , in the first year of Valentinian , broke  in at once , though in different places , upon the Roman territories in Britain .


Historians have not told us in what manner the Britains sustained themselves against such numbers of invaders , till Severus was sent to their relief in the year 368 .
But neither Severus , nor his successor Jovinus were able to vye with the barbarians , who were now dispersed throughout the whole kingdom , and had made great devastations in the city of London .
Valentinian saw an immediate necessity for a reinforcement of troops under the conduct of a veteran and experienced commander : he chose Theodosius , as a man of great experience , and of a most martial character .
Theodosius lost no time in executing his commission : he set sail from Boulogne , and landed at Sandwich , with the choicest troops that could be gathered throughout the continent .
He marched directly to London , and found the city in the greatest distress .
He immediately relieved the metropolis  and , by a division of his army into different parties , surprised the lawless freebooters in several places , and divested them of their plunder , which consisted of captives and herds of cattle .
For some time afterwards he chose rather to observe than to molest his adversaries .
His caution and sagacity , joined to the force of his arms , at length entirely effected the purposes for which he was deputed into the kingdom .
By degrees he drove back the Picts , the Scots , and all the invaders into their own territories : he replaced garrisons to defend the boundaries  he repaired walls , and restored cities  and , at his return to  Rome , he left the island in a state of security and peace .
He was attended to the shore by vast numbers of Romans and Britons , all full of expressions of regret and sorrow at his departure .
He was received by his imperial master with the most public demonstrations of friendship , gratitude , and affection : honours which he most justly deserved .


The emperor Valentinian died in the year 375 .
He was succeeded in the western empire by his son Gratianus , a young man addicted to pleasures , resigned to favourites , and in every respect unfit for his dignity .
As only chance of birth had made him an emperor , and as nature had given him abilities only for a huntsman , he soon found himself under a necessity of summoning a coadjutor to his assistance .
He chose Flavius Magnus Theodosius * , the son of the Roman general , who , not many years before , had made so considerable a figure in Britain .


At the time when the emperor Gratianus made this choice , Maximus , a Spaniard by birth , of a very noble family , and an officer of great merit and distinction , was at the head of the Roman army in Britain .
He was personally beloved by the soldiers , and had rendered himself much esteemed and revered among the Britons .
All his military actions had been planned upon the model of that great general Theodosius , by whom he had been left in Britain , in a high post of command .
Soon  afterwards , probably in the order of succession , he became the captain-general of the Roman and British forces .
Maximus was of an ambitious temper , and he was much disgusted at the sudden rise of the younger Theodosius .
He complained loudly of the injustice which he suffered by the election of any other emperor than himself : he drew his pretensions from his near degree of affinity to Constantine the Great : and his army , without an examination into the truth or falshood of those pretensions , immediately saluted him Caesar , and offered to him their service and obedience .


In what a state of confusion were the Romans and the Britons at this period ?
little able to help themselves , much less to assist their allies : two emperors in Italy , and one * risen up on a sudden in Britain .
The account of these times is very elaborately , although in many points very differently , set forth by the Scotch and English historians .
But the prospect we receive from all those commentaries are only melancholy , and various views of rage and bloodshed .
Revolutions upon revolutions .
Gratianus killed by the troops of Maximus  Maximus put to death by Theodosius  Britain invaded by the Scots and Picts  the Scots extirpated by the Picts from Scotland , and driven into Ireland  in the continent , a declining empire  in our own island , a perpetual civil war  throughout the world , an iron age .


` Insidiae } que { et vis , et amor sceleratus habendi . '
` Mix'd with curs'd avarice falshood and rapine shone . '


 Such was the dismal scene , some little intervals excepted , during the whole reign of Theodosius , who died in the beginning of the year 395 .
He left two sons , Arcadius and Honorius .
The western empire fell to the lot of Honorius , who was only ten years of age at the death of his father : he was committed to the tuition and conduct of Stilico .
Under his government the Saxons , Scots , and Picts , those perpetual invaders of the British territories , were effectually suppressed and repulsed .


But Stilico was called off from his attention to the affairs of Britain , by the appearance of Alaric * in Italy at the head of a most numerous army of Goths .
The Roman troops were immediately summoned to the continent  as not only the empire , but the whole world seemed to be in danger of ruin , and was afterwards over run by this set of barbarians .


Here , I think , may be dated the end of the Roman government in Britain .
Some assistance , some legions were sent now and then , upon the supplication of the Britons in the southern parts of the island , to relieve them from immediate destruction  but such succours were few , uncertain , and at last absolutely withdrawn .


At this particular period , let us endeavour to take a general retrospect of the Britons  their manners , their laws , and their government , as far as the obscurity , and the many chasms of our history will allow the search .


 Caesar and many other authors describe the original Britons appearing in the wildest state of nature : savages living upon plunder , inhabiting woods and mountains , and ignorant of all laws and order .
The description , I am afraid , is in many instances too true  but however licentious and untamed these barbarians may have been , some form of government certainly subsisted amongst them , especially , as Caesar himself says , that the customs of the Britons were almost the same as the customs of the Gauls .
But he speaks indeed there only of the Cantii * , who , living nearest to the Gallic shores , were most humanized .


In his account of the Gauls , he tells us in how great a degree of obedience the lower classes of people were held by the nobility  an obedience which could not have been formed or regulated without a complete and acknowledged system of laws .
The particulars of those laws are not perfectly ascertained : they were always composed by the Druids , who never suffered any of their institutions to be committed to writing .


Some of them , however , have been handed down to us , and are sufficiently curious to be inserted .
They are these :


I. None must be instructed but in the sacred groves .


II .
Misletoe must be gathered with reverence , and , if possible , in the sixth moon .
It must be cut with a golden bill .


III .
Every thing derives its origin from heaven .


 IV .
The arcana of the sciences must not be committed to writing , but to the memory .


V. Great care is to be taken of the education of children .


VI .
The powder of misletoe makes women fruitful .


VII .
The disobedient * are to be shut out from the sacrifices .


VIII .
Souls are immortal .


IX .
The soul after death goes into other bodies .


X .
If the world is destroyed , it will be by fire and water .


XI .
Upon extraordinary emergencies a man must be sacrificed .
According as the body falls , or moves after it is fallen : according as the blood flows , or the wound opens , future events are foretold .


XII .
Prisoners are to be slain upon the altars , or burnt alive , inclosed in wicker , in honour of the Gods .


XIII .
All commerce with strangers must be prohibited .


XIV .
He that comes last to the assembly of the states ought to be punished with death .


XV .
Children are to be brought up apart from their parents , till they are fourteen years of age .


XVI .
Money lent in this world will be repaid in the next .


XVII .
There is another world , and they who kill themselves to accompany their friends thither , will live with them there .


 XVIII .
Letters given to dying persons , or thrown on the funeral piles of the dead , will faithfully be delivered in the other world .


XIX .
The moon is a sovereign remedy for all things , as its name in Celtic implies .


XX .
Let the disobedient be excommunicated  let him be deprived of the benefit of the law  let him be avoided , and rendered incapable of any employ .


XXI .
All masters of families are kings in their own houses : they have a power of life and death over their wives , children , and slaves .


The learning , and the religious tenets of the Druids are specified in various authors .
Diogenes Laertius assures us , that their chief precepts were ` the worship of the Gods  an abstinence from all kinds of evil  and a constant exercise of manly fortitude . '


Pomponius Mela informs us , that the Druids were remarkably expert in geography and astronomy * : and Caesar says , that they taught the transmigration of souls , and by that means inspired their disciples with an absolute contempt of death , which , in their articles of faith , was looked upon only as a passage from one body to another  or , as Mr. Rowe expresses it from Lucan 's description of the Druids ,


`` A stop , which can but for a moment last , `` A point between the present and the past . ''
The character of these priests must have appeared extremely venerable , had not their doctrines  been attended by the most sanguinary acts of superstition , which certainly augmented , or at least never could suppress the natural savageness and barbarity of the natives .
The Bards were a lower order of the Druids : their sacerdotal employments were the celebration of the British heroes in verses , which they sung to the harp  and which were probably composed to excite emulation in the hearers of their poetry .
Such a design had an a [ ... ] of policy , and might , in some measure , be conducive to tame the ferocious natures of those who listened , either from piety or curiosity , to their songs .
There were still a third and inferior o [ ... ] of Druids called Eubates : and there were also Druids ( not many I presume ) of the female [ ... ]


The original constitution of Britain was [ ... ] monarchical .
All authors agree that [ ... ] island was divided into colonies , each of [ ... ] subject to a particular sovereign .
U [ ... ] [ ... ] and dangerous emergencies , the Britons ?
[ ... ] general assembly of their princes , unanimo [ ... ] [ ... ] one superior chieftain , to whom they [ ... ] the command of the army , and the govern [ ... ] [ ... ] f the state : such were Cassivelaunus , [ ... ] , Boudicea , Carausius , and Galga [ ... ] us .
[ ... ] these royal magistrates were temporary or [ ... ] dictators , is a point that does not seem perfec [ ... ] y cleared up by any of the historians : when they had the power , it is probable they kept it : most , if not all of them , came to sudden and fatal catastrophes .
The Britons were subdued by Julius Caesar , and they were treated with great tyranny and oppression by all succeeding Roman empe [ ... ] o [ ... ] s ,  governors , legates , and pro-praetors , till Agricola lightened and diversified , if he did not remove the oppression .
In the reigns of Nerva and Trajan , the Caledonians and the Britons were most firmly united , and the consequence of their union had almost produced a total extirpation of the Romans .
Adrian † , probably with a design to sow the seeds of disagreement between the two nations , enlarged the frontiers of the Scots , permitted them to come forwarder towards the south , and resigned to them that portion of lands , which , in the time of the elder Theodosius , was distinguished as a fifth province , and was called Valentia .
The Meatae and the Picti settled themselves in this district .


Whatever might be Adrian 's motives , dissension grew up most prosperously , and rooted itself so firmly and deeply in the soil , that no association was afterwards formed between the Britons and the Caledonians .
By the Caledonians , I would be understood to mean tbe inhabitants of Scotland  whether distinguished by the names of Picts , Meatae , Scots , Scythians , or any other denominations .
To fix the time of their arrival , and their settlement in Great Britain , is difficult , if not impossible : the inquiry is now intirely useless .
Their wars , their incursions , their depredations , and their policy are points to reflect some entertainment  their origin , and the fabulous tales that attend it , must in general be despised and forgotten .


The Caledonians , ever a crafty , and a wise nation , had tasted the sweets , and had experienced  the advantages arising from frequent inroads into Britain .
Their own country was barren and uncultivated : the adjoining territories were rich and fruitful : their gains , consequently , might be great  their losses could only amount to a repulse .
Caesar tells us , that the Britons thought it unlawful to taste hares , hens , or geese , of which they kept great plenty for their pleasure and diversion : the Caledonians had no such scruple of taste or conscience .
The British fowl , their game of all kinds , and their numerous herds of cattle , were a sort of plunder easily taken , and as easily carried away : and these tempting objects of hostility drew the Saxons and the Hibernians almost annually across the sea , in search of prizes and acquisitions from Britain .
They were constantly joined and assisted by the Picts and the Meatae  so that a variety of repeated invasions totally employ the first annals of our history , and leave us scarce any other characteristical idea of our forefathers than their bravery and resistance .


Early in the fifth century , the Romans , now grown so weak as to perceive within themselves evident symptoms of dissolution , took a last farewel of our ancestors  and , like expiring friends , exerted their last efforts , amidst convulsive pangs , to assist and direct the Britons how to build a wall of stone in the same situation where the wall of Severus had formerly stood : and still , as a final instance of their friendship , they advised the natives to practise the art of war , and to become expert and regular in military discipline  but most especially to act upon one general confederate plan , by making  use of their own collective strength against the Caledonians and all other invaders .
The advice was excellent , and , if pursued with constancy and firmness , might have rendered the Britons for ever impregnable to their enemies .
But unanimity among Britons was reserved for distant times , and the happiest age that our island has ever known .


By the departure of the Romans , the Britons looked upon themselves as delivered from their first conquerors : but they little considered that they were still subject to a worse set of tyrants , their own passions and disunion : no people upon earth are formed with more acute sensations , or deeper resentments against each other .
These are the causes that fill our history with such frequent revolutions .
Our climate is a representation of our nature : it is uncertain , and in the space of one week affords as much variety of weather as is known in other countries throughout a twelvemonth .
A single day is often a scene of summer and of winter  and of great heat and of violent cold  of rain and snow  and of warmth and sunshine : so various is the temperature of our air .
The temperature of air governs the minds of the inhabitants : we are gloomy or gay , sullen or good-humoured , and sometimes religious or immoral , according to the state and alterations of our atmosphere .
What must be the effects arising from such variegated dispositions ?
continual changes , and continual discontent .
Britons left to themselves are like horses unbridled , and let out to pasture : they wince  they roar  they kick their heels towards heaven in all the wantonness of liberty .
Their freedom might be perpetual ,  if they knew how to direct it , or were conscious of their own strength  but they employ their time in self-destruction : they impoliticly tread down the pasture which ought to feed them , and , inconsiderately striking at each other , they become so lame , as to stand in need of assistance from the first aukward farrier who presents himself .
Gildas , I think , defines our island as a land steady in nothing , and greedy of every thing new .
Such , indeed , it proved after the removal of the Romans : successive royal idols were set up , worshipped , and then taken down , and trampled to pieces .
The names of these molten calves are insignificant  their actions , as sovereigns , immaterial and uncertain : they were elected , adored , and destroyed .
The reign of Vortigern , indeed , was of longer duration , and of more consequence : it afforded scenes of variety and importance .
We are told , that while Vortigern was upon the throne , the Britons , finding themselves overpowered , and almost ruined by invasions from the Scots and Picts , sent a solemn embassy with most submissive letters to implore the assistance , and to require the immediate presence of their old enemies the Saxons .
Is it possible to believe our ancestors guilty of so absurd a resolution ?
That they were factious , discontented , and unversed in the rules of government , is certain  but that they should imagine themselves under a necessity of seeking refuge from Charybdis , because they were close upon the rocks of Scylla , is highly improbable .
How indeterminate are the historical accounts of this particular period , when the introduction of the Saxons is recorded in a  manner that bears so little resemblance to truth ?
The Britons might not be willing , or more probably might not be capable to oppose the Saxons , when those invaders were arrived  but it is scarce credible to imagine that the Britons sollicited their arrival .
However , by the generality of historians , we are to suppose that the sheep invited the wolves .
A modern writer * differs from many of his predecessors , and tells us , from Nennius , that the arrival of the Saxons was accidental : the only fact that can be depended upon is , that they arrived .
The year can not be ascertained †  in that point the chronologists differ .
But of what nation shall we find the chronology ascertained ?


The Saxons were commanded by two brothers , Hengist and Horsa , men of judgment and penetration , who , finding their first design of plunder and devastation insupportable , tacitly changed the plan , and offered themselves as friends and confederates to the Britons .
At so critical a juncture , they were joyfully received by Vortigern , and were incorporated into the British army .
The island of Thanet was assigned for their settlement : their numbers did not exceed fifteen hundred : three ships transported them into Britain .


Hengist and Horsa soon distinguished themselves as allies of consequence .
The Picts and Scots were driven back to their several territories  some to Caledonia , others to Ireland  and the Saxons retired to the isle of Thanet with all possible demonstrations of peace .


 The articles of compact between the Saxons and the Britons were these : That the Saxons were to fight for the Britons against all foreign enemies , and were to receive the pay and maintenance from the nation for whom they fought .
In the general name of Saxons were included the Jutes and the Angles , who had enlisted themselves under the banner of Hengist and Horsa .
These two brothers were the direct descendants of Woden , an Asiatic king , who came from Scythia into Europe , and seized those German territories that are now distinguished as Saxony .
The Angles were inhabitants of Sweden .
The Jutes were a people of Denmark .
Whilst the number of these Saxons did not exceed fifteen hundred , the articles of compact were not difficult to be fulfilled .
But Hengist and Horsa had farther views than merely a subsistance from the Britons : the isle of Thanet was too limited a circumference for their ambition : a settlement , and some degree of power within the greater island , were the objects upon which they had fixed their eyes .
Of the two brothers , Hengist seems to have been particularly vigilant and politic : he considered the fertility of the soil , the inexperience of the inhabitants , and the weak passions of the king  and , from these circumstances , he proposed to himself and to his people , all the future advantages that they could wish , riches , alliance , and a kingdom .
In consequence of such a plan , he sent for fresh supplies of his countrymen : and they came over in tribes sufficiently numerous to fill seventeen ships .
With them arrived Rowena , the daughter of Hengist : her father had particularly observed the amorous disposition  of Vortigern  and , conscious of his daughter 's beauty , he proposed to make her the chief step by which he was to ascend .
The effect answered the design : Vortigern saw the fair Saxon , divorced his lawful wife , by whom he had many children , and incontinently married Rowena .
In consequence of this marriage , the kingdom of Kent was allotted to the Saxons , and the dominion of that territory was taken away from Guorangonus , the reigning prince , and was bestowed upon Hengist , the father-in-law of the chief sovereign in Britain .


How unhappy must be the state of government , when the king could break through all the bounds of morality , and where the people could tamely submit to see one of their most considerable colonies peremptorily given away to strangers ?
These instances shew us , that not the least order , and scarce any degree of public courage subsisted at this time in Britain : they shew us that christianity had not as yet taken sufficient root in our island .
A religion that was calculated to rescue mankind from the tyranny of fraud and force , and instituted to give a true notion of one God , and to fix right and justice upon a sure and natural foundation , must have little efficacy among a wild and indocile race of men .
Some churches , however , were built , and some outward appearances of religion were maintained  but the antiquities of these times are so fabulous , that few authentic commentaries are extant , either of ecclesiastical , or of civil affairs .
The facts to be depended upon , are these :


[ To be continued . ]
4 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 THE meeting between my father and me was , on my side , full of respect , but coldness and ' I have given you leisure , said he to me , to repent of your folly , and I am now come to give you the means to make me forget it  return this instance of my indulgence with obedience , and prepare to receive as you ought , the count of Foix , and mademoiselle de Foix his daughter , for whom I have destined you .
The marriage shall be solemnized here  they will arrive to-morrow with your mother  I came before them only to give the necessary orders for their reception . '


' I am sorry , Sir , replied I calmly , that I can not comply with your wishes : I have too much honour to marry a person I can never love , therefore I intreat you will permit me to leave this  place directly .
Mademoiselle de Foix , however amiable she may be , can not alter my resolution  and if I see her , the affront I shall give her by refusing her hand , will be more poignant to her . '


` No , interrupted my father in a rage , thou shalt not see her , nor shalt thou be allowed to see the day  I will shut thee up in a dungeon , a fitter habitation .
I swear by heaven , that thou shalt never be delivered from thy confinement , till I am convinced thy repentance is sincere , and thy change certain .
I will punish thee for thy disobedience every way that is in my power  I will deprive thee of my estate , and settle it upon mademoiselle de Foix , to fulfil , in some degree , the promise I have given her . '


I made no opposition to my father 's tyrannical design  I suffered myself to be conducted to an old tower , where I was confined in a place at the bottom of it , which received no light but from a little grated window which looked into one of the courts of the castle .
My father gave orders that food should be brought me twice a-day , but that I should not be suffered to see any person whatever .


I passed the first days of my confinement with tranquility enough , and even with some kind of pleasure .
What I had so lately done for Adelaida employed all my thoughts , and left no room for reflection on the horrors of my condition  but when this sentiment began to lose its force , I resigned myself up to despair at being thus doomed to an absence of which I knew not the end .
My busy imagination tortured me with the apprehension of a thousand other evils : Adelaida might be forced  to enter into another engagement : I fancied her surrounded with rivals , all assiduous to please , while I had none to plead for me but my miseries  but to a mind so generous as Adelaida 's , was not this sufficient ?
I reproached myself for entertaining the least doubt  I asked her pardon for it , as for a crime , and my heart gathered new strength from the confidence I had in her fidelity .


My mother found means to convey a letter to my hands , in which she exhorted me to submit to my father , whose rage against me seemed to increase every day .
She added , that she suffered a great deal herself  that her endeavours to procure a reconciliation between him and the family of Lussan had made him suspect that she acted in concert with me .


I was greatly affected at the uneasiness my mother suffered on my account  but as I could not accuse myself of having voluntarily caused her any part of it , all I could do was to lament her situation .


One day when I was , as usual , wholly taken up with reflections on my unhappy fate , something fell through the window into my dungeon , which immediately rouzed my attention .
I saw a letter on the floor , I seized it with trembling haste  but what became of me when I read the contents !
they were as follow : ` Your father 's rage has instructed me what I ought to do .
I know the terrible situation you are in , and I know but one method to extricate you from it , which will perhaps make you more miserable  but I shall be so as well as you , and that thought will give me resolution to do  what is required of me .
Our cruel parents , to make it impossible for me to be yours , insist upon my marrying another .
This is the price your father has set upon your liberty  it will perhaps cost me my life , my quiet it too surely will , to pay it : but I am determined .
Your sufferings and your prison are at present all that I can think of : in a few days I shall be the wife of the marquis de Benavides  his character is sufficient to acquaint me with all I have to suffer from him  but this sort of fidelity I owe you , at least that in the engagement I enter into , I should find nothing but misery .
May you , on the contrary , be happy  your good fortune will be my consolation .
I am sensible I ought not to tell you this : if I was truly generous I should suffer you to be ignorant of the part you have in my marriage  I should leave you in doubt of my constancy .
I had formed a design to do so , but I was not able to execute it : in my sad situation I have need of being supported with the thought that the remembrance of me will not be hateful to you .
Alas !
soon , very soon it will not be permitted me to preserve yours .
- I must forget you  - at least I must endeavour so to do .
- Of all my miseries this is what I am most sensible of : you will increase it if you do not carefully avoid all opportunities of seeing and speaking to me .
Reflect that you owe me this mark of your esteem , and oh !
reflect how dear that esteem will be to me , since of all the sentiments you have profest for me , it is the only one that I am allowed to require of you . '


 Of this fatal letter , which I have related at length , I was able to read no more than to these words : ` Our cruel parents , to make it impossible for me to be yours , insist upon my marrying another . '
Pierced to the heart with this cruel , this unexpected misfortune , I sunk upon the mattrass which composed my bed , and lay there several hours without sense or motion , and probably might never have recovered , but for the assistance of the person who brought me my provisions .
If he was alarmed at the condition in which he found me , he was much more so at the excess of my despair , when my senses returned .
The letter , which I held fast in my hand during my swoon , and which I at last read quite through , was wet with my tears , and I spoke and acted extravagancies which made him apprehensive for my reason .


This man , who till then had been inaccessible to pity , was melted all on a sudden : he blamed my father for his cruel treatment of me  he reproved himself for having executed his orders  he asked my pardon on his knees .
His repentance inspired me with the thought of proposing to him to let me quit my prison for eight days only , promising him that , at the expiration of that time , I would return and put myself into his hands : I added every thing I could think of to oblige him to consent .
Moved at the state he saw me in , excited by his own interest , and by the fear that I should one day take vengeance upon him for being the instrument of my father 's cruelty , he agreed to what I desired , upon the condition I had myself proposed to him .


 I would have set out that moment from the castle , but there was a necessity for his going to seek for horses  and when he returned , he informed me that we could not get any till the next day .
My design was to go to Adelaida , to tell her all my grief and despair , and to kill myself before her eyes , if she persisted in her resolution .


To execute this project , it was necessary that I should arrive before her fatal marriage , and every moment 's delay seemed to me an age of misery .
I read over her letter a hundred times , as if I had expected to find still something more in it .
I examined the date over and over  I flattered myself that the time might have been prolonged .
` She will at least make an effort , said I  she will seize all pretences to defer it .
But why should I flatter myself with so vain a hope , resumed I ?
Adelaida sacrificing herself for my liberty will hasten the dreadful moment .
Alas !
can she believe that liberty without her , can be a blessing to me ?
I shall every where find this prison she delivers me from  she has never known my heart  she judges of me by other men : it is to that I owe my ruin .
I am still more miserable than I believed myself , since I have not the consolation to think that she knows how much I love her . '


I past the whole night in making these complaints , the most tedious night I had ever known , even in that place of misery .
At length the day appeared  I mounted on horseback with my conductor .
We travelled the whole day without stopping a moment , when , towards the evening , I perceived my mother in a chariot which took the road  towards the castle .
She knew me immediately , and , after having expressed her surprize at meeting me , she obliged me to come into the chariot to her .
I durst not ask her the occasion of her journey in the situation I was in  I feared every thing , and my fear was but too well founded .


' I come , my son , said she , by your father 's permission , to release you from your confinement . ''
Ah !
cried I , then Adelaida is married . '
My mother answered only by silence .
My misfortune which was then without remedy , presented itself to my mind with all its horrid aggravations .
I fell into a kind of stupidity , and , by the force of grief , I seemed to have lost the sense of it .
However , my body now sunk under the weakness of my mind : I was seized in the coach with a shivering like the cold fit of an ague .
As soon as we arrived at the castle , my mother caused me to be put to bed .
I lay two days without speaking or taking any nourishment  all the symptoms of a violent fever appeared , and , on the fourth , the physician despaired of my life .
My mother who never left me , was inconceiveably afflicted  her tears , her prayers , and the name of Adelaida , by which she conjured me to live , made me resolve not to obstruct the endeavours of the physician to save me .


[ To be continued . ]
5 .
THE HISTORY OF BIANCA CAPELLO CONTINUED .


 THE polite behaviour and promises of Mandragone , gave such agreeable hopes to Bianca , that with quite another countenance than before , she renewed her conversation with his lady  who , a little after , taking her by the hand , said , I have a mind to show you our palace , that you may tell me , if in any thing it resembles your great and noble buildings at Venice  and in the mean time , the old lady , your mother , as she is in years and feeble , may repose herself here till our return .


` Aye , aye , go ( replied she , ) for I have not breath enough to mount such a stair-case  ' upon which the young women smiling , and arm in arm , ran from room to room , almost over the whole house .
This palace , ( which stood in the street called Carnesecchi , near Santa Maria Novella , ) was so lately built that it was not quite finished , though very near so  and that with such good taste , and so much magnificence , that the  Venetian lady admired and praised every part of it : and now through many anti-chambers , they arrived at last to a very large one , where there was an extreme rich bed , and near it a writing closet , beautifully ornamented , the window of which looked down on a delightful garden .
Here the Spaniard having opened a scrutore , took out a vast quantity of jewels , which one by one she shewed her guest , to whom , while she was looking on them with great attention , she spoke in this manner , ' I have a great , fancy to shew you some dresses I have lately made , which they tell me are exactly as the Venetian ladies wear them  but as I must fetch the key , I beg you will divert yourself with these few jewels till I come back . '


No sooner was Mandragona gone out of the closet , but on a sudden the grand duke entered it : at whose unexpected presence Bianca trembled from head to foot , well imagining the meaning of his coming  but collected in herself , and alike prudent and virtuous , she immediately threw herself at his feet , and in the most moving manner said , ` Since , sir , it has pleased God that it should be my unhappy fate to lose my parents , my fortune , and my country , and to have nothing in this world left me but my honour  permit me humbly to entreat your royal highness 's protection for that only good , which I esteem more than all the rest . '


The grand duke hearing her talk in this manner , presently raised her from the ground with the greatest respect , saying , ` You have no reason , madam , to fear any thing from me , who only  come here to assist and comfort you , under those misfortunes I grieve to see you suffer  of the truth of which , my actions shall soon convince you  let me then beg you to be satisfied , that you have found a friend in me , both willing and able to make you happy  ' and so saying , he bowed and left her all pale and confused , which the Spaniard perceiving at her return , said , ` Do n't wonder , madam , at the abrupt appearance of the grand Duke , for he is pleased to live in that familiarity with us , that very often , and at all hours he comes in this way , diverting himself with jesting , and frightening my maids and me  but this time I believe he is well met withal , and I do n't doubt but that you have given him an answer that has put him out of countenance , and perhaps will make him more cautious for the future . '


' I made him no answer , said the Venetian , but what the care of my honour obliged me to , and which I recommended to the mercy and protection of his serene highness . '


And you may be certain he will protect it , said Mandragone : ` But can a lady of your sense and quickness ( added she ) not perceive , that fortune in compassion to your tedious sufferings , has at last turn'd her face , and will you not seize the golden opportunity ?
Believe me , madam , these are accidents that seldom happen  to have so young , so charming , and so great a prince , devote his heart with the sincerest passion to your service . '


 Many were the arguments that these two ladies used to maintain their different opinions  but at the last those of the Spaniard prevailed with Bianca Capello to hear the grand duke  and having heard , she soon consented to accept his love : the charms of his conversation and person encreasing every day her inclination for him , till their passion became mutual .


Having traced poor Bianca through all those thorny paths that brought her to the flowery precipice into which she fell , we will now turn to Pietro Buonaventuri her husband , and see how his new fortune became him , still young and handsome , and still beloved by his wife  so that upon her account the grand Duke not only made him master of the robes , but gave him a most magnificent palace in the street named Maggio , with such great appointments , that he enjoyed all the happiness this world could give .


His apartment was on the ground-floor , from whence he could ascend to his wife 's , except when the grand Duke was with her , and in that case , the door to them was fastened on the other side : this happened frequently , Francisco generally dismissing his train when he came home in an evening , and only with one or two confidents going privately to sup with signora Bianca , whom he could seldom bring himself to leave , till an hour before day obliged him to return to his palace  which he did in the same manner he left it .


Long did this course of life , and round of pleasure last , and longer still it might have done , had not the prosperity and power of Pietro ( now become very  considerable all over Florence , ) filled his mind with so much pride and insolence , that his desires alone dictated all his actions , without the least regard to form or decency .
Amongst the many ladies whose affections he sought to acquire , was a widow called Cassandra Bongianni , descended from one of the greatest families in the city , whose extraordinary beauty had gained her many admirers , to some of which it had proved very fatal : her relations , to revenge the dishonour done their family , having already miserably destroyed two of them  one of which ( a young man of the family of del Caccia ) after giving him several mortal wounds , they dipp'd in pitch , and with a straw hat on his head , and a basket full of balls of packthread on his arm , set him on a stone near the door of his mistress  so that all the people , who passed , ( thinking it was a country man asleep ) took no notice of him , till towards evening , some body going to wake him , discovered the truth , to the great concern of all who knew him , and more particularly his parents  who , after they had buried him , sought in vain for the authors of his death , though every body 's conjecture centered on the relations of the lady .


Notwithstanding all this was well known to Buonaventuri , it did not in the least intimidate him from pursuing his enterprize , which , as he was insinuating , young and beautiful , he soon attained : and not content with his victory , he gloried in the publication of it , jesting upon , and laughing in the very faces of any of her relations whom he met  and being one day particularly impertinent to  Roberto Ricci , her nephew , he , ( unable to endure it , ) complained to his aunt , threatning her extremely if she pursued so vile a practice , which , though she positively denied to him , she still continued in such a manner , as made it obvious to all the city : nor did Pietro from this grow more discreet  but as before he had only laughed at them , he began now to menace and insult them , which for some time they feared to resent , out of respect to the grand Duke : but at last their patience being exhausted , they went all together , and represented to his serene highness , the injuries they suffered from Buonaventuri , begging he would command him to behave in a more reasonable way .


The grand Duke was very much concerned to hear of the ill behaviour of Buonaventuri  and promised it should be remedied .
When they were gone he immediately sent for Pietro , and taking him into his closet , told him the complaints he had received from Ricci , and the rest of Bongianni 's relations , adding these words : ` You see therefore , how great is the uneasiness such things give to families , and as this is one of the most considerable in our dominions , you ought to have some regard to it  instead of which you are not content to possess the aunt , but must insult and ridicule the nephew  and that in the most public places , and most opprobrious manner : all this forces me to warn you , that as your actions are unjust ( perhaps ) they may draw on bad consequences  and should these people kill you , 't is not in my power to restore you to life  so that if you can not or will not leave pursuing  this amour , at least do it with more secrecy and decorum . '


The haughty Buonaventuri having heard the gracious admonitions of Francisco , ( which being deliver'd with so much reason and calmness , he ought to have esteemed them as the greatest of favours ) returned this answer : ` As I assure your royal highness , there is not one word of truth in all that these men have said , ( being neither so extravagant , nor impertinent as they would make me appear , ) so I have not the least fear of them : but the true cause of their anger is their envy  they can not bear to see me in that state , to which your highness 's bounty has raised me , and therefore with calumnies endeavour to deprive me of it , envying also their own blood , whose fortune , like wolves , they would devour  and as they know I have a friendship for that lady , and am some protection to her from their cruelty , they are resolved to ruin us both by this monstrous contrivance . '


' I know nothing of these affairs , replied the grand duke , nor do I mean to enter into them  't is enough that I have advised you as a friend , do as you please , what happens after this will be owing to yourself alone  ' and so saying he dismissed him .


Yet little did Buonaventuri profit by the kind remonstrances of the great Duke , growing every day more furious and offensive , committing so many outrages against all the relations of Cassandra , and treating Ricci especially , in so despicable a manner , that he was often ready to take a full revenge ,  being only detained from it by the fear of losing his fortune , by the grand Duke 's resentment  at last he resolved to renew his complaints to him , and as he was much in favour with the princess Isabella his sister , he chose to do it by her means : to whom he protested , he was not able to support any longer the scorn of the world , and abominable impudence of Pietro , to deliver himself from which , if he could find no other redress , ( he said ) he should be obliged at last to abandon the consideration of his fortune and every thing else .


The princess having heard him out , went directly to her brother , whom she made sensible of the vile carriage of Buonaventuri , and of the mischiefs that might attend it  representing the approaching ruin of that whole injur'd family , who were so enraged , as to have no farther restraint , either from their obedience to their sovereign , or reason itself .


The grand Duke promised a speedy and effectual redress  and considering with himself that the only way to it , was to send Pietro from Florence till this hatred should be abated , by time and absence , he determined to employ him in some of his affairs abroad  and as soon as he came to Bianca Capello that night , he told her all that had passed on the occasion , desiring her to use all sorts of arguments , both persuasive and threatning , that might induce Buonaventuri to change his proceedings , and for the future to act more wisely  `` But if you ca n't prevail ( added he ) I will send him to France , where he shall stay till he is sensible of his errors . ''


 This was like a dagger to the heart of poor Bianca , who still loved her husband to excess , ( though she did not let it appear to the grand duke ) and fearing that he would , as he said , send him away , she resolved to try all the rhetoric of prayers and tears , to turn him from his dangerous course , and keep him with herself .
For that purpose she waited his coming home , which was always late , and when she heard him below in his apartment , she descended the back stairs , and began in this manner , ` Since my love to you exceeds all that is , or ever was , of passionate , and kind , let me by that conjure you , to hear me out with patience  for what I have to say concerns you in the nearest manner , and is absolutely necessary to your preservation  ' and then in few words she proceeded to tell him all that the grand duke had said to her , and the resolution he had taken for his security , to send him out of the country .


( To be continued . )
6 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONTINUED .


 6.1 .
CHAP .
IV .
Cautions concerning Imitation .


THE ignorance of children , whose brain hath as yet taken no impression , and who have no formed habits , is what occasions their pliancy and inclination to imitate all they see .
It is therefore a very principal point to set before them none but the best models  no sort of persons should be suffered to come near them , but such as it would be advantageous to copy after .
But as it is impossible , notwithstanding all our precaution , but they must see many irregularities , we should teach them timely to remark the faulty behaviour of vicious and irrational people  such whose reputation is irretrievably lost : they should be shewn how deservedly despicable , how miserable they are , who abandon themselves to their passions , and neglect the cultivation of their reason .


By this means we may , without fear of giving them a turn for mockery , form their taste , and inspire a sensibility of whatever is truly graceful .
Nay , we need not refrain from general cautions , with relation to some sorts of defects , altho ' there should be a danger , by such proceedings , of giving them an insight into the weaknesses of people to whom they owe respect : for besides that we ought not to hope , nor would it be just , to keep  them ignorant of the true maxims relative to those points  so is it the surest way of keeping them in their duty , to instil the notion that they must bear with another 's defects  not even judge of them inconsiderately  that they often appear greater than they really are  that a number of other good qualities atone for them  that , as perfection is not to be found upon earth , we should admire those who have least imperfection : in short , though this species of information ought to be reserved for extremities , nevertheless it is our duty to give the true principles , and to preserve them from imitating indiscriminately whatever evil shall happen to come in sight .


Besides all this , we should discourage them from personating ridiculous people .
This turn for comic mockery has something in it low and repugnant to genteel sentiment  besides which , it is much to be feared lest children should catch these manners , because the warmth of their imaginations , the suppleness of their bodies , and their sprightliness together , give them an aptness in taking all sorts of forms for the representing every ridiculous object .


This propensity in children to imitation , produces infinite mischief when they are put into the hands of bad people , and who act with no reserve in their company .
But God hath indued them by the same means with a pliableness to whatever is set before them for their good : very often , without speaking , it sufficeth only to make them observe in another the thing we would have them do .


[ To be continued . ]
7 .
Figure 1 .
The SWALLOW-TAIL'D Butterfly and the ICHNEUMON .
Fly in their several States .


 PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONTINUED .


 7.1 .
The natural History of the Swallow-tail'd Butterfly , and its Ichneumon .


IN a former Number of this work , our fair readers may remember we gave them some account of the several metamorphoses or alterations from one state to another , which various classes of animals undergo .
But although we mentioned in general terms the changes of the butterfly kind , yet as we entered into no very particular detail in regard to them , it will not , we hope , be look'd on as any kind of repetition , if we take up a short portion of their time on that head here .


That beautiful and almost infinitely varied genus of insects , which is so well known by the names of butterfly and moth , ( the one meaning only a day , the other a night fly , ) is to be ranked with those of the most perfect change , as every one of this kind passes through the greatest number of  states that has yet been discovered amongst animals , viz .
the egg , worm , chrysalis , and fly .
But to render these terms more clear , and at the same time to relate the general history of this extensive province in the great kingdom of nature , we shall illustrate it with an example .


The butterfly we have fixed on for this purpose is one of the most beautiful as well as the largest that we know of English growth : it is commonly known by the name of the Swallow Tail , from the figure of its under-wings , which terminate in some measure like the tail of that bird .
Some authors indeed have called it the fennel fly , because the caterpillar which produces it , is fondest of feeding on fennel , though it is not uncommonly found upon dill , parsley , carrot , and several other umbelliferous plants .
But Linnaeus , whose names are frequently as absurdly arbitrary , as his system is laboriously ingenious , has bestowed on it the name of Machaon , who was a celebrated Greek physician , and son to Esculapius .


His first state is , like that of all other insects , an egg , which is laid by its parent on the plant that is afterwards to become food for the infant worm at the emersion into life .
She , however , seldom lays more than two , never more than three or four on one plant , and those singly and at a considerable distance from each other .
These eggs are yellow and of a conical form , and are so sixt by the female , with a strong glutinous matter , to the stalk of the plant , as to stand all the fiercest attacks of the wind and rain , without being forced  from their hold .
One of them , as affixed to a piece of a stalk is represented at c , in the annexed plate .


These eggs , which are generally laid in June , July , or August , come to perfection in about a month 's time  when the young caterpillar breaks forth the same in every respect but bulk that it appears when full grown : its body is green , annulated , or striped transversely with striae of black , each ringlet studded with spots of a bright scarlet .
This caterpillar leads a very solitary life , there seldom being more than two to be found on one plant .
The reason of this may probably be , that the umbelliferous plants in general , and more particularly the fennel , which , as we have before observed , is the favourite food of this caterpillar , afford but a very small quantity of foliage  and that this worm before its next change , grows to a very considerable bulk .
The parent , instructed by that most infallible of all properties , instinct , purposely deposits her eggs so sparingly , lest the future offspring forming too large a colony to be maintained by one plant , should be forced to seek out for fresh quarters , in which case , unless they chanced to meet with another plant of the same kind with that they quitted , they must inevitably perish .
They are very slow in feeding , and in their growth cast their skins several times before they change into a Chrysalis .
In some the green is more or less bright , but in general the colours are more vivid in their infant state than when more fully grown .


This caterpillar has one property peculiar to itself , which is , that on the approach of any fly or  ichneumon , it puts forth from the two red spots on its forehead , a pair of antennae , or horns like those of a snail , and then beats about from side to side with the fore part of its body , in order to prevent the Ichneumon from emitting or fixing any eggs on its body .
Two of these caterpillars at their full growth , the one at rest , the other with its antennae put forth and defending itself from the ichneumon , are represented at d and e .


His next state is that of the Chrysalis , which , foreseeing for some little time beforehand , he prepares for , by abstaining from food , and discharging his excrements  which done , he fixes himself by his two hind legs , with a web , to some part of the stalk of the plant , and then spinning a thin single thread across his body , between the third and fourth joint , remains as it were suspended and immoveable for about four and twenty hours , when by a continued motion the skin is stripped off , and he becomes converted to the Chrysalis , shewn at f .


This transformation happens in August or September , according as the spring may be early or late  and in this situation he passes the whole winter and ensuing spring , coming out about the May or June following , in the form of the large and beautiful butterfly , represented at A and B .
The wings are of a bright yellow , with borders and bands of a deep black  the under pair still farther decorated with a chain of fine blue spots , and two circles of a full orange .
These flies feed on the dulcet juices of flowers , the moisture of which they suck in by means of a long proboscis , wherewith they are provided .
They are frequenly seen  sitting with their wings folded , as at a , on the ground , near rivers and ponds .


Those who are desirous of breeding these flies themselves , in order to see their changes , or to procure the butterfly in greater perfection , may find the caterpillars , during the months abovementioned , in places abounding with the umbelliferous plants .
When discovered , they must be carefully supplied with fresh food : when the Chrysalis is obtained , it must be kept temperate , and not much disturbed : and the box or cage must be roomy , in order for the wings to expand themselves , otherwise they will be liable to be injur'd , when the fly issues from the shell .


They copulate as soon as they appear in the fly state , lay their eggs in about a fortnight afterwards , and then soon die .


As in our description of the abovementioned butterfly we took notice of the manner in which the caterpillar whereby it is produced , defends itself from the attacks of the Ichneumon , it may not be improper in this place to explain what we mean by that term  especially as it opens an entire new scene in the natural history of the insect tribe , in which the great parent who provides sustenance for all creatures in different ways , and has in general contrived it so , that the larger and more powerful shall prey on and destroy the smaller ones , seems to contradict herself , by enabling a small animal to subsist on the very flesh and juices of one much larger than itself  and that even whilst it continues alive , and apparently in good health .


 The Ichneumon then is a class of small flies , whereof there are a very great variety of species  the proper nourishment of the worm of which is , the body of some other caterpillar .
On this account the parent finds means to deposit its eggs on , or rather underneath the skin of such caterpillar , which hatching in due time , the worm immediately begins to feed on the very entrails of the caterpillar  nor ever quits it , even though it frequently changes into a Chrysalis , as if it were by a metamorphosis to elude its enemy , till the time when his own change is to happen , which he undergoes first into an Aurelia , and then into a Fly , emerging in the last form from the very spot where he first found residence in that of an egg .


The fly which is represented in the same plate with the Swallow Tail , sitting at g , and in its flying position at b , is one of this sort  preys on the caterpillar of that butterfly , and is produced in the following manner .


The female fly emits an egg , ( which is represented in its natural size and shape i , ) on the caterpillar , either at the time when the caterpillar is asleep , or soon after it has received a new skin .
This egg , by means of a glutinous matter , which the parent emits at the same time with it , is so fixed where it is deposited , as not to be got off without the utmost difficulty  and being in less than seven days hatched by the warmth of the caterpillar 's body , and the heat of the sun , the animal produced from it eats its way thereinto , on that part , whereby it adheres to the body .
The empty shell covering the entrance or incision made by the newly  hatched maggot , the wound becomes quickly healed , and the worm feeds on the entrails of the caterpillar till such time as he comes to his maturity , which not being in less than eighteen or twenty days , it frequently happens that the caterpillar becomes in the mean while transformed into a Chrysalis .
The maggot , however , contained either within the caterpillar or chrysalis when grown to its full bulk , will eat its way through and fall to the ground  at which time it is in size and shape as represented at k , and of a dusky white  but in less than two hours is formed into a Chrysalis , as at l , in which state , if this change happens in summer , it continues for only about three weeks  but if late in autumn , as is sometimes the case , it remains during the whole winter in that state , and the fly , by eating its way through the shell , comes forth in the spring following .


N. B. All Caterpillars or Chrysales impregnated by Ichneumons , become spoiled , and do not produce any butterfly or moth .
There are great varieties of the Ichneumon fly  but the one we have here described is of the kind called by Linnaeus Larvaxum .


7.2 .
Description of the copper plate contained in our last Number .


Figure 1 .
The Calamary compleat , with all its arms extended .
Figure 2 .
and 3 .
Two of the suckers belonging to the long arms of the Calamary , detached and represented in different views .


8 .
THE LADY 's GEOGRAPHY .


 8.1 .
The MANNERS and CUSTOMS of the Inhabitants of AMBOYNA concluded .


THE People who were looked on as the Origines of these islands , but which it is probable came thither from other countries , were reckoned by the antient writers , who however knew very little of them , amongst the Anthropophagi , or devourers of human flesh  and indeed some recent examples seem to confirm that idea of them .
The grossness of their manners was perfectly correspondent with their simplicity and their ignorance , which has however often been favourable to strangers , still is apparent in the fabulous and absurd relation , which the Amboynians themselves give in regard to their origin .
Some of them claim descent from a crocodile , some from a serpent , and others from an eel , a tortoise , or even the old trunk of a tree  on which account they still respect their ancestors , in the creature from whom they pretend to have sprung  and if any one happens to kill one of these animals , they consider themselves in duty bound to avenge their deaths .


 Ignorance , in all ages the mother of idolatry and superstition , has introduced into the worship and manner of living of these islanders , an infinity of customs as whimsical as their prejudices are ridiculous .
Demons partake of their principal cares , and are the continual objects of their inquietude .
The meeting of a dead body going to the grave , or of a lame , or old man , if it happens to be the first live object seen in the day  the cry of night birds , or the flight of a crow over their houses , are with them so many fatal presages , whose effects they think themselves enabled to prevent , by instantly returning back , and making use of certain precautions .
A few cloves of garlic , some little bits of pointed wood , and a knife , put into the hand or laid under the pillow of a child in the night time , are by them imagined a sufficient security against evil spirits .
They never sell the first fish which they catch in new nets , being well persuaded that it is unlucky so to do , but either eat it themselves or else present it to some one .
The women who go to market in the morning with certain commodities , always give the first piece for whatever price is offered them  without which they imagine they should have no business for the whole day after : also , whenever they have sold any thing , they immediately strike on their basket , crying out as loud as they can , `` that 's well . ''


It gives these people no kind of pleasure to commend their children  for on these occasions they are always apprehensive of some design to bewitch them , unless such commendations are joined with certain expressions which may dispel all kind of  diffidence .
When a child sneezes , they make use of a sort of imprecation , by way of conjuring the evil spirit which is waiting for its life  and the least thing which ails a child they attribute to the power of witchcraft .


These ideas are so deeply rooted among the people of this nation , that it would be in vain to attempt destroying them .
Even those who have embraced christianity are not exempt from them , although they are more circumspect on this head than the others .
They will not admit into a sick person 's room any one who has been before where there was a corpse .
The women of the country will not eat a double pisang , nor any other double fruit  nor will a slave present her mistress with any such , for fear that afterwards , when she shall lie in , she should bring twins into the world , which would be an increase of domestic trouble .


When a woman dies either pregnant or in childbed , the Amboynians believe that she is changed into a daemon , of which they tell stories as absurd as the precautions which they take on such occasions to prevent this imaginary misfortune .
Persons attacked by the small pox , would , according to them , run a very great risk , if not narrowly and closely watched , of being carried away on a branch of sagu , by the demon who communicated the distemper to them .


In short it would be endless to enter into a detail of all the singular opinions of these people , with respect to an infinity of other things : but the most remarkable one , and which shews what an imagination once led to a wrong biass is capable  of , is the notion they have formed to themselves concerning their hair , to which they attribute the hidden virtue of supporting a malefactor amidst the most cruel tortures , without a possibility of forcing a confession of his crime , unless by shaving him , which never fails instantly to produce that effect .


With so strong an inclination for superstition there can be no difficulty in conceiving that they should have a fondness for necromancy .
This science resides in certain particular families who are in high renown amongst them  and although the rest hate them mortally , because they look on them as capable of doing them a great goal of mischief , yet they all have recourse to sorcery on every occasion where they think it can procure them any information which may favour their loves or aid any of their designs .
This vice reigns principally among the women , who talk the most of it , and who are also the most credulous  but if their magic is more deeply examined it will be found that it most frequently consists only in the fatal art of subtilly preparing poison  and that every thing also in it is no more than a texture of skilful impostures .


Inconstancy , and a love of novelty , are the characteristics of this people , in whom , therefore , there is no placing any great confidence .
The Dutch have frequently experienced the necessity of depriving them of the means of following their natural bent , which incessantly leads them to form plots against them , and execute them with as much steadiness as secrecy whenever they find a favourable opportunity .


 Too much severity , however , towards them would be equally dangerous : sensible of injuries , and vexations , vindictive and implacable , it is ever , better to please them by fair , than to enrage them by harsh treatment .
Such moderation therefore is ever strongly recommended in the instructions which the company sends to its officers  and it were to be wished for their own sakes that they conformed thereto with more exactness than they generally do .


8.2 .
DESCRIPTION of the Island of CEYLON .


 CEYLAN , Ceilon , or Zeilan , is an island of Asia , in the Indian sea , on this side of the Ganges , near the Cape of Comori , upon the streight of Manar or Quiloa .
It lies in about six degrees of south latitude , and near 200 of longitude  and is one of the most remarkable of these seas : its length being , according to the accounts of the Hollanders , who have measured it the most exactly , about fifty-five leagues , its greatest breadth about thirty , and its whole circumference one hundred and ninety seven .
Its figure is nearly that of a pear , or rather of a gammon of bacon  for which reason the Dutch have given the fort Cays , near Jaffanapatam , the name of Hammenbiel , or the Knuckle of the Gammon , a name which is perfectly expressive of the form of the island in that place .


The possession of this island lies between the Hollanders and the sovereign of the country , which is called king of Candi , or Candi-Uda .
The first European settlements that were made on it were by the Portuguese , who , not contented with the possession of part of the coast , carried their incursions as far as to the capital , which they burned more than once , without sparing even the palaces or temples  in short , they rendered themselves so formidable , that they obliged the king to pay them an annual tribute of three elephants , and to purchase peace on many other servile conditions .
At length , however , that prince had recourse for assistance to the Dutch of Batavia , who joining  their forces to his , entirely beat the Portuguese , and drove them out of all their fortified places , after their having possessed them for near a hundred and fifty years .
The monarch , however , was little advantaged by this assistance , which was only intended to procure a like establishment for themselves : for the Dutch , on the cOnclusion of the war , and more especially after making themselves masters of Colombo , in 1655 , positively refused to give up a conquest which they thus saw themselves in the easy possession of : ever since which time they have applied their whole care and diligence to fortify themselves on the coast .
Their principal establishments are at Jafnapatam , and the island of Manaar on the north  Trinquemali , and Batticalon , on the east  the town of Point de Galla , on the south  and Colombo on the west .
To say nothing of Negombo , and Calpentin , which are two other towns belonging to them , with several forts at the mouth of the rivers and the openings of mountains , for the defence of passes  so that the Dutch may properly be considered as absolute masters of much the greatest part of the coasts of this very extensive island .


[ To be continued . ]
9 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER VII . ]


 MADAM ,


ONE of your correspondents having given you a most entertaining account of the fair and unfortunate Bianca Capello , give me leave to offer at your shrine , some curious anecdotes of an Italian hero , known by the name of Castruccio Castracani .
I shall draw my materials from Machiavel .
They begin , I believe , with a mixture of truth and romance : Machiavel never keeping strictly in the road of truth , when by going a little on one side of it , he could embellish the history of his country .
In the main , the facts are true .


In the city of Lucca , capital of the little republic of that name , Dianora Castracani , an unmarried  sister of Antonio Castracani , one of the prebends of the cathedral of Lucca , going one morning into her garden , to gather herbs , found secreted among some cabbages an infant boy , who at her approach held out its helpless little hands , and cried , as wanting assistance .
Dianora was moved at the sight  she took up the child , and carried him into her brother 's house .
The prebend , no less humane than his sister , approved of what she had done , and resolving to preserve , nourish , and adopt this foundling , immediately gave the child baptism , by the name of Castruccio .


Antonio and Dianora performed their different parts with equal care and attention , in the culture of this young sapling , which Antonio intended to plant , in a proper season , under the shade of the church .
Fate , and Castruccio 's own inclinations , intended him for a more open situation .
At the age of fourteen , arms were his exercise , and books on military subjects his study .
The boy had discovered so many feats of courage among his play-fellows , and such an unwearied attention to all the exercises in which he saw the soldiers employed , that he had attracted the particular observation of Francisco Guinigi , a gentleman of great esteem and authority  head of that party distinguished in Lucca , by the title of the Ghibellins .
Guinigi sent for the boy , and , after having exactly learnt his story , and education , very generously offered to place him , without any expence to himself or friends , in the army .
Castruccio , with great eagerness , chose to mount a horse , rather than ascend a pulpit : he quitted the good priest Antonio Castracani ,  with all the decency of gratitude , and enlisted into the Ghibellian troops , with all the raptures of an Achilles .
His person , his manners , and particularly his modesty , soon became extremely attractive .
He was not only agreeable to the family of Guinigi , but to the whole people of Lucca .
He had scarce been three years in the army , when , in consequence of a treaty between the Lucchese and the Pavians , the Guelfs of Pavia applied to the Ghibellins of Lucca for assistance , which was granted by the latter , notwithstanding former antipathies , the Guelfs and Ghibellines having been long at variance .
Francisco Guinigi , was appointed with the number of auxiliary troops in favour of the Pavians .
Among these squadrons marched Castruccio , then only eighteen years old : he distinguished himself in so remarkable a manner , and reflected such glory and success upon his countrymen , that at his return to Lucca , he was received with the most unanimous applause , and rewarded with honours seldom or ever bestowed upon so young an officer .
He was raised in the army and in the state , to a rank equal with Uguccione della Fuggivola : even his personal losses became to him fresh acquisitions of power  his great patron and benefactor , Francisco Guinigi died , and left Castruccio tutor and sole director of the education and fortune of his only son Pagolo Guinigi .
A trust of such importance still exalted the character of Castruccio , especially as his intentions of discharging it with honour and fidelity appeared in every step of his life .


 After the death of Francisco Guinigi , whose authority had been incontestably great , Georgio Opizi attempted to grasp the same same degree of power which Francisco had enjoyed in Lucca : he was the head of a numerous family , all of whom were Guelfs .
Uguccione , jealous of the Opizi , and most especially of Georgio , was advised by Castruccio , to destroy the whole race at once .
The manner of putting his scheme into execution was performed with equal secrecy and dispatch .
Castruccio remained at Lucca , while Uguccione went to his government at Pisa  but soon returned in the night time unsuspected to the gates of Lucca , at the head of an army of Ghibellins , whom he had brought from Pisa .


Castruccio was ready at the time appointed to open the gates , and in the slaughter of a few hours , the entire race of the Opizi , and great numbers of the chief Guelfs , were put to the sword .
Not one of the Opizi survived  but , amidst the confusion and obscurity of the night , about an hundred of the Guelf families escaped , some of whom took refuge in Florence , others in Pistoia .


To this massacre , for it will bear no softer a denomination , succeeded La Battaglia de Monticatini , the battle fought upon the banks of the Nievole .
Uguccione was hindered by illness from being personally present in the battle : one of his sons was killed , Castruccio was wounded , and three hundred of the Lucchese army were left dead upon the field .


Uguccione , naturally jealous , was now grown as uneasy at the established power of Castruccio  Castracani as he had been at the aspiring power of Georgio Opizi .
He saw the repeated victories of so young a general with envy .
He acquiesced to councils , and pursued measures , which he wished rather to have given , than to have heard .
He had been taught by Castruccio himself , that death was the only sure antidote against a rival .
Morta la Serpe , spento it veleno .
` The viper killed , the poison evaporates . '
In pursuance of this maxim , he sent a letter to his son , Neri Uguccione , to invite Castruccio to supper , and there , in defiance of all laws of hospitality and honour , to take an opportunity to murder him .
Castruccio was invited  accepted the invitation , and in the midst of the festivity was manacled and confined as a prisoner , but not murdered .
Neri Uguccione rightly judged that the forfeiture of his own life would be inherent to the destruction of so popular a man as Castruccio .
The father , less considerate and more envious , was resolved to perfect the bloody work , which his son was unwilling to perform .
He came to Lucca , with a considerable number of soldiers for that purpose .
At his arrival , the whole people of Lucca rose in arms , delivered Castruccio from his imprisonment , and soon drove Uguccione out of Tuscany : he took refuge in Lombardy , where some years afterwards he died in little esteem , and extremely poor .


Uguccione being removed , the whole field of honorary dignities lay open to Castruccio : he was solemnly elected prince of Lucca , and lord of Pisa : he was scarce in possession of those titles , when Frederic of Austria came into Italy , where he was  received as emperor  and in a personal interview with Castruccio , appointed him his lieutenant in Tuscany .


Castruccio , equally courted by Tuscans , Lombardians , and Guibellins , entertained hopes within his own breast , of becoming entire master of the whole kingdom of Tuscany .
In pursuance of such intentions , he resolved to seize upon Florence  but while he was taking proper measures to fulfil these revolutions , he was called back to Lucca , on account of a conspiracy against him , concerted by the family of Poggio .


The several branches of the house of Poggio thought their merits ill rewarded by Castruccio , to whose sovereignty they had zealously contributed .
Catching mutually fire from each other 's indignation , they took advantage of their prince 's absence , killed his lieutenant , and were warmly inciting the whole state of Lucca to rebel , when Stefano Poggio , an old man of great worth and weight in his family , who had kept himself free even from all thoughts of a conspiracy , stopped any farther mischief , and waited upon Castruccio , to ask his pardon for what had already past .
Castruccio received him without any outward shew of resentment  and having placed soldiers upon whom he might depend , in every corner of the city , he appointed a day when Stefano Poggio at the head of his relations should come to receive an act of grace .
The harmless unsuspicious old man , being deceived himself , deceived all his relations , and attended with his whole family at the day and hour appointed .
They were admitted to Castruccio :  they were sent by his immediate orders to prison  and soon afterwards , without any respect to age , or regard to honour , they were every one of them put to death .


More effectually to secure himself in a government , which he found capable of entertaining plots against him , Castruccio , under various pretences , destroyed either the life or fortune of every individual Lucchese , whom he suspected as his personal enemy  and having pulled down many of their castles , he turned the materials to his own service , and built a fortress at Lucca in a situation to command and terrify the inhabitants .
As a farther security of his dominions , he made a league of friendship with the Florentines for two years , and then turned his thoughts towards Pistoia , in which city he knew the old party-divisions , distinguished by the names of Bianci and Neri , were not totally extinguished .
With great accuteness he foresaw the consequences that must follow from those divisions , and found himself courted by both parties , separately and secretly from each other .
He gave them both assurances of his protection .
Bastianodi Possente was at the head of the Bianchi , Jacopo da Gia at the head of the Neri .
To Jacopo he promised troops under his own conduct  to Bastiano he promised troops under the conduct of Pagolo Guinigi , whom he treated and loved as his son .
The troops of both commanders marched different ways , and came into the town at different gates  but at the same time the Pistoians of each party received them as friends .
Castruccio soon gave  the signal , and while Guinigi cut in pieces the Bianchi , Castruccio himself slaughtered the Neri .
Then , as conquerors , they seized the palace , put themselves in possession of the signory , quieted the populace , and made Pistoia their own .


Castruccio , by his continued victories , no matter how obtained , was become the idol of worship to all the states of Italy : he was entreated to come to Rome to pacify the people , who were ready to mutiny for want of provisions .
Pope John the XXII .
was , by the twenty seventh schism in the church , at that time driven to Avignon : and the emperor Lewis V. was in possession of the city of Rome .
Castruccio hastened in person to the relief of the Romans , and sent thither great quantities of corn from Pisa : he calmed the mutiny , made himself acceptable to the emperor and the nobility , and was created a senator of Rome .


The Florentines foreseeing their danger , in the capture of a town so close to their territories as Pistoia , seized it to themselves , by the assistance and stratagems of several of the inhabitants , who were glad to be delivered from the present yoke of their servitude  and whom the Florentines , by the power of money and promises , had seduced to their own desires .
Such an action was scarce justifiable , if the subsisting truce had been ratified to any other man less faithless , ambitious , or sanguinary than Castruccio : but he was to be looked upon as a wolf , and all the states of Italy as lambs destined to his voracity , unless they could find a shepherd for their own security .
He hastened  back from amidst his honours at Rome , and made preparations for a Florentine war .
The successes of that war were various : sometimes the acquisitions were on one side , sometimes on the other  till in the year 1328 , one great battle gave Castruccio a signal , but , in its consequence , a dear bought victory .
As soon as the conquest was entirely compleated , by the loss of twenty thousand Florentines , and the flight of the rest , their whole army having consisted of thirty thousand foot and ten thousand horse , Castruccio placed himself in the gateway of the town of Fusechio , the head-quarters of his own residence , to review his troops at their return , and to take an opportunity of thanking the several soldiers and officers of his army , as they passed by him into the town .
He was much heated and fatigued by the long and laborious combat  and whilst he staid in the passage of the gate , hot , and exposed to a very sharp nipping wind , he caught cold , and the next night a fever confined him to his bed .
At first the symptoms were not dangerous , but the distemper increasing by degrees , quickly spread throughout his body , and beyond the limits of medicinal power .
As soon as he found himself without the least hopes of recovery , he called Pagolo Guinigi to his bed side , and embracing him with the composure of a hero , and the affection of a father , made a very moving speech , and took a last melancholy farewell of his pupil , who had been the constant object of his care .
Castruccio died September 3 , 1328 .
No comments are requisite to illustrate  the life of such a man : his actions are a continual comment upon themselves : they represent him an active , bloody , remorseless soldier  not unsusceptible to the calls of gratitude and friendship , but vindictive to a degree that makes human nature almost tremble at his name .


I am , Madam , Your Humble Servant , E. F .


10 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 WHEN they arrived at Mrs. Lawson 's , Sophia , who little expected such a visit , had wandered , as usual , in the wood , accompanied with Dolly : Mrs. Lawson immediately sent Fanny in search of her  and Harriot , expressing an impatience to see her sister , went along with her .


They found Sophia sitting under an oak , with Mrs. Gibbons on one side of her , and Dolly on the other  for the old gentlewoman was prevailed upon by Sophia to endure the company of the innocent girl , who had never offended her  and Dolly , instructed by her lovely friend , made good use of these opportunities to insinuate herself into her favour .


William leaned on a branch close by Sophia , to whom he addressed his discourse , while his eyes often stole tender glances at his beloved Dolly .
Harriot , when she approached , cried out affectedly , ` Upon my word , sister , you have a brilliant assembly  here  I did not expect to find you in such good company . '


Sophia , surprised to see her sister , ran hastily to meet her , and embracing her kindly , enquired with a sweet anxiety for her mother , and whether she also had been so good to visit her .
Harriot scarce answered her question  her attention was all fixed upon William : so handsome a youth seemed worthy to feel the influence of her charms  and all the artillery of her eyes was instantly levelled against him .
Having returned his respectful bow with an affected courtesy , and the fashionable toss of the head , she deigned to take some little notice of Mrs. Gibbons , and honoured Dolly with a careless glance , whose amiable figure , however , attracted a second look  and after examining her with an inquisitive eye , she turned away with a little expression of scorn in her countenance , and again attacked William , practising a thousand airs to strike him  all which he beheld with the utmost indifference .


Sophia , being impatient to see her mother , took leave of Mrs. Gibbons  but Harriot , who had a new conquest in view , was unwilling to go so soon , professing herself inchanted with the place , and declaring she would turn shepherdess .


Sophia told her , smiling , that she was sure that that sort of life would not please her .


` Oh !
how can you think so , cried Harriot , is not the dress excessively becoming ?
then love in these woods is so tender and sincere !
I will engage there is not a nymph in this hamlet whose frown would not drive her lover to despair :  pair : own the truth now , said she , turning with a lively air to William , are you not violently in love ? '


The youth bowed , blushed , and sighed  and not daring to look at his mistress , he suffered his eyes , full as they were of tender expression , to direct their glances towards Sophia . '
I am proud to own , madam , said he to Harriot , that I have a heart capable of the most ardent passion . '


`` And mighty constant too !
no doubt , '' interupted Harriot , with a malignant sneer  for she had observed the sigh and the look , and was ready to burst with vexation and disappointment , to find her conquest obstructed already by her sister , as she supposed  and being now as impatient , as she was before unwilling to be gone , ` Come , Sophy , said she , taking her under the arm , my mamma will take it ill that you make no more haste to see her , for we shall return to town immediately . '


`` Sure you will stay one night , '' said Sophia .


`` Oh not for the world ! ''
exclaimed Harriot affectedly  ` How can you imagine I would stay so long in an odious village , to be rusticated into aukwardness , pursued she , with a spiteful laugh , and ashamed to shew my face in any assemby in town afterwards . '
Saying this , she courtesied disdainfully to Mrs. Gibbons and her nephew , and tripped away , pulling her sister away with her .


Dolly joined the two ladies , but walked by the side of Sophia , not aiming at any familiarity with the insolent and affected Harriot  and as they pursued their way home , she had the mortification to  hear her lover ridiculed and despised by the disappointed coquet , who supposed she mortified her sister by the contempt she expressed for a man who had so little taste as to like her .


Sophia , as well in compassion to poor Dolly , who suffered greatly upon this occasion , as in justice to the amiable youth , defended him warmly , which drew some coarse raillery upon her from Harriot .


When they came near to Mr. Lawson 's house , the sight of Sir Charles 's chariot threw her into a fit of trembling  Harriot perceived it , and willing to undeceive her , if she hoped to find the young baronet there , ' I am charged with Sir Charles 's compliments , to you , said she , he insisted upon our using his chariot for this little excursion  my mamma and I would fain have persuaded him to accompany us , but he pleaded an engagement , and would not come . '


Dolly now looked with great concern upon her fair friend , who suppressing a sigh , asked if Sir Charles was quite recovered .


' I do not know that he has been ill , replied Harriot .
Indeed when he came from Bath , the fatigue he had endured with his sick uncle , whom he had sat up with several nights before he died , made him look a little pale and thin  but he is now extremely well , and more gay than ever : and it is well he is so , pursued she , for we have so much of his company , that if he was not entertaining , we should find him very troublesome . '


 All this was daggers to the heart of poor Sophia : those pleasing ideas which she had indulged upon reading her mother 's letter , that represented Sir Charles as having suffered in his health , from his endeavours to vanquish his passion for her , all vanished , and left in their room a sad conviction that she was become wholly indifferent to him .


She might indeed , knowing her sister 's malice , have attributed what she said to artifice  but her manner of accounting for the alteration in Sir Charles 's looks , which her fond fancy had dwelt upon so much , was so natural and so full of probability , that she could suspect no artifice there .


Every thing Harriot said was confirmed by facts which left no room for doubt : his assiduity to Harriot , his neglect of her , appeared but too plain .
Did he not lend his chariot for a visit in which he would not share ?
did he not send his compliments in a manner that shewed his heart was so much at ease , that he felt not even any resentment for her leaving him ?
could there be stronger proofs of indifference than these ?


Such were her thoughts , and her heart was so oppressed by this sudden and unexpected shock , that it was with difficulty she restrained her tears .
Dolly , who looked at her with tender anxiety , and saw her colour come and go , and her charming eyes bent on the ground , as if she feared to look up , lest they should betray her anguish , cast many an angry glance at her envious sister , and wished her a thousand miles off .


Sophia having a little recovered herself , hastened towards her mother , who with a face of ignorant  wonder was following Mrs. Lawson about her little farm , asking a thousand questions , without heeding the answers she received .
Sophia approaching , paid her duty to her with her usual tenderness and respect , which Mrs. Darnley returned with slightly kissing her cheek , telling her that she thought her complexion was greatly improved , and appealed to Harriot for the truth of her observation .


Harriot answered , ` That indeed she could not flatter her sister so much , as to say she thought so  for if there was any alteration , it was rather for the worse . '


Sophia , without attending to this difference of opinion , with regard to her complexion , was only sollicitous to know if her mother had been well  and while she was making some tender enquiries concerning her health , Mrs. Darnley , who never consulted either time or place , suddenly interupted her to draw her aside from the company , and asked her abruptly , ` Whether she was not surprised at Sir Charles 's indifference ? '


Sophia , still smarting with the pangs her sister 's discourse had given her , replied , in a tone of resentment , ` That nothing now could surprise her with regard to Sir Charles . '


` Why , to say the truth , Sophia , replied Mrs. Darnley , I believe he has quite forgot you  but there was a time when you might have been happy .
- oh girl , girl , pursued she , kindling with anger as she spoke , you were always obstinate and conceited  what a foolish part have you played with all your wit !
but I am to blame to trouble myself about you . '


 Sophia now eased her loaded heart by a shower of tears .
` It is to little purpose now , said Mrs. Darnley , to repent of your imprudent behaviour  you were too wise to take a parent 's advice , when it might have been useful : when a man of rank and fortune makes his addresses to a woman who is inferior to him in both , he expects a thousand little complacencies and attentions from her , which , without wounding her honour , may convince him that it is not to his riches she sacrifices herself . '


` Ah , Madam , cried Sophia , that is a snare which has been fatal to many young women in my circumstances .
Who sees not the advantages this gives a man whose aim is to seduce ?
I am persuaded these pernicious maxims are not yours , but his , for whose ungenerous purpose they are so well calculated . '


Sophia guessed truly  the young baronet had often had discourses of this sort with Mrs. Darnley , who nevertheless took it ill that her daughter should offer her such an affront as to suppose she did not understand maxims as well as Sir Charles .


Nothing is more certain than that we are never made so ridiculous by the qualities we have , as by those we affect to have .
Mrs. Darnley , with all her ignorance , aspired to be thought witty : she therefore vindicated her claim to what Sophia had called maxims  no matter whether they were pernicious or not .
The word maxim sounded learnedly in her ears : she told her daughter , with great asperity , that she was so conceited and vain of her  own wit , that she would allow no one else to have any .
Sophia found it difficult enough to appease her , but she succeeded at length , and they joined the rest of the company .


Mrs. Lawson easily prevailed upon her guests to stay that night and the following day , which , being Sunday , Harriot could not resist the temptation of displaying her charms and her fine cloaths in a country church , which was so new a triumph , that the thoughts of it kept her waking almost the whole night .


The ridiculous airs she assumed to draw the admiration of the simple villagers , who never saw any thing so fine and so gay before , and who stared at her with stupid surprise , made Sophia often blush for her : but her affected glances were chiefly directed to the beautiful youth , whose insensibility had so greatly mortified her pride : she saw his eyes constantly turned towards the pew where she sat  but she saw plainly that it was not her charms that drew them thither .
She had no suspicion that Dolly was the object of his affection , and , sensible to her great grief , of her sister 's power to charm , she no longer doubted that this envied conquest was hers .


Thus disappointed , she appeared so much out of humour , and so impatient to return to town , that Mrs. Darnley , over whom her power was absolute , complied with her importunity , and set out with her for London , as soon as they returned from church  notwithstanding all the endeavours of the good curate and his wife to detain them to dinner .


 Sophia was now left alone to her own melancholy reflections  this visit from her mother and sister had produced a sad reverse in her situation : hitherto hope had not quite forsaken her  the idea of being still beloved by Sir Charles lessened all her griefs , and supported her amidst the doubt and anxiety which his mysterious conduct had involved her in : his indifference , so apparent in her sister 's account of him , gave her pangs unfelt before : and never till now did she think herself unhappy  for , unperceived by herself , she had encouraged a secret hope that the passion she had inspired him with would not be easily subdued  and that perhaps all which she had thought exceptionable in his conduct proceeded not from a settled design to the prejudice of her honour , but from that irresolution and slowness with which a man , too sensible of his superiority in birth and fortune , proceeds in an affair of marriage , where he has no obstacles to fear , and where every thing depends upon himself .


She now perceived the necessity of banishing Sir Charles from her heart  but at the same time , she perceived all the difficulty of the task .
Though ashamed of her tears , she wept , and passionately exclaimed against her own weakness , which had kept her in a delusion so fatal to her peace .
She continued the whole day in her chamber , wholly absorb'd in melancholy thoughts .


Dolly , who knew enough of her situation to guess the cause of this new affliction , was grieved to find herself excluded as well as the rest of the family  and although she ardently wished to console  her , yet she durst not intrude uncalled upon her retirement .
While she waited impatiently for her appearance , a visitor arrived , who she knew would be welcome to her charming friend .
As soon as she perceived him , she flew with eager haste to inform Sophia , and , tapping at her door , told her in a joyful voice , that Mr. Herbert was just alighted .


Sophia , surprised at the news , instantly opened her chamber-door , and smiling tenderly upon the charming girl , to whom she excused herself for her long absence , hastened to receive the good old man , who , after some affectionate enquiries concerning her health , rallied her upon the melancholy that appeared in her countenance .


Sophia blushed and fixed her eyes on the ground , not a little surprised at his talking to her in that manner  and when with a bashful air , she looked up again , and saw a more than usual chearfulness in his eyes , her confusion encreased , and for a few moments she could not help feeling some resentment against her benefactor , for thus diverting himself with her uneasiness .


Mr. Herbert , whose thoughts were wholly employed on the pleasing news he brought , did not perceive how much his behaviour embarrassed her : to prevent his renewing a subject so disagreeable , she talked of the visit her mother and sister had made her .


Mr. Herbert asked her , ` If they had mentioned Sir Charles , and what she thought of him now ? '


 ' I think of him as I ought to do , replied Sophia , with some warmth , I despise him . '


` Be not too rash , my dear child , said Mr. Herbert  if your sister , whose malice I well know , has suggested any thing to Sir Charles 's disadvantage , be assured she deceives you  for I am convinced he not only loves you , but loves you with honour . '


Sophia , who from the first words Mr. Herbert uttered , had been in great agitation , as expecting something extraordinary , was so overwhelmed with surprise at what she heard , that her speech and colour forsaking her , she remained pale , silent , and motionless in her chair .


Mr. Herbert , perceiving how powerfully this news operated on her spirits , began to be apprehensive of the consequences , and was rising hastily to give her some assistance , when Sophia , rouzed to recollection by this motion of her venerable friend , and ashamed of the extreme sensibility she had discovered , apologised for it with a charming modesty , that greatly affected the good old man , who , if he had known in what melancholy thoughts she had passed the day , would have told her with more caution , a circumstance that raised her at once from despair to hope , and produced so great a change in her situation .


As we are never so ready to fear a disappointment as when we are nearest the completion of our wishes , Sophia , with a sweet apprehensiveness , which yet she laboured to conceal , hinted her doubts of the baronet 's sincerity  Mr. Herbert answering explicitly to these half expressed doubts ,  told her , that he was fully persuaded Sir Charles would act like a man of honour .
`` I will give you an exact account , said he to her , of what has passed between us , from which you may judge yourself of his conduct : '' he then took a letter out of his pocket , and desired her to read it .


Sophia , trembling a little at the sight of Sir Charles 's hand writing , took the billet , and found it contained a message from him to Mr. Herbert , requesting in very earnest terms , the favour of an interview , and an offer to wait upon him at any hour he should appoint .


` You may be sure , said Mr. Herbert , ( receiving back the billet which Sophia gave him without speaking a word ) that I did not suffer Sir Charles to come to me  hearing from the messenger that his master was at home waiting for my answer , I attended him immediately .
I perceived a little embarrassment in his countenance upon my first entrance , but that soon wore off : he welcomed me with great politeness , and after thanking me for the honour I did him , in preventing his visit , he entered immediately upon the affair which had occasioned his sending to me . '


` You have , Sir , said he , shewn so truly a paternal affection for the young lady to whom I have paid my addresses , and are so much esteemed and reverenced by her , that I think I may without any impropriety , address myself to you upon this occasion - '


Here he paused , and seemed a little perplexed .
` To be sure , added he , I ought to have done this before  my conduct must have appeared capricious  both to her and you , and indeed it was capricious , - but - '


Here he paused again , and fixed his eyes on the ground .
`` His frankness , pursued Mr. Herbert , pleased me greatly , and disposed me to give him a favourable attention . ''


' I can not blame Miss Sophia , said he , for acting as she has done  my heart did homage to her virtue at the time that I suffered most from the contemptuous behaviour it suggested to her .
Fain would I hope , added he sighing , that the prejudices she has conceived against me has not entirely banished me from her remembrance  the delicacy of my passion would be but ill satissfied by calling so deserving a woman my own , unless I could likewise boast a preference in her heart that left me no room to doubt my fortune had any share in determining her in my favour . '


`` I know not , pursued Mr. Herbert , whether Sir Charles expected any answer to this declaration  it is certain he looked on me with a kind of anxious timidity , and stopped a moment  I continued silent , and he proceeded in this manner : '' ' I know , Miss Sophia has an understanding too solid , and a mind too noble to suffer any considerations of rank and fortune to determine her solely in an affair upon which the happiness of her life depends : she would not surely give her hand where her heart did not acknowledge a preference .
'T is thus I answer all those doubts which my situation , and perhaps an overstrained delicacy suggest : I am impatient to convince her of the purity of my passion  and , considering you as her friend , her  guardian , and one who is in the place of a father to her , I will take no steps in this affair but such as have the sanction of your approbation  I will not even presume to visit her without your permission : be you my advocate with her , tell her I lay myself and fortune at her feet , and will receive her from your hand as the greatest blessing that heaven can bestow on me . '


` Now , my child , pursued Mr. Herbert , looking on Sophia with a smile , how would you have me answer to this discourse ?
was it necessary , think you , to play off a few female artifices here , and keep Sir Charles in doubt and anxious suspence , or did the apparent openness and candor of his procedure deserve an equal degree of frankness on my part ? '


` It is not to be doubted , sir , said Sophia blushing , but that on this occasion , as on every other , you acted with the utmost prudence . '


' I find , resumed Mr. Herbert , that you are resolved beforehand , to approve of whatever I said : well then , I told Sir Charles , that his present declaration entirely satisfied me  that being fully convinced of his sincerity , I looked upon his offer as highly honourable and advantageous to you  and that I was very sure you would have all the sense you ought to have of so generous an affection . '


` He then begged me to set out immediately for this place , and prepare you to receive a visit from him .
This request I could not possibly comply with , having business in town , which would necessarily detain me for some hours  but I promised him to go as soon as that was dispatched , which probably might be in the afternoon . '


 ` He modestly asked my leave to accompany me  but this I declined , as fearing his sudden appearance , without your being previously acquainted with what had past , might occasion some perplexity and uneasiness to you  so it was agreed that he should come to-morrow . '


`` To-morrow , '' replied Sophia , with an emotion she was not able to suppress .


` Yes , my child , replied the good old man , have you any objections to this ? '


' I know not , replied Sophia , with downcast eyes and a faultering accent , what I ought to do  I have been so used to consider Sir Charles 's professions in an unfavourable point of view  my heart has been so accustomed to suspect him - to guard itself against delusive hopes , perhaps I ought not to admit his visit so easily  perhaps I ought to resent his former behaviour .
I own I am greatly perplexed , but I will be determined wholly by your advice . '


Mr. Herbert saw her delicate scruples , and , to favour her modesty , answered , with the authority of a guardian , ` When Sir Charles visits you next , Miss Sophia , he comes to offer you his hand  he has asked my consent as your guardian and your friend  and , I presuming on my influence over you in both those characters , have given it freely  and how indeed , having your interest and happiness sincerely at heart , could I do otherwise ?
but if you think his former behaviour , in which however there were only suspicions against him , deserves to be resented , at a time when those suspicions are absolutely destroyed , you must go  through with your heroism , and see him no more  for as the poet says , ` He comes too near who comes to be denied , ' so he has offended too much who needs a pardon . '


Sophia , who felt all the force of this reasoning , answered only by a blushing silence .
Mr. Herbert then told her , that Sir Charles had declared to him that he would make the same settlements on her as had been stipulated for his mother  for he added , with equal delicacy and tenderness , ` Miss Sophia , in virtue , wit , good sense , and every female excellence , brings me an immense portion . '


`` Sir Charles , pursued Mr. Herbert smiling , by a strange contradiction , which is , I suppose , always found in lovers , though he was impatient to have me with you , yet could not help detaining me to have the pleasure of talking of you : he painted to me very naturally , the uneasiness he had suffered from your supposed contempt of him : he told me , that he was at one time determined to travel , in order to efface you from his remembrance  '' ` But , ( said he , rising and unlocking a cabinet , from which he took out a paper and put into my hands , ) you shall judge whether amidst all my resentment I did not still love Miss Sophia  that is my will , which I ordered to be drawn up previous to my intended journey . '


`` He then , to spare me the trouble of reading it all through , pointed to the place where you was mentioned , and I found he had bequeathed you an estate of four hundred pounds a year for life , and five thousand pounds to be disposed of as you pleased . ''


 This last circumstance touched Sophia so much that tears filled her eyes : she sighed , and turned her head aside to conceal her emotion , while Mr. Herbert , without seeming to observe it , continued to repeat to her several expressions used by Sir Charles , which shewed the greatness of his affection , and his veneration for her virtues .


` We parted at length , pursued Mr. Herbert , extremely well satisfied with each other , and tomorrow , or next day at farthest , you may expect to see Sir Charles here  for he told me , that if he received no ill news from me , he would conclude I had prepared him a favourable reception  and , presuming on this hope , he would immediately set his lawyer to work to prepare the writings , that nothing might be left undone which could convince you of the sincerity of his affections  therefore , my dear child , set your heart at rest  and since providence has thought fit to reward your piety and virtue , receive with humble gratitude that fortune to which you are raised , and which puts it so largely in your power to do good .
I will now leave you , said the good old man rising , to your own reflections  I have scarce spoke a word yet to our kind friends here , for I was so impatient to see you , that I left them very abruptly . '


Mr. Herbert had no sooner left the room , than Sophia , in an ardent ejaculation , thanked heaven for thus relieving her from her distress : but it was long ere the tumult in her mind raised by such unhoped for happy news subsided , and gave place to that calm recollection which supplied a thousand  pleasing ideas , and filled her with the softest emotions of gratitude , tenderness , and joy .


She was now freed from those tormenting doubts , which made her consider her tenderness for Sir Charles as a crime , and occasioned so many painful struggles in her mind .
What joy to reflect that the man she loved was worthy of her affection !
how pleasing was the prospect that opened to her view  to be blest with the power of shewing her gratitude to her friends , her piety to her mother  to repay her sister 's unkindness with acts of generosity  and indulge the benevolence of her heart in relieving every distress which fell within her power to relieve !


These were the advantages which she promised herself in the change of her fortune , and for these her grateful heart lifted itself up every moment in thanks and praise to that providence that bestowed them on her .


While Sophia was thus absorb'd in thought , Dolly opened the door , and running up to her , eagerly cried , ` Tell me true , my dear miss , has not Mr. Herbert brought you some good news ?
I am sure he has  I never saw him so joyful in my life , and you look glad too , ' pursued she , peering in her face with a sweet earnestness .
` May I not ask you , Miss Darnley , what this good news is ? '


` You may , my dear , said Sophia smiling , but not now  you shall know all soon .
At present I would rather talk of your affairs . '


` Indeed I am greatly obliged to you , miss , said Dolly , for what you have done for me .
Mrs.  Gibbons seems almost as kind to me as ever she was , and you have talked so sensibly to my mother , that she repents of her behaviour to Mrs. Gibbons  and she likes Mr. William so well , that I am sure she would be glad to be reconciled to her . '


` That is what I have been labouring at all this time , resumed Sophia .
If Mrs. Lawson can be persuaded to make some concessions to the fantastick old gentlewoman , all may go well yet : it shall be my care to bring them together  and if my endeavours to produce a reconciliation fail , perhaps I may be able to engage a more powerful mediator in your interest . '


Sophia had Sir Charles in her thoughts , who she doubted not would readily undertake the cause of the distressed lovers , and possibly add something to her Dolly 's portion , to lessen the inequality there was between them in that point .
She spoke with such a chearful confidence , that Dolly , full of hope and joy , thanked her with artless transports of gratitude that moved her even to tears .


The next day , though in expectation of seeing Sir Charles , her heart laboured with a thousand emotions  yet kindly attentive to the affairs of her friend , she resolved to make Mrs. Gibbons a visit , to prepare the way for the hoped for interview between her and Mrs. Lawson .
As soon as she had disengaged herself from Mr. Herbert , she set out alone for Mrs. Gibbons 's house  but scarcely had she crossed the first field when she saw William , who was as usual , sauntering about Mr. Lawson 's grounds , in hopes of seeing his mistress .


 Sophia beckoned to him , and he flew to meet her  for , next to Dolly , he thought her the most charming woman in the world  and he adored her for the goodness with which she interested herself in his and his Dolly 's happiness .


When he drew near , Sophia told him she was going to visit his aunt  the youth respectfully expressed his concern that his aunt could not have that honour  she was gone , he said , to visit a relation who lived a few miles up the country .


Sophia then told him the design upon which she was going , and the favourable disposition Mrs Lawson was in . '
I am persuaded , said she , all might be made up , if we could but bring them together .
Mrs. Lawson only wants an opportunity to repair her fault  but how shall we contrive to give her this opportunity ?
what expedient can we find out to overcome your aunt 's obstinacy , and prevail upon her to enter Mrs. Lawson 's door again ? '


' I know one , madam , said the youth smiling , which I think would do . '


Sophia concluding from the timidity of his look , that she was concerned in this expedient , prest him to speak freely , assuring him she would assist to the utmost of her power .


` My aunt , madam , said he , is as you know a great observer of forms : she would not for the world fall under the censure of having failed in any part of ceremony or good breeding  now , madam , if you would be pleased to make a point of her returning your visit , and permit me to tell her that you are offended with her neglect ,  and that you insist upon this proof of her politeness , I am persuaded she will come . '


` Well , said Sophia , smiling , if you are of opinion this will do , you have my consent to say whatever you think will affect her most  make me as angry and as ceremonious as you please . '


` Nothing shall be wanting on my part to promote the success of this affair , added she , with a graver look and accent  for I believe you have a sincere affection for my young friend , and I shall not be at rest till I see you both happy . '


The youth , in whose breast the sweet benevolence of her looks and words excited the strongest transports of gratitude , not able to find words to express his sense of her goodness , suddenly threw himself at her feet , and kissed her hand with a mixture of tenderness and awe .


Sophia , smiling at this sally , stepped back a little  upon which he rose up , and with a graceful confusion paid her his thanks : she again repeated her promise of serving him , and took leave : he bowed low , following her for some time with his eyes , and sent a thousand kind wishes after her .


Sophia , at her return , acquainted Dolly with what had passed between her lover and her , and filled her with pleasing hopes of the success of his scheme : but now the day wore away , she was in continual expectation of seeing Sir Charles  her heart throbbed with anxiety  every noise she heard , sounded like the trampling of horses , and then a universal trembling would seize her .
She dreaded , yet wished for his arrival  and at every disappointment  she sighed , and felt her heart sink with tender despondency .


Such were her agitations , till the evening being far advanced , she gave up all hope of his coming that night .
Mr. Herbert had assigned a very pleasing reason for his visit being deferred till the next day  and , her mind growing more composed , she went in search of the good old man , who , Dolly told her , was gone to walk in the meadows behind the house  for she had kept herself out of his sight as much as possible , unwilling that he should observe her emotions .
She saw him at a distance , walking with a slow pace , and she perceived he saw her  but to her great surprise , she saw him cross into another field , and take a quite contrary way , on purpose to avoid her .


Struck with this little accident , she stood still and paused a few moments : she felt herself strangely alarmed , yet wondered why she should be so , and took her way back again to the house with sad forebodings on her mind .


[ To be continued . ]
11 .
Figure 2 .
BRITANNIA SAXONICA


 ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN , CONTINUED .


 IMmediately upon the marriage of Vortigern with the daughter of Hengist , great numbers of the northern nations , under the inclusive title of Saxons , hastened over to Britain , and the Britons received and paid them as confederates .
Vortigern , by the persuasion of his father-in-law , assigned Northumberland for their residence .
As their numbers increased , the payment of such fresh supplies grew burdensome to the Britons .
They desired the Saxons to depart  and alledged that they were not able to maintain so many more troops than were stipulated by treaty , or were necessary for defence .
The Saxons relished their present situation too well to exchange it : they refused to return  so that the Britons were compelled to rouze themselves from every symptom of lethargy , and to assume that glorious spirit of liberty , which , whenever exerted in a proper manner , renders the British nation a powerful , and a happy people .
They unanimously rose up in arms against the Saxons , who were joined by the Scots and Picts .
Many battles were fought , and great numbers of men were destroyed  woods were burnt , churches  were demolished , and whole cities were depopulated .
At length , many of the Saxons returned into Germany : Their return was owing to the warm reception which they met with from our ancestors .
The Britons might be plundered , but could not be absolutely conquered : they might be forced or betrayed into slavery , but they had native strength sufficient soon to unshackle themselves , and to burst forth again into the plains of liberty .
The Britons , as a national body , or as individual men , seldom failed to appear with remarkable lustre under misfortunes and oppressions .
In milder times , they were either totally inactive , or impoliticly employed in disputes and animosities among themselves .
They were naturally honest , indolent , and unsuspicious  too easily captivated with strangers  too hasty and irresolute , and , consequently , too easily led into danger and disasters .
These were some of their earliest , and these will probably be some of their latest characteristics .


Nothing farther can be said with certainty : the latter end of Vortigern 's reign is much obscured amidst fables and idle tales : he is generally described as a man much abandoned to his vices .


His son Vortimer is supposed to have deposed his father , or at least to have commanded the Britons against Hengist , Vortigern , and the Saxons : he is represented as a prince of a more amiable character than Vortigern .
He died before his father  and , after his death , Vortigern reassumed the reins of government , and became again one of the chief monarchs of Britain .
Hengist still remained king of Kent .


 Vortigern was very unacceptable to his subjects : he shewed too great favour and partiality to the Saxons , who , by their cruelties , had rendered themselves exceedingly terrible and odious .
Vortigern , finding himself uneasy on his throne , retired with his family into Wales , and was buried at a place in Caernarvonshire , which still bears the name of Vortigern 's Grave * .


The clouds of history are no where more obscure than at this period .
The antient historians have mixed their narratives with legendary stories : the modern writers have been at the pains to mention those stories  the history is swelled , but the instruction from it is not encreased .
The uncertainty of chronology is another most discouraging circumstance : the chronologists differ very widely from each other .
Every author who treats of those times , fills his bucket , as he imagines , from the purest fountains  but tacitly endeavours to draw up some water from a different stream than any that has been discovered by his cotemporaries , or his predecessors .


Here it may not be improper to remind ourselves of the civil government that still subsisted among the Britons , since that government will soon be changed into another form .


The whole nation , as by the original constitution , was still divided into principalities .
The principalities were very small : the head of each little colony was honoured sometimes , not always , with the pompous title of a king .


 Several of these princes had been lately driven out of the kingdom by the outrages of the Saxons  and had been attended by great numbers of their subjects into Armorica † .
They were received and protected by Aldroen , king of that country : but as soon as they heard that the majority of Saxons were departed towards Germany , many of the British princes , again attended by their subjects , came back , and settled themselves in the districts which they had formerly governed .
Ambrosuis Aurelianus was of the number of those who returned .
He was king of Wiltshire , and his chief residence was called Urbs Ambrosii : the name of the place ( Amesbury ) is still in a great measure retained .
He was a young prince of Roman descent , and of a most excellent character  warlike , modest , and amiable .
As some period must be affixt to his reign , although the beginning and end of it are both very uncertain , let us suppose , from various small glimmerings , if they even may be called glimmerings of probability , that it began in the year 465 , and ended in the year 508 .
In this space of forty-three years the general historical records entirely consist of different battles and sieges between our ancestors and the Saxons , who had left Britain fully determined to return to a more effectual purpose .


The methods which the Saxons took to effect their views of conquest were gradual .
From the year 437 , Hengist bore the title of king of Kent :  he reigned upwards of thirty years , and died , after various struggles with the Britons , in peaceful possession of his throne .
He was succeeded by his son Esca  and from him sprung a line of kings amounting , Hengist included , to seventeen .
The last of the kings of Kent was Baldred : he was driven out by Egbert , in the year 823 .


The Saxons who had been settled in Northumberland , or dispersed in other parts of the kingdom , received continual accessions of strength by the arrival of their countrymen from Germany .
These additional troops of supply came in small numbers , but they came often  till , by degrees , the most eminent chieftains appeared , and with them whole armies of followers and dependants .


Such was Ella , a Saxon of great power and dignity among his countrymen .
He brought with him his two sons , and a very considerable force .
He landed in Sussex in the year 477  and , after much opposition from the Britons , he conquered Sussex , and a great part of Surry .
He did not assume the title of king during the life of Hengist , from whom he probably received great assistance in his conquests .
He died in the year 514 , after a reign of twenty-four years .
His territories were called the kingdom of the South Saxons .


The third and next monarchy formed by these invaders , was the kingdom of the West-Saxons .
The first of the West Saxon kings was Cerdic : he landed in the year 495 .
From the very day on which he landed , till the year 519 , he was at war with the Britons .
In these battles the success was  various , and the loss on each side considerable : but Cerdic was constantly reinforced by fresh recruits from Germany .
The Britons , who had no such advantages , were at last so effectually conquered , that Cerdic became possessed of a great part of Cornwall , and entirely of Devonshire , Dorsetshire , Wiltshire , Somersetshire , Hampshire , and Berkshire .
He died in the year 534 , and was succeeded by his son Cenric .
The West-Saxon kings were in number seventeen , the last of whom became sole monarch of Britain .


The fourth kingdom of the heptarchy was that of the East-Saxons .
The first monarch of that kingdom was Erkenwin .
He began his reign in the year 527 : he died in the year 560 .
His territories were Essex , Middlesex , and part of Hertfordshire .


Northumberland was the fifth kingdom of the heptarchy .
It contained Lancashire , Yorkshire , the bishopric of Durham , Cumberland , Westmorland , Northumberland , and part of Scotland , as far as the frith of Edinburgh .
Ida was the first Saxon king of these provinces .
He began his reign in the year 547 , and died in the year 559 .
After his death , the kingdom of Northumberland was otherwise divided .


The sixth was the kingdom of the East-Angles .
It contained Norfolk , Suffolk , Cambridgeshire , and the isle of Ely .
Uffa , the first monarch , began his reign in the year 575 : he died in the year 582 .
This kingdom was united to Mercia in the year 793 .


 Mercia was the seventh , and the largest division of the Saxon heptarchy .
It contained Gloucestershire , Herefordshire , Worcestershire , Warwickshire , Leicestershire , Rutlandshire , Northamptonshire , Lincolnshire , Huntingdonshire , Bedfordshire , Buckinghamshire , Oxfordshire , Staffordshire , Shropshire , Nottinghamshire , Cheshire , and part of Hertfordshire .
Cridda , the first king , began his reign in the year 582 , and died in 593 .
The fate of these several kingdoms needs not to be particularised : let us return to take a review of the Britons under the reign of Ambrosius .


Many of our historians are of opinion , that Ambrosius is the same person as Natan-leod , who is represented by the antient writers , as the greatest of the British kings .
In that point the description answers the dignity of Ambrosius , who , whilst he lived , defended his territories with great magnanimity , and often with success .


Natan-leod was slain in a battle fought against the Saxons , near Charford , in Hampshire , when five thousand Britons were left dead upon the field .


But what shall be said of king Arthur ?
or at what time shall we suppose that he reigned ?
since his very existence itself is call'd in question  and since he has unfortunately been celebrated by so many fabulous writers , that his true history can never be known .
That he existed is beyond all doubt , and that he reigned is a point which many authors have sufficiently proved : but the actions of this prince , although in themselves brave and glorious , are so outrageously magnified , that the  real soldier is lost in the fictitious giant-killer  and the genuine and noble form of the hero is so utterly dissolved , that from a substance , it becomes a shadow .
I will endeavour to extract , if possible , some gold from amidst the historical dross of these times .
Probability must be my best assistant in the search .


Arthur was nearly related to Ambrosius , Aurelianus , perhaps directly descended from him .
The beginning of Arthur 's reign is assigned to the year 514 .
His coronation to the year 519 .
His victories over the Saxons are supposed to have been twelve in number  but the Saxons had already fixed themselves too deeply in our island to be rooted out by the strongest hand : nor was Arthur always victorious , otherwise he would scarce have yielded up by a treaty with Cerdic , the counties of Somerset and Southampton *  a cession which gave the West Saxons such great power , and such easy opportunities of encreasing their dominions , that in length of time , they absorb'd the rest of the heptarchy , and terminated the entire monarchy of Britain in their own sovereign , king Egbert .


Arthur was a native of South Wales : his memory has been ever held in particular veneration by the Welch .
One of the highest mountains in Brecnockshire is called Arthur 's chair † , in honour of a prince who was remarkable pre-eminent .
The first part of his life was prosperous , the latter end of it was unfortunate .
During an expedition to the northern parts of the kingdom , where he was summoned to assist the Britons against the Saxons , he left his patrimonial dominions , which were  Cornwall , Devonshire , and Dorsetshire , to the government and care of his nephew Mordred , who proved unfaithful to his trust , and possessed himself of the throne .
Arthur returned into Cornwall , attended by a numerous army : an engagement ensued , Mordred was killed in the field of battle , Arthur was desperately wounded , and died soon afterwards , at the age of ninety years , seventy-six of which he had exercised in war .
He was buried at Glastenbury , in Somersetshire , and with him was interred the glory of the Britons .
Arthur 's death is fixed by all authors , in the year 542 .


As I have mentioned the Welch , it may not be improper in this place to give some short account of a people , who have constantly held themselves in a kind of separate and distinct state from the rest of the Britons .
In the time of the Romans , the inhabitants of North Wales were called Ordovices , and those of South Wales were called Silures .


The counties of North Wales are Montgomeryshire , Merionethshire , Denbighshire , Flintshire , Carnarvonshire , and the isle of Anglesey .


The counties of South Wales , are Monmouthshire , Brecknockshire , Carmarthenshire , Glamorganshire , Cardiganshire , and Pembrokeshire .


The inhabitants of the forest of Dean , and of Herefordshire , were also called Silures , and those of Shropshire were reckoned among the Ordovices .


The Welch , or Cambrians were never entirely conquered : They had the same advantage as the Caledonians .
When they found themselves too hard pressed , they retired within their mountains , and were safe .
They were of more generous , and  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  less rapacious dispositions than the Scots : they were an high spirited people , easily provoked , and very sharp in resentment : they were hardy , like all mountaineers , well made , and robust in their persons : they were proud , not vain  fiery , not cruel : they married within their own tribes , and therefore are justly looked upon even to this day , as the truest and most ancient Britons .
The Ordovices remained longer than the Silures , in the state of a commonwealth , independant of any single sovereign : but the whole kingdom of Cambria had certainly submitted to a regal government long before the arrival of the Saxons , and even before the departure of the Romans .
Their sovereigns were all chosen by the people  but in what manner , I believe , can not easily be known : and although their names may be enrolled in the records of Wales , their particular histories would be tedious and to no purpose .
In the choice of Arthur , the Britons were entirely unanimous : he was an honour to the country where he was born , and a defence to the territories where he resided .


From the departure of the Romans , to the settlement of the Saxons , Christianity , by degrees , and at different periods , had made a considerable progress into various parts of Britain .
The first step , and certainly a very wise one , was the establishment of schools , in which the Britons in their earliest time of life were taught the doctrines of religion , and the principles of moral virtues .
From such seeds alone must spring every flourishing branch of civil government and order .
A school under the conduct and care of Dubricius , is mentioned  as one of considerable note in those times , Dubricius was a most religious man , of great abilities , and of indefatigable industry .
He was first made bishop of Landaff , and was translated from thence in the year 512 , by the authority of a synod , to the archbishoprick of Kaer-leon , or Chester .
I mention this circumstance only to shew that the Christian church was then so well established in Britain , as to be divided into sees : and it will be found , upon looking into the voluminous historians of our nation , that monasteries had been erected , synods had been held , and even heresies , particularly those of Arian and Pelagius , had prevailed in Britain long before the perfection of the heptarchy .
By the perfection , I mean the division of the kingdom into seven Saxon monarchies .


To give an history of the church , or to enter minutely into the ecclesiastical government , would be a laborious , and a very unprofitable undertaking  neither suitable to the intent of these papers , nor available in any material point whatever .
To our happiness , and to our honour be it spoken , we have long ago thrown off the yoke of Rome : we have discovered her pretended miracles , and we have despised her idolatrous vanities .
The memorials of her errors need not be minutely specified , unless when they are connected , or interwoven with the systems of the state .


The Saxons were descended from those Germans who are often mentioned by Caesar , and fully described by Tacitus  and who appeared under the denomination of Goths and Vandals , titles dreadful to learning , and all the civil arts of peace !
 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  they were a rude , robust , warlike people  and subsisted under a kind of government , to which it would be difficult to appropriate any general name .
It was neither oligarchy , monarchy , democracy , nor commonwealth .
Tacitus , in his account of the Germans , says , De minoribus rebus principes consultant , de majoribus omnes .
Ita tamen , ut ea quoque quorum penes plebem arbitrium est , apud principes pertractentur .
` The chieftains debated solely upon matters of little consequence : in matters of importance , all the people were consulted  but in such a manner , that whatever was left to the decision of the people had first been digested by the chieftants . '
A little farther , the same historian tells us , Nihil autem neque publicae neque privatae rei nisi armati agunt .
` They never transact any business , either of a public or a private nature , unless they are armed . '
Such were the aborigines of the Saxons , and from them is derived our Gothic custom of wearing swords in all public places , and in all visits of ceremony , even to our nearest friends and relations .


Whatever system of government might have prevailed among these northern nations , while they remained upon the continent , they were wise enough to perceive that the regal state was most natural , and agreeable to the disposition of the Britons .
The first step of Hengist was to make himself king .
Six other Saxon chieftains , whose names I have already mentioned , followed his example .
The Britons fought often , and fought bravely in defence of their rights and privileges , particularly the liberty of chusing their  own kings : they were overpowered by numbers  and time , often the best friend to conquest , inured them to Saxon monarchs , and to Saxon laws .
Their own customs were forgotten , and the customs and religion of the conquerors were received .
They even lost their name  and , from the Angles , will be called English , as long as the nation shall subsist .


The Saxons apparently laid the foundation of that mighty pillar of our state , a parliament : at least the basis of it seems to have been built upon the Saxon Wittena-Gemot .
The column indeed has since been formed and fluted with all the power and skill of architecture  and when a sovereign is properly placed upon the capital , the justness of the several parts , and the exactness and beauty of the proportions will be universally admired , except by those who think the king a superficial ornament .
The Wittena-Gemot of the Saxons was an assembly in which all public and private business was transacted .
Leagues of alliance and affinity with other nations were there determinately passed : inconveniencies were remedied , and rights were established , and sanctified by law .
The assembly was composed of king , lords , and freemen .
The debates were concluded by votes , and the numbers were determined by voices , unless when the noise was doubtful , and the majority uncertain : in that case the votes were taken severally .


In the year 596 , Augustine the monk , since known by the name of St. Austin , was peremptorily sent into England by Pope Gregory the first , to convert the Saxons from Paganism to Christianity :  he was attended by a company of Missionaries , his brethren , of whom he was the chief : they landed in the isle of Thanet , and soon afterwards proceeded to Canterbury , where king Ethelbert and his court then resided .
They were received favourably by the king : a part of the city of Canterbury was assigned for their habitation , and they were permitted to preach the gospel throughout the dominion of Kent .
Augustine had undertaken the journey unwillingly : he had once absolutely refused it , and had returned back to Rome , frightened at the terrible accounts which were given of our ancestors .
Gregory , who had undoubted assurances , that the English were ready to embrace Christianity , spirited up the timorous monk to pursue his intended journey , and the event proved so successful , that before the end of the year , more than ten thousand English were converted .
Among these was Ethelbert , king of Kent , who was looked upon as the superior king of the Saxons .
In his conversion he was probably influenced by his queen Bertha , a princess of great piety , a daughter of France , and perhaps the only daughter of France who was ever of real advantage to England .


From this period , Christianity , which had been much repulsed , and damped , since the arrival of the Saxons , began to shine out , sometimes in greater , and at other times in lesser degrees of lustre .
Many of the Saxon kings were zealous christians : their sons and successors often returned to paganism .
But the indefatigable industry of the Romish priests , the dexterity with which they performed their miracles , the natural enthusiasm ,  doubts , and timid disposition of mankind , were all circumstances that tended , not indeed to introduce the doctrines of Christ , but to establish and encrease the power of the pope , and to inculcate an implicit submission to priests of every degree and order  and most especially to monks .
It pleases God to permit us to worship him in all the errors and infirmities of our nature : such is his will , and his will be done !


From the arrival of St. Augustine , to the end of the heptarchy , by the establishment of a single monarch over the whole kingdom of England , is a space of about two hundred and thirty years .
Throughout that period we might expect to find many remarkable events in a monarchy , consisting of seven royal branches  but scarce any part of the English history is more sapless and unfruitful .
The scenes which heretofore represented civil wars between the native Britons , were now only changed into civil wars between those Britons , and the engrafted Saxons .
The ambition and restlessness of the several kings prevented an union in the general system of government .
Each monarch strove to extend his territories , and to enlarge his rights .
We are at a loss to know in what particulars these rights consisted .
If from the materials of history that remain to us , we can form any exact notion of the rules of policy , by which the heptarchy was guided , we may conclude that one of the seven monarchs was superior to the rest : a kind of president to the regal council .
All matters of importance , or relative to private property , were to be laid before him  but each of the other kings  had an equal right of choice in every single transaction that required approbation or dissent .
The principal members of the Wittena-Gemot had no less a right of giving their voices , in points where the general welfare of the nation was included .
This seems to have been the Saxon form of government  and it is easy to suppose , that the different prerogatives not only of the several kings , but of the individual members who composed the assembly , might often clash , and give continual occasions for those feuds and contests , which are the principal records that occur to us in all accounts of the heptarchy .


[ To be continued . ]
12 .
THE HISTORY OF BIANCA CAPELLO CONCLUDED .


 THE furious Buonaventuri would not let her go on  but starting up , and running to her in a fury , said , ` Go hang yourself , and then howl to those that will hear you in the other world : in this , I 'll follow my own way  therefore do not pretend to whine to me , but take care of yourself , who are in more danger  for do you think , strumpet , that I wo n't cut off that golden horn , which you have placed on my head , by stopping your windpipe with a knife one day or other . '


In the mean time the grand Duke being returned to his palace , could not rest there , having observed in Bianca , ( in spite of all her endeavours to hide it , ) a great concern at his late discourse  and impatient to give some satisfaction either to her or himself , returned back  and not finding her in her apartment , softly descended the back-stairs , from the door of which he overheard every word that had passed : and Pietro thus answering his wife , in a great rage turned his back , and went out of the  house .
Deaf to all her calls , and despising all her care , he left her overwhelmed with grief and tears  in which she retired to her own apartment , without knowing Francisco had been there , he having taken care to mount the stair-case first , and get out of sight .


Here she gave a loose to all her sorrows , enumerating all her misfortunes , and lamenting the hour that brought her to the light of this world , where she was doom'd to find them  and in a flood of tears , gave vent to the passion that filled her breast .
Long would these reflections have employed her time and thoughts , had not the grand Duke interrupted them , who coming into the room , and appearing ignorant of the matter , asked the cause  saying , ` To what are owing these tears , and these complaints ?
dearer than my soul , tell me what misfortune has befallen you ? '
` Nothing , sir , said she , occasions my concern but compassion for my husband , who as you have commanded , I have admonished  but he seems so little to regard his safety , that I fear some mischief will attend him . '


` Is it nothing but that , ( replied the grand Duke , ) Oh , let him follow his own inclination , and at last he will find the consequence : but why will you afflict and torment yourself for what you can not prevent ?
a torrent must have way , or they that try to stop it may be drowned in it : Buonaventuri is headstrong , and void of understanding , which will inevitably draw on his fate , if he does not quickly change his manners . '


 Yet after all this , the desperate Pietro , full of indignation and revenge , meeting Ruberto Ricci next day at the column of the Santa Trinita , where he was talking with two other gentlemen  he clapt a pistol to his breast , saying , ' I do n't know what hinders me , despicable , infamous wretch that you are , from shooting you this minute through the heart : but stay and hear what I have to say to you , for you shall not escape me .
I will go to your aunt , as often as I please , in defiance of you  and if ever I know , or but guess , that you make the least murmur or complaint to the grand Duke , you shall not live an hour after it . '


Ricci being unarmed , and thus accosted , remained immoveable as a statue , till the other had done speaking , and then , without the least reply , went with his companions immediately to the grand Duke , who was at the Casino , where he declared to him all that had passed just before at the Column  to which the two gentlemen witnessing , the grand Duke , ( who remembered his threats to his wife , ) no longer doubting of his unbounded brutality , thought within himself , that there was no more time to be lost in inflicting on Pietro the punishment he deserved  and taking Ricci apart , they talked together for some time in the garden , where the grand Duke having given him what directions he thought proper , sent him away , and the next morning by times mounting on horseback , rode to his villa of Pratolino , where he stayed all that day and the next night .
The result of their conference was , that Ricci should get together twelve  companions , all men well armed , strong , and resolute  some of whom had cutlasses of such a temper , that with one stroke , they were able to cut off the head of a bull  for he knew that Buonaventuri was ever provided with pistols , and other arms from head to foot , in which equipage , he constantly went in the night to Bongianna 's house , not returning home till very late  so that in order to be sure of his prey , he divided his company , setting two or more in different places , through which Pietro might pass  and his page ( who personally knew him ) as centinel at the beautiful bridge of la Santa Trinita , to give notice when he should be there , for which Ruberto waited with great impatience , after he had made this disposition of his forces .


And now the unlucky lover having spent the night with his mistress , rose before break of day , and taking leave of her went slowly to his own house .
As he was walking over the bridge , the page gave two whistles , and then cry'd , alo !
alo !
the accustomed noise of the Florentine ruffians in those days : at this the fierce Pietro , though unused to fear , felt some presage of his approaching fate  and taking in his left hand a pistol , held it ready cocked , and with his drawn sword in his right , passed the bridge , that led directly to the great gate of his palace  but as his apartment was on the ground-floor , the door to it lay on the other side of the house  so that he was obliged , after descending the bridge , to turn down a little street , on the left hand of which , within a stone 's throw , was the entrance that he always kept the  key of .
Meeting in this narrow passage two armed men , he did not immediately think they had any design on him  but going a little farther , he saw four more , who stopt his way , and these having joined the two first , six others started out and encompassed him , with Ricci in the midst , crying out , kill , kill , the infamous traitor .
Buonaventuri knowing his voice , threw his cloak to the ground , and firing his pistol , hit one of them  but whilst he was taking another out of his pocket , they all fell on him at once  yet by means of his armour , he escaped for some time , making a very brave defence , and had already wounded two of them , when the assailants renewing their attack , by the advantage of their short arms , and the closeness of the street , struck him at every blow , so that being driven to the wall , he could do little damage with his sword : but as Ricci got under it , thinking to end him , he exerted all his force for one blow , and cut him quite thorough his iron head-piece to his skull  at the sight of which a cousin of Ricci 's , with a back stroke , wounded Pietro in the face , and repeating it with a second , split one side of his head , so that his brains stuck to the wall .
Buonaventuri finding himself dying , said , oh !
no more for mercy , since I am dead , and dropt down  after which they all fell on him , stabbing him in every part which his armour did not cover , and there left him , with no less than five and thirty mortal wounds .
Ricci , as fast as he could , got to the palace of the princess Isabella , where , though his hurt was dangerous , he was by the help of a good surgeon , cured in a short time .


 Not far from the place where this bloody scene was acted , stood an apothecary 's shop , the people of which , having heard the clash of arms and noise of men , with two of their boys , as it drew near day , went to see what was the matter , and there found the unfortunate Pietro bathed in his blood upon the ground , and by same faint short sighs , could just perceive he was not quite dead : upon which they run for a light , and immediately conveyed him to the nearest church , named St. Jacopo , which stands upon the river Arno .


The sun was no sooner up than the death of Buonaventuri was spread about the whole city  and coming to the ears of the poor deluded , but still affectionate Bianca , almost distracted her .
She , with the utmost violence of passion , was ready to destroy herself , in order to follow him  which perhaps in the first rage of sorrow she might have done , ( notwithstanding the endeavours of all her friends and acquaintance who came to comfort her , ) if the great Duke had not arrived at that juncture , to restrain and pacify her , which even he found difficulty in doing .


The next night after this had happened , as soon as it was quite dark , two armed men masked got into Bongianna 's house by the tiles , and cutting her throat left her dead on the floor : such was the miserable end of these thoughtless lovers , and such the revenge taken by this lady 's relations , for the infamy she had brought upon them .


The grand Duke , that he might not seem to know of this execution , put on all the appearance of anger and inquisition after the actors in it  but  took care they never should be discovered , so that by degrees the affair was dropt  and Ricci unsuspected went about as before .


Time , which alleviates all affliction , had now restored Bianca to herself , whose charms and merits the Grand Duke grew every day more sensible of  and reflecting that his love alone had obscured her virtues , which in themselves were both great and many , and that her birth , though not royal , was illustrious , resolved to give the utmost proof of a sincere passion , by sharing his power and title with her who had already all his heart  and on the evening of the 22d of June , 1579 , publicly married her  commanding the senate of forty eight , to do her homage as grand Dutchess , and the next day she went out as such , with the German guard , and a train of eight coaches .
To compleat her glory , the senate of Venice , when they heard she was become great Dutchess of Tuscany , not only repealed their former acts against her , but made a new one , by which she was adopted daughter of that state , which sent a solemn embassy with it to the grand Duke , and a dowry suitable to the dignity they had given her .


When the sudden marriage of Francisco was effected , the cardinal Ferdinando , his next brother , resided at Rome , where he received the news of it with the greatest indignation , his haughty soul not enduring any alliance below that of a crowned head  and he esteemed his blood so much disgraced by this marriage , that he set a thousand machines at work , to take away ( what he called ) the shame of his family , by the death of Bianca  whom he  oftentimes attempted to poison , either by means of her servants , or presents that he sent her .
His designs by one accident or other , being discovered , made her very cautious , nor was he less suspicious of her , fearing to meet the same fate he had designed to give  so that a mutual hate reign'd in both , though both disguised it , out of regard to the grand Duke .


It happened one time amongst others , that the cardinal being at Florence , and they all dining together , the grand Dutchess had that morning taken a fancy to make a tart with her own hands , which , towards the latter end of the dinner was served up with other things of the same sort  and when Ferdinando was desired to taste of it , he put it off , and began some gay discourse , that he might not appear to have any thought about it .
At last the grand Duke , ( after having asked his brother several times to taste what Bianca had made , ) said , since none else will begin , I must , and took a piece and eat it : after which the grand Dutchess did the like , and the conversation continued for some time with the same good humour , when all of a sudden they both felt such violent and strong pains in their bowels , that they were obliged to retire to their apartment , and go to bed  where they waited in vain for remedies and physicians , the cardinal having given strict commands , that none should come near them , himself and his creatures keeping guard at the doors for that purpose  whilst the poor unhappy princes expired in tortures , on the 28th of October , 1586 .
He buried them by each other , with all due honours : himself  renouncing the cardinal 's hat , was immediately acknowledged grand Duke of Tuscany  through all which he caused a report to be spread , that Bianca Capello intended to poison him , which he pretended he discovered by means of a ring he always wore , the stone in it being of a nature to change colour at the approach of poison  and so he avoided tasting the tart , which she seeing her husband do , rather than outlive him , or discover her treachery , chose to eat the rest  but however this story was strengthened by authority , very few believed it  for besides the improbability of her killing herself , with that coolness , when she might have found a hundred pretences to hinder Francisco from eating the tart , without discovering herself , ( and would no doubt if she had known it to be poisoned ) many circumstances concurred to make it plainly a contrivance of the cardinals , who had bribed the servant that provided the materials for the tart , to put poison amongst them .
But as Francisco dying without a son , left Ferdinando his heir , the nobles thought it wiser to receive with a good grace their living prince , than hazard their safeties , by a vain inquiry after the dead one , tho ' a man beloved and esteemed , a fine gentleman and great governor , all the arts and sciences being in perfection in his time , as may be seen by their best poets and historians , who all dedicated their works to him .


13 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 AFTER suffering fifteen days the agonies of a most violent fever , I began , tho ' by slow degrees , to recover .
The first thing I did when I was able to attend to any thing , was to seek for the letter I had received from Adelaida .
My mother , who had taken it from me , for fear it should increase my affliction , was obliged to restore it to me .
After I had read it several times , I put it into a little silk bag , and placed it on my heart , where I had always kept her picture  and whensoever I was alone , it was always my employment to gaze upon that lovely picture , and read that letter .


My mother , who was of a soft and tender disposition , shared my grief : she likewise thought it best to yield to my first transports , and leave it to time to finish my cure .
She permitted me to speak of Adelaida , and sometimes was the first to mention her to me  and perceiving that the only thing which gave me consolation was the thought of being loved by her , she told me that it was she herself that had determined Adelaida to marry .


 ' I ask your pardon , my dear son , said she , for the grief I have caused you  I did not imagine you would have felt her loss so deeply .
I trembled for your health , and even your life , while you continued under that cruel confinement .
I knew your father 's inflexible temper , and was convinced he would never set you at liberty while there was a possibility of your marrying mademoiselle de Lussan .
I resolved to speak to that generous young lady : I told her my fears for your health  she partook in them , she felt them perhaps with more force than I did .
From that moment I saw her use every endeavour to hasten her marriage  for her father , justly irritated at the proceedings of monsieur de Comminge , had long pressed her to marry : hitherto she had resisted his solicitations , and even his commands .
I asked her which of those persons who addressed her , she would chuse ?
It matters not which , replied she  they are all equal to me , since I can not be his to whom I have given my heart .
Two days after I had this conservation with her , I learned that the marquis de Benavides was preferred to all his rivals  every one was surprised at her choice , and I as much as any other .
Benavides has a disagreeable person , his understanding is mean , and his temper extremely bad : this last circumstance made me tremble for poor Adelaida .
I was resolved to tell her my apprehensions : I went for that purpose to the house of the countess de Garlande , where we used to meet . '


' I am prepared , said she , for misery , but I must marry  and since I know it is the only  means of procuring your son 's liberty , I reproach myself every moment that I delay this sacrifice : yet this marriage , which I consent to only for his sake , will perhaps be the most cruel of his misfortunes .
I will at least convince him by my choice , that his interest was the sole motive which engaged me to it .
Pity me , dear Madam , I deserve your pity  and , by my behaviour to Mons .
Benavides , I will endeavour to render myself worthy of your esteem . '


My mother afterwards told me , that Adelaida was made acquainted by my father himself , with my having burnt the writings : he publicly upbraided her with it on the day that he lost his process .
` She confessed to me , added my mother , that she was more affected with your extreme delicacy in concealing so generous an action , than with the action itself . '
We passed the days in such conversations : my melancholy was excessive  yet , tho ' deprived of hope , I found a kind of sweetness in the idea of my being still loved .


After a stay of two months , my mother received orders from my father to return to him .
He had expressed no concern for my illness , and his cruel treatment of me had extinguished every sentiment of tenderness for him .
My mother pressed me to go with her  but I intreated her to consent to my staying in the country : she yielded to my reasons , and left me .
I was now once more alone in the midst of my woods , and found so much sweetness in solitude , that I would then have abandoned every thing , and taken up my habitation in some hermit 's cell , had I not been restrained by my tenderness  for my mother .
I often resolved to endeavour to see Adelaida , but the fear of displeasing her stopt me .
At length after long irresolution , I thought I might at least attempt to see Adelaida without being seen by her .


Accordingly , I resolved to send a person in whom I could confide to Bourdeaux , to know where she was , and for this purpose I fixed upon a man who had attended me from my infancy .
My mother , during my illness , had restored him to his place about me : he had been with me at the baths  he knew Adelaida  and when I mentioned my design to him , he informed me that he had friends in the house of Benavides .
After having given him his orders , which I repeated a thousand times , I caused him to set out from the castle .
When he arrived at Bourdeaux , he was informed that Benavides had carried his lady a short time after his marriage to an estate which he had in Biscay .
Saint Laurent , for that was my servant 's name , wrote to me to know what he was to do next : I sent him orders to go immediately into Biscay .
My desire of seeing Adelaida was so much increased by the hope I had conceived , that it was not possible for me to oppose it any longer .


Saint Laurent returned at the expiration of six weeks , which my anxiety and impatience had lengthened into so many ages .
He told me , that , after many fruitless attempts , Benavides having occasion for an architect , he had prevailed upon his friend to present him to him in that quality  that having acquired some knowledge of the art from an uncle , under whose care he had been brought  up , he made no scruple to undertake the business Benavides employed him in . '
I believe , said he , that Madame de Benavides knew me , for she blushed when she first saw me . '


He then told me that she lived the most retired and melancholy life imaginable : that her husband hardly ever quitted her a moment  and that it was said in the house , he was excessively fond of her  but that he gave her no other proof of it , than by his extreme jealousy , which he carried so far , that even his brother had not the liberty of seeing her , but when he was present .
I asked my servant some questions about that brother  he told me that he was a very amiable young man , and that the world spoke as much in his favour as they did to the disadvantage of Benavides  and that he appeared to be greatly attached to his sister-in-law .


This discourse made no impression upon me at that time  the unhappy situation of Madame de Benavides , and the desire of seeing her , employed my whole soul .
Saint Laurent assured me he had taken proper measures for introducing me into the house of Benavides .
` He has occasion for a painter , said he to me , to paint an apartment : I promised to bring a good one , and you must undertake this business . '


Nothing now remained but to regulate our departure  I wrote to my mother , and told her I was going to pass some time at the house of one of my friends .
This done I set out with Saint Laurent for Biscay : during our journey , I was continually asking him questions concerning Madame de Benavides  I was desirous of knowing the slightest  particulars relating to her .
Saint Laurent was not able to satisfy my curiosity  he had but few opportunities of seeing her : she was shut up in her own apartment , with no other company but a little dog , of which she was extremely fond .
This article touched me particularly : I had presented her with that dog , and I flattered myself that she loved it for my sake .
These little things , which escape one in good fortune , affect one sensibly in misery : the heart , in the need it has of consolation , fastens upon every thing which is likely to afford it .


Saint Laurent often mentioned to me the great attachment of young Benavides to his sister-in-law  he added , that he often opposed the furious sallies of his brother 's temper , and , but for his good offices , Adelaida would be still more miserable than she was .
He earnestly intreated me to be contented with the pleasure of seeing her , and to make no attempt to speak to her , ` not because it would endanger your life , added he : that , I know , is too weak a motive to restrain you  but because she will suffer by any imprudence you may be guilty of . '


The liberty of seeing Adelaida appeared to me so great a blessing , that I was fully persuaded that alone would satisfy me , and resolved within myself , and promised Saint Laurent , to behave with the utmost circumspection .
After a most tedious journey , as my impatience made it seem , we arrived at Biscay , and was presented to Benavides , who set me to work immediately .


The supposed architect and I were lodged in the same apartment , and to him was committed the  care of overseeing the workmen .
I had been several days at work before I saw madame de Benavides  at length I perceived her one evening from a window in my own room going to walk in the garden .
She had only her little favourite dog with her : her dress was negligent , a kind of languishing melancholy appeared in her looks and motions , and her fine eyes seemed to dwell on the objects around her , without regarding them .
Oh heavens !
what sweetly painful emotions did my soul feel at the sight of her .
I continued leaning on the window the whole time she staid in the garden : it was dark when she returned  so that I could not distinguish her when she passed by my window , but my heart knew it was her .


I saw her a second time in the chapel of the castle  I placed myself in such a manner , that I could look at her the whole time without being observed .
She never once turned her eyes upon me : I ought to have rejoiced at this circumstance , since I well knew that if she discovered me , she would be obliged to go out of the chapel  yet I was afflicted at it , and returned to my chamber in greater disquiet than when I left it .
I had not yet formed any design of making myself known to her  but I was sensible that I should not be able to resist doing it , if an opportunity offered .


The sight of young Benavides gave me likewise some kind of uneasiness  he often came to see me work , and notwithstanding the seeming distance of our rank , he behaved to me with an obliging familiarity , which ought to have excited my esteem  yet it had no effect on me .
His great merit , and  the amiableness of his person , which I could not but be sensible of , with-held my gratitude .
I was afraid of a rival in him , and a certain impassioned sadness that I perceived in him , which was too like my own not to proceed from the same cause , gave me a suspicion which he soon confirmed .


After asking me one day several questions relating to my condition in life  ` You are in love , ( said he to me , sighing imperceptibly to himself , ) the melancholy in which I perceive you continually plunged , persuades me that your heart is not well : tell me the truth  can I do any thing for you ?
The miserable in general have a claim to my compassion  but there is one sort of grief which I pity more than any other . '
I believe I thanked Don Gabriel , ( that was his name , ) with a very ill grace , for the kind offers he made to me  however , I could not help owning to him that I was in love : but I told him that time only could produce any change in the state of my fortune .
` You are not absolutely unhappy , replied he , since you may hope for a change  I know persons who are much more to be pitied than you . '


When I was alone I reflected upon the conversation that had passed betwen Don Gabriel and myself  I concluded that he was in love , and that his charming sister-in-law was the object of his passion : his whole behaviour , which I examined with the utmost attention , convinced me I was not mistaken  I observed him always assiduous about Adelaida  he gazed on her with eyes like mine , yet I was not jealous : my esteem for Adelaida  would not admit of such an injurious sentiment  but I could not help fearing , that the company of an agreeable man , who was continually rendering her services that softened the horrors of her present situation , would make her reflections on me be greatly to my disadvantage , whose passion had been productive of nothing but misfortunes to her .


I was full of these thoughts , when one day I saw Adelaida enter the room where I was painting , led by Don Gabriel .
` Why , said she , do you press me to come and look at the ornaments of this apartment ?
you know I have no taste for these things . ' '
I hope , madam , ( said I , looking earnestly upon her , and bowing low , ) that if you will deign to cast your eyes upon what is here , you will find something not unworthy your attention . '


Adelaida , struck with the sound of my voice , turned instantly towards me .
I perceived she knew me , for she blushed and bent her eyes on the ground , and , after pausing a moment , she left the room without giving me a look , saying , that the smell of the paint was disagreeable to her .


I remained behind , terrified , confused , and overwhelmed with grief .
Adelaida had not deigned to give me a second look  she would not even shew that she was enough interested in my disguise to express any signs of resentment at it .
What have I done , said I , I am indeed come hither contrary to her commands  but if she still loves me , she would pardon a fault that proceeded from the excess of my passion for her .
I now concluded , that since Adelaida no longer loved me , she must of necessity  have bestowed her heart upon another .
This idea filled me with a grief so new and violent , that I thought I had never been truly miserable till then .


Saint Laurent , who came from time to time to see me , entering the room that moment , found me in an agitation that made him tremble .
` What ails you , sir , said he to me , what has happened to you ? ' '
I am undone , replied I  Adelaida no longer loves me : she no longer loves me , repeated I  it is but too true , alas !
I never had reason to complain of my fate till this cruel moment : what torment would I now endure to purchase this blessing which I have lost !
this blessing which I preferred to all things , and which in the midst of my greatest miseries , filled my heart with so soft a joy . '


I continued a long time to exclaim in this manner , while Saint Laurent in vain endeavoured to draw from me the cause of my grief .
At length I related to him what had happened . '
I see nothing in all this , said he , which ought to drive you to the despair I see you in .
Madam de Benavides is certainly offended at your rash attempt .
She was desirous of punishing you by appearing indifferent  and perhaps she was apprehensive of betraying herself , if she had looked upon you . '


` No , no , interrupted I , they who love have no such command over themselves in those first emotions  the heart alone is listened to .
I must see her , added I , I must reproach her with her change .
Alas !
after giving herself to another ,  ought she to take away my life by so cruel an indifference ?
why did she not leave me in my prison , there I should have been happy , had I been assured of her love . '


Saint Laurent fearing that any one should see me in the condition I was in , obliged me to retire to the chamber where we both lay .
I past the whole night in tormenting myself  my thoughts were at strife with each other  in one moment I condemned my suspicions , and the next relapsed into them again .
I thought it unjust to wish that Adelaida should preserve a tenderness which rendered her miserable .
In those moments , I reproached myself for loving her less than my own satisfaction .
` Why should I wish to live , said I to Saint Laurent , if she loves another : I will endeavour to speak to her , only to bid her an eternal adieu : she shall hear no reproaches from my mouth  my grief , which I can not conceal from her , shall speak for me . '


When this point was resolved upon , it was agreed that I should leave Biscay as soon as I should have an interview with her  we then began to consider upon the necessary means of procuring it .
Saint Laurent told me that we must seize the first opportunity that offered , when Don Gabriel went to hunt , as he often did , and Benavides was employed in his domestic affairs  for which he always set apart two mornings in the week .
He then made me promise , that to avoid giving any suspicion , I should go on with my painting , as usual  but that I should likewise declare , that I was under a necessity of returning soon to my own country .


 Accordingly I resumed my former employment .
I had almost , without perceiving it , some hope that Adelaida would come again into that apartment  every noise that I heard gave me an emotion I was scarce able to bear .
In this situation I remained several days , and then losing all hope of seeing Adelaida in that manner , I eagerly sought for some moment in which I might be so fortunate as to find her alone .
At length this moment came  I was going as usual to my work , when I saw Adelaida passing to her own apartment .
I knew that Don Gabriel went out early that morning to hunt , and I had heard Benavides talking in a low hall of the castle , to one of his farmers  so that I was pretty certain of finding her alone .


I entered her apartment with so much precipitation , that Adelaida saw me not till I was very near her : she would have retired to her closet as soon as she perceived me , but I catched hold of her robe , and prevented her .
` Do not fly from me , madam , said I to her , suffer me this last time to enjoy the blessing of beholding you : I shall never importune you more .
I am going far from you , to die with grief for the miseries I have been the cause of to you  and for the loss of your heart .
I wish Don Gabriel may be more fortunate than I have been . '


Adelaida , whose surprise had hitherto prevented her from speaking , interupted me at these words , and giving me a look of mingled tenderness and anger , ` What , said she , dare you make me reproaches ?
dare you suspect me ?
- you - . '
The tone with which she pronounced these last words ,  brought me instantly at her feet .
` No , my dear Adelaida , interupted I , no , I have no suspicion that is injurious to you : pardon a few distracted words , which my heart disavows . '


' I pardon you all , said she to me , provided you depart immediately , and never attempt to see me more .
Reflect , that it is for your sake I am the most miserable creature in the world  would you give me cause to reproach myself with being the most criminal . ' '
I will do every thing you command me , replied I , but only promise that you will not hate me . '


Although Adelaida had several times desired me to rise , yet I still continued at her feet .
To those who truly love , this attitude has a thousand secret charms .
I was still kneeling , when Benavides suddenly opened the chamber door .
Transported with rage , he flew towards his wife , and drawing his sword , `` Thou shalt die , perfidious woman , '' cried he , and would have infallibly killed her , had I not thrown myself between them , and put by his sword with my own .


` Wretch !
cried Benavides , you first shall feel my vengeance , ' and at the same time gave me a wound on my shoulder .
I did not love life well enough to be solicitous for the preservation of it  but my hatred to Benavides would not suffer me to abandon it to his fury : this cruel attempt upon the person of his wife , deprived me almost of reason .
I threw myself upon him , and plunging my sword in his body , he fell at my feet without sense or motion .
The servants , drawn by the cries of madame de Benavides , entered the room that moment ,  and several of them throwing themselves upon me , disarmed me , while I made no effort to defend myself .
The sight of madame de Benavides bathed in tears , and kneeling by her husband , left me no sensibility of any thing but her grief .
I was dragged out of her chamber into another , and the door fastened upon me .


There it was , that delivered up to my own reflections , I saw the abyss into which I had plunged madame de Benavides : the death of her husband , killed before her eyes , and killed by me , could not fail of giving rise to suspicions against her .
How did I not reproach myself !
I had been the cause of her first misfortunes , and I had now completed her ruin by my imprudence .
My imagination continually represented to me the dreadful condition in which I had left her .
I acknowledge that she had just reasons to hate me , and I did not murmur at it .
The only consolation I had , was in the hope that I was not known .
The idea of being taken for an assassin , and a robber , which on any other occasion would have made me tremble with horror , now gave me joy .
Adelaida knew the innocence of my , intentions , and Adelaida was the whole world to me .


Impatient to be interrogated , that I might clear the honour of Adelaida , I passed several hours in the most racking inquietude : in the middle of the night my chamber door was opened , and I saw Don Gabriel enter .


( To be continued . )
14 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONTINUED .


 14.1 .
CHAP .
IV .
Indirect Instructions , and that Children ought not to be urged .


I AM persuaded it would be right to make frequent use of such indirect instructions , as are not so tiresome as lessons and remonstrances , meerly to awaken their attention to those examples we would lay before them .


One person may sometimes say to another in their hearing , why did you act in that manner ?
and the other may answer , for such and such a reason : for instance , why did you acknowledge your fault ?
because it would have been a greater to disavow it meanly by the help of a lie  and nothing sounds handsomer than to say frankly , I was in the wrong  upon this , let the first commend him for thus passing sentence upon himself : but all this should be carried without affectation  for children have more penetration than is generally thought , and as sure as they discover any artifice in their governors ,  they fall off from that simplicity and reliance so natural to them .


We have formerly remarked that the brain of infants is very hot and moist , which therefore subjects them to be in continual motion .
This softness of the brain is the reason why the images of all sensible objects impress themselves thereon very easily , and in very lively characters : we should not let slip this opportune season  but then , be careful in our choice of the images to be engraved , for in a receptacle so small and so precious , none but very valuable things ought to be deposited  nothing but what we may wish to remain there during life .
The first let of images engraven while the brain is so soft , and entirely unoccupied , are always the deepest : as it dries they harden , and become indelible  hence it is , that though grown old , we remember the passages of our youth , through a long space of time , distinctly  but those of our more advanced age , in a much slighter manner , because those traces were drawn in the brain already dried and marked with many other figures .


Perhaps this kind of reasoning will with difficulty be admitted  nevertheless , it is certain every one talks in this way without perceiving it : do we not say every day , I have taken my biass , I am too old to change , I was brought up to this ?
and besides , is there not a particular pleasure in recalling the images of our youth ?
the strongest inclinations , are they not such as were taken at that age ?
and does not all this prove that the first impressions and first habits are the most prevalent ?


 Now , though infancy is the fittest season for engraving images on the brain , yet it must be confessed , not to be the same with respect to reasoning : that humidity , which so easily admits impression , being joined to a great degree of warmth , is productive of an unsettledness that is an enemy to close application : their brain is in the condition of a lighted taper , exposed to the air  its flame perpetually wavering : a child asks a question , and before you can answer , his eyes are upon the wainscot , counting all the figures painted there  or all the pieces of glass that compose the windows .
To force him back to his first object , is , as it were , to put him in confinement .
So then it behoves us with great care to temporise with the organs till they are grown firm  answer his question directly , and let him ask others as he likes  entertain his curiosity only , and furnish his memory with a stock of good materials .
The time will come when they will assemble of themselves , and the brain having obtained a consistence , the child will reason of course  at which time , when he happens not to reason justly , confine yourself to setting him right , and letting him see , without emotion , as he shall give you an opportunity , what it is to draw a true consequence .
Suffer a child therefore , to have his play , and mingle instruction with it , that wisdom may not shew herself to him but at intervals , and ever with a smiling countenance : take care , I say , of tiring him with indiscrete exactness :


If a child once forms to himself a frightful and gloomy idea of virtue , if self-will and irregularity appear to his eyes in a pleasing shape , all is lost   your endeavours are in vain : therefore keep him ever from the flatteries of the narrow-minded and the profligate .
We grow to love the manners and sentiments of the persons we love  the pleasure found for the time in the company of immoral people , draws us on by degrees to esteem those very qualities in them which are most to be abominated .


In order to give children a liking to the well-disposed , bring them to remark all that in them is both amiable and profitable  their sincerity , their modesty , their disinterestedness , fidelity , and discretion  but above every thing , their piety , which is the source of all .
Should it happen that any such have something about them disagreeable and disgusting , you may say , these defects take not their rise from Piety  she eradicates , or at least abates them .


Though you should keep strict watch over yourself never to let him see in you ought but what is right , yet expect not that your defects will escape him  frequently he will perceive some of your minutest failings .
St. Austin tells us , that he in his infancy remarked the vanity of his masters in their respective professions .
The best step you can take , and the most important , is , to be as well acquainted with your own defects as will the child , and to get some sincere friends to advertise you of them .
Generally speaking , those who have the government of children , pardon nothing in them , and every thing in themselves  this excites in the young ones a spirit of criticism and ill-nature , insomuch , that when ever they can espie any fault in the governor ,  they are quite delighted  what they want is , a reason to hold him in contempt .
Avoid this inconvenience , nor fear to speak of your visible defects , nor of the errors that have escaped you in his presence : as you find him capable of hearing reason , say that you are desirous to set him an example of correcting his errors by correcting your own .
Thus will you draw from your imperfections themselves matter of instruction and edification for the child , and give him courage to bear correction  thus will you escape that contempt and disgust which your failings might give him for your person .


At the same time it is necessary to take all methods to render the things you require of him agreeable  suppose some particular one should be in its nature unpleasant , assure him that his trouble will be followed with satisfaction  explain the usefulness of what you would teach him  shew him the relation it bears to the commerce of the world , and the duties of his station  without this , study will appear an abstract , barren , and thorny piece of work  to what purpose , will they say to themselves , is it to learn all these things which are never mentioned in conversation , and have no relation to what one is obliged to do .
It is necessary therefore to give them the reason for teaching them : it is , we may say , to put you in a capacity of doing well , what one day will be your duty .
It is to form your judgment  it is to use you to reason well upon the affairs of life .
One should always place in their view some truly useful and agreeable end , that will keep up the spirit of application   but never pretend to force them to it by meer tyrannical authority .


Never assume , without extreme necessity , an austere and imperious air , such as makes children tremble .
It is for the most part affectation and pedantry in governesses  for as to children , they are generally but too meek and bashful : it is the way to harden their hearts , and to destroy that trust and reliance , without which no fruit of education is to be expected .
Make yourself beloved by them , that they may be free with you , and not fear to let you see their faults  to bring this about , be indulgent to those of them who act without disguise  seem neither astonished , nor provoked at their bad inclinations  on the contrary , bear with their weaknesses : sometimes this inconvenience will arise , that they will be under less restraint of fear , yet upon the whole , a reliance and a sincerity kept up will be more serviceable to them than your exertion of rigorous authority .
Authority will at all times take place , when respect and persuasion fail  we should ever begin with an open behaviour , easy , and familiar without meanness  this affords an opportunity of seeing their real tempers , and of knowing them thoroughly .
In short , though you should reduce them by dint of authority to the observation of all your rules , the whole would be but a scene of stiff formalities , perhaps of hypocrisy  you would give them a disgust to that good , which it ought to be your sole aim to make them love .


If the wise son of Sirach continually recommends it to parents , ever to keep the rod lifted up over their children  if he hath said , Play with thy child ,  and he will bring thee to heaviness * , it is not that he means to blame a gentle and patient education : he only condemns those weak and inconsiderate parents who flatter the passions of their children , and aim at nothing but to please themselves with them , during their infancy , to such a degree as to indulge them in all kinds of excesses .


The conclusion from this is , that parents ought always to keep authority in reserve for correction  for there are dispositions which must be subdued by fear , but , once again , it is not to be made use of but when we have nothing else left .


A child , who hitherto acts merely by his imagination , and confounds in his head those things that present themselves to him in combination , hates study and virtue , whenever he is prepossessed with an aversion to the person that talks to him of them .


Observe here the source of that gloomy and frightful idea of piety , which he retains all his life : it is often the only part that stays with him of an education of severity .


Frequently it will behove us to tolerate things that require to be corrected  and to watch for the moment in which the spirit of the child shall be disposed to profit by correction .
Never reprehend him in his first emotion , nor in your own : if you do it during your own , he will perceive you to be actuated by your mood and over-hastiness , not by reason or friendship to him : you will lose your authority without resource .
In case you reprove him in his first emotion , consider he has not his spirit enough at liberty to acknowledge his fault , to overcome  his passion , to perceive the importance of your reproof .
This is to expose the child to a losing of the respect which he owes you : let him always see you master of yourself , and this your patience will best show him .
Watch day after day , if need be , for the favourable moments to introduce reproof .
Tell him not of his faults , without adding the method of surmounting them , something that may hearten him to endeavour it  for we must beware of the chagrin and despondency , which mere dry correction brings on .


If one finds the child somewhat reasonable , I believe it right to engage him insensibly to desire to be told of his mistakes , and by this means he will hear them without being afflicted  but even then let him hear but one at a time .
It ought to be considered that children have weak heads , and by reason of their age , are sensible of pleasure alone  whereas , there is oft times expected of them an exactness and seriousness of which the very people that require it , are not themselves capable  nay , their very temper receives a dangerous tincture of uneasiness and melancholy from being continually talked to of words and things they understand not : no liberty , no diversion , but always a lesson , silence , a prescribed posture , rebukes , threats .
The ancients understood this matter much better  among the Hebrews , Egyptians , and Greeks , the principal sciences , the maxims of virtue , and politeness of manners , were introduced by the delightfulness of verse and music : people that have not read can hardly believe this , so wide is it from our customs  nevertheless , whoever is the least acquainted with  history , can have no doubt of its having been the common practice for several ages .


In this our age let us accede so far as to unite the agreeable with the useful , as much as lies in our power .


Now , though with regard to numbers of children whose tempers are difficult to be wrought upon , we can not hope not to be obliged to make use of fear , yet we should first have tried , with patience , every other remedy .


We ought to make them apprehend distinctly the sum of what we require of them , the very point which would please us  for liveliness of disposition , and their reliance on us ought to be kept up , otherwise their spirit will be dulled , and their courage abated  the bold will be provoked , the gentle made stupid .
Fear is like those forcible remedies made use of in violent illnesses , they purge , but they alter the temperament and wear the organs : and thus , amind acted upon by fear is constantly rendered weaker .


[ To be continued . ]
15 .
THE LADY 'S MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER VIII . ]


 MADAM ,


IF the title of a literary performance contributes much to excite the curiosity of the public , I can well suppose that the Trifler is eagerly perused by all the bright eyes of the kingdom  for surely a greater consonancy between the title of this essay and the present complection of females , can not well be imagined .
- For to what end or use do the multiplied branches of female education serve , but to trifle gracefully and agreeably ?
This is the true sÁavoir vivre , so happily and universally taught by those valuable people , the French governesses , all over this great metropolis : for surely no other  persons can pretend , with equal justice , to give people of fashion that charming air and those enchanting manners which alone can make them look like themselves .
Did our young gentlemen enjoy the benefit of instruction equally salubrious , I should hope , that in a little time they might learn to trifle away their courage and honesty , almost as happily as the French themselves seem to have done .


Nor let it derogate in the least from the present approved system of things , that in the fervid pursuit of higher attainments , the ladies may very possibly less attend to duty , character , reputation , than some Cynical persons have been willing to approve of .
Surely such mean insinuations could only be suggested by those whose exploded nonsense has totally disqualified them for the society of the triflers - And really was the accusation well founded , I do n't see what blame could justly lie upon us , who have never been taught to set the least value on moral obligations .


In how much more pleasing a light have we been instructed to consider the scope and design of our being ?
We have at length happily resolved it into one general principle , that of being delightfully idle .


In order to support the consistency of our character , give me leave to descend to a few particulars .
If a lady spends her whole life in fretful dissipation , is it not plain , that she considers her time , for the use of which some have fancied themselves accountable , as a meer trifle ?


 If another considers cards as the true consolation of life , and consequently makes them the sole business of it , supposing even that she is unsuccessful , no matter by what compensations she ballances her accounts  her losses in any way , can only be considered as meer trifles .


If a third , by the kind assistance of foreign tuition , has been happily extricated from the restraints of modesty , delicacy , virtue , and religion , these omissions ought surely to be considered as so many negative advantages , and their value placed to our account .
For it is well known , that those exploded qualities which are now not worth a dispute , were only held in great reverence in remarkably simple times .


However , we are happily accomplished out of all those simplicities , and have substituted in their room such opinions as have raised us above all vulgar fears and prejudices - Hence it is , that we have left the sense and love of religion to be embraced only by those who are no longer loved by any body .
Let such as want the solid supports of fashion , luxury , gallantry , and fifty et cetera 's , take refuge in such aerial meditations : for our part , we shall take care to enjoy the substance , and leave to those disappointed wretches the shadow .


As to the churches , I ca n't say what sort of people attend them , as neither I or any of my acquaintance ever go there  but , in the way of curiosity and pleasure , we sometimes visit the methodist conventicles  and there thro ' the whole auditory there obtains so visible a distraction , that we have always considered those deluded people  as much more the objects of compassion than contempt .


I have often thought it extremely well judged in the government to tolerate such places  for they must considerably lessen the number of mad-houses .
With such invariable constancy do we persevere in our opinions , that our whole life may be considered as one uniform trifle  and , unless we should be encumbered by a few brats , can it be said of any of us , when we quit the scene , that we have left any monuments of our existence ?


A tender regard for the honor , laws , and religion of one 's country , are considerations which only can affect narrow souls  but ( thanks to the dear foreigners who direct our education ) we have been taught to consider things in a more elevated sense , and to respect the interest of our very national enemies at least as much as our own , and universally to prefer those people to our own natives .


There is one discovery in particular that does infinite honour to our society , and which for the credit of the sisterhood , I must beg leave a little to enlarge upon - I mean our discovery of the true sources of pleasure and happiness .
These objects were heretofore supposed to be best attained by following nature , and to be inseparably connected with reason and duty .
Pleasure , truly so called , had formerly been considered as a very natural thing , and some unintelligible stuff , named virtue , as the only safe road to happiness - But we have undeceived the world in these particulars , and have taught them to look for their happiness  where none but ourselves ever dreamed it could be found .


In short , we have fixed its basis in the extinction of all reasonable ideas , and , to enjoy life the more perfectly , have fairly consented to lose sight of all the ends of living .
This grand principle pervades the whole sphere of our activity , and our conduct affords the most ample attestation of our opinions .
- Let others , if they please , look up to causes , and consider consequences  it is sufficient for us , that we appear of consequence in the eyes of the world .


Nor are we in the least disconcerted by the invidious remarks of those who would insinuate , that we are not quite so happy as we would seem to be  and that , notwithstanding our continual efforts to appear highly pleased , there is still a dismal vacuity in our minds .


However that may be , there is at least an equal vacuity in those understandings who have made that remark , not to know , that we live only for appearances  and that to be , or to seem only , are pretty much the same thing with the whole race of triflers .


Nay , to a still higher heroism have we carried our ideas on this subject , that , with a magnanimity peculiar to ourselves , we have exchanged realities for appearances , and have lost all pleasure , merely for pleasure 's sake .
Let others ridiculously estimate their happiness by their own consciousness , while we wisely measure ours by the opinions of other people , which must always be in our favour so long as


to appear we strive ,


The most contented things alive .


 I ca n't conclude this letter , without lamenting the great detriment our society have suffered by the conduct of Miranda .
This lady , you know , is the sworn enemy of all triflers , and the business of her whole life has been to discredit our opinions .
Perverse creature !
not to have yielded to the conviction which numbers , fashion , and raillery scarcely ever fail to impress .


Her obstinacy is the more to be lamented , as from an unusual concurrence of circumstances her influence happens to be very extensive .
Happy for us there are few Miranda 's  for if we may judge from this one , half a dozen such would be sufficient to destroy the credit of our society .
Never was there so ungrateful a creature !
would you believe it ?
though nature has been extremely kind to her , in the distribution of personal charms , she never was so much as suspected to be sensible of the obligation .
It is very plain that this must be the case  for had she been duly thankful for nature 's liberality , she would , like the rest of us , have solely relied upon it , and never so far affronted her beauty , as to endeavour to please by any other merit whatsoever .


We have great reason to wish , that nature in this instance had spared her bounty  for her charms always create an attention , which she never fails to improve to our prejudice .
However , there is one consolation left  as Miranda is yet single , and the men almost all of our party , who knows but the race may become extinct ?


This lady , I am told , among other singularities , pretends to have opinions of her own  and that  she makes reason , and not ridicule , the criterion by which she examines their truth .
Some of her notions are so extraordinary as to deserve being related .
She thinks that moral virtue , on its true basis religion , is the only sure and permanent object of esteem  and that whatever purifies the heart does likewise embellish the manners , and even raises the genius .
She can not comprehend why a rational creature should be ashamed of its reason , or blush to acknowledge a pleasure in cultivating it .


She is of opinion that a woman of sense is a character not inferior to a woman of fashion , and , with an extravagant ambition , has united both in her own person .
I have here only given you a small specimen of her notions , which are such , you see , as leave us slender hopes of reclaiming her .


Indeed were her opinions simply proposed to the understanding , or to the desires , which judge much better , they are so repugnant to the present modes both of thinking and acting , that they must be inevitably rejected , as our custom is , without any examination at all .
But things will appear very different , seen through different mediums .
There are certain women who carry in their own persons a demonstration of their opinions .
Of that number is Miranda , who besides has got such a way of colouring things , and of recommending her notions by manners the most insinuating , and a behaviour so sweetly feminine , that I really begin to fear her impressions must be irresistible .
You know , my dear , every body is not fortified as we are , and the girl has so imposing a way , she certainly will continue to do much mischief .
Let us  not however be intimidated by so dangerous an enemy , but unite more vigorously in our common defence .
The annals of all ages are in our favour  for at what place or period could nature and reason prevail over folly and vanity ?


I shall further observe , for our encouragement , that the world never fails to applaud the time and pains which are devoted to the service of the triflers .
Upon this consideration I hope you will excuse the trouble occasioned by this long letter , from your


Affectionate Sister , and Servant , ANOETA .


16 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 WHEN Mr. Herbert returned from his walk , and met the curate , and his little family at supper , Sophia , who heedfully observed him , saw an alteration in his countenance , which realized all her melancholy apprehensions , and convinced her that some new misfortune awaited her : his eyes , which studiously avoided her 's , expressed nothing but grief and confusion  but he retired so early to his chamber , that Sophia , finding there was no hopes of his explaining himself that night , passed it in an anxiety of mind which suffered her not to taste the least repose .
Early in the morning he knocked at her door , and desired her to join him in the garden  she was already drest , and instantly complied .


As soon as she came up to him , he took her hand , and pressed it affectionately , but spoke not a word .


Sophia , who feared , as much as she wished to know what had happened , had not power to ask for an explanation  so they both continued silent for some minutes .


At length Mr. Herbert told her he was going to London : Sophia , in a faultering accent , asked  him what had happened to occasion this sudden resolution ?


` Alas !
my dear child , said the good old man , in great emotion , I am ashamed and grieved to tell you that - Sir Charles has , I fear , deceived me . '


Although Sophia had reason to expect some sad reverse of fortune , and had endeavoured to prepare herself for it , yet this fatal confirmation of her fears shocked her so much , that Mr. Herbert , who saw a death-like paleness overspread her face , and felt her hand cold and trembling , fearing she would faint , made haste to lead her to a little bench of turf which was near them .


Sophia recovering , saw so much concern in his looks , that struggling to repress her own anguish , she endeavoured to comfort him , and smiling through the tears that filled her charming eyes , ` Let not this instance of my weakness alarm you , sir , said she  and doubt not but , with the assistance of heaven , I shall bear this strange insult with proper fortitude . '


` How worthy are you , my good child , of better fortune ! '
said Mr. Herbert  then taking a letter out of his pocket , ` My first design , pursued he , was to seek some explanation of this mysterious letter before I made you acquainted with it , but I perceived that my too apparent uneasiness had alarmed you , and I thought it would be less cruel to inform you of the whole matter , than to leave you in doubt and uncertainty : this letter was delivered to me yesterday in the evening , by one of Sir Charles 's servants , just as was  walking out towards the road , in hopes of meeting his master .
My surprise at receiving a letter when I expected to see himself , made me open it instantly , without asking the servant any questions , and while I was reading it he went away , doubtless being directed to do so . '


Mr. Herbert then gave the letter to Sophia , who unfolding it with trembling emotion , found it was as follows :


SIR ,


Since it is impossible my marriage with Miss Sophia can ever take place , I wish you would look upon all that passed between us upon that subject , as a dream : I dreamt indeed when I imagined there was a woman in the world capable of a sincere attachment  and I ought to be ashamed to own that upon so delusive a hope I was ready to act in opposition to the general maxims of the world , and be pointed at as a silly romantic fellow .
However , I beg you will assure the lady , that as I have no right to blame her conduct , so I have not the least resentment for it , and am so perfectly at ease on this occasion , that I can with great sincerity congratulate her on her approaching happiness .
I am , Sir ,


Your humble Servant , CHARLES STANLEY .


Although this letter gave Sophia a sad certainty of her misfortune , yet it relieved her from those worst pangs which a heart in love can feel , the belief of being abandoned through indifference , or inconstancy : unperceived by ourselves , pride mixes  with our most tender affections , and either aggravates or lessens the sense of every disappointment , in proportion as we feel ourselves humbled by the circumstances that attend it .


This ill-disguised jealousy , the personated calmness , the struggling resentment that appeared in this letter , convinced Sophia that Sir Charles was far from being at ease , and that to whatever cause his present unaccountable behaviour was owing , yet she was sure at least of not being indifferent to him .


It was not difficult to perceive that he had been deceived by some malicious reports , and her suspicions fell immediately upon Harriot  but rejecting this thought , as too injurious to her sister , she returned the letter to Mr. Herbert without speaking a word , but with a look much more serene and composed than before .


Mr. Herbert , who saw nothing in this letter like what her penetration had discovered , and who conceived it to be only a poor artifice to disengage himself from promises which he now repented of , was surprised to find her so much less affected with it than he expected , and asked her what she thought of it ?


Sophia told him , that she was fully persuaded Sir Charles had been prejudiced against her .


` Do you think so , my dear , said he , after a little pause  then it is your sister to whom you are obliged for this kind office . '


' I hope not , sir , replied Sophia , sighing  that circumstance would aggravate my concern - indeed  I think it would be a crime in me to suspect her of being capable of such unkindness . '


` Well , resumed Mr. Herbert , I will , if possible , discover this mystery before night  you shall hear from me to-morrow  in the mean time calm your mind , and resign yourself entirely to that providence , which while you continue thus good and virtuous , will never forsake you . '


Mr. Herbert now left her , to go and take leave of the curate and his family  and Sophia , whose fortune had undergone so many revolutions in so short a time , retired to her chamber , where she passed great part of the day alone , at once to indulge her melancholy and to conceal it from observation .


In the afternoon Dolly came up , in a great hurry of spirits , to acquaint her that Mrs. Gibbons was come to wait upon her , that she had been met at the door by her mother , and that several courtesies had passed between them .


The poor girl , though transported with joy at this favourable beginning , no sooner perceived by the pensive air in Sophia 's countenance , and the sighs that escaped her , that her suspicions of some new disappointment having happened to her were true , than instantly forgetting the prosperous situation of her own affairs , her sweet face was overspread with tender grief , and a tear stole from her eyes  but Sophia , whom nothing could have awakened from that stupifying sorrow in which any great and sudden misfortune plunges the mind , but the desire of being useful to her friends , soon assumed a more chearful look , and hastened to receive her visitor .


 Mrs. Gibbons was in full dress , and had omitted no superfluous ornament that could serve to shew Sophia how well she understood every sort of punctilio .
As soon as the first compliments were over , ` You see , madam , said she , what affluence your commands have over me  I once little thought that I should ever have entered this impolished house again  my nephew attended me to the door , but I would not suffer him to come in , because I am not sure that you are willing to let these people know the honour you do him by receiving his adorations . '


Sophia , though a little startled at these words , yet supposed she had no particular meaning in them , and ascribed all to her fantastick manner of expressing herself  but Mrs. Gibbons being resolved to hasten the conclusion of an affair which she had very much at heart , spoke so intelligibly at last , that Sophia could no longer be ignorant of her design , all the ill consequences of which suddenly striking her imagination , she exclaimed in a tone of surprise and terror , ` Sure I am the most unfortunate creature in the world !
is it possible , Mrs. Gibbons , that you can be serious ?
have you really given any cause for a report , that I receive your nephew 's addresses ?
if you have , you have done me an irreparable injury . '


Sophia 's spirits were so greatly agitated that she did not perceive how much of her situation these words discovered  so that Mrs. Gibbons , who saw the tears flow fast from her eyes , immediately comprehended the whole truth .


 ' I see plainly , said she , in great concern , that I have been deceived , and others perhaps have been so too  I shall never disculpate myself for being the cause of any misfortune to you : some more advantageous treatise has been on the tapestry , and this unlucky affair has done mischief . '


` Give me leave to ask you , madam , interupted Sophia , with some peevishness , what foundation you had for believing that I considered your nephew as my lover ?
you know his heart has been long since engaged . '


' I acknowledge I have been to blame , my dear miss , resumed Mrs. Gibbons , I was too sanguinary in my hopes  but I beg you will disclaim no more , this will do no good , only tell me if it is possible to repair the harm I have done by my foolish schemes . '


To this Sophia made no answer  but Mrs. Gibbons , who wanted neither tenderness nor candor , and who was greatly concerned at the uneasiness she saw her under , urged her so frequently , and with so much earnestness , to tell her if she could be of any use in clearing up a mistake that had possibly been disadvantageous to her , that Sophia , still attentive amidst all her own distresses to the interest of her friend , thought this a favourable opportunity to serve her  and therefore told Mrs. Gibbons , that if she was really sincere in her offers , there was one way .


' I understand you , madam , interrupted Mrs. Gibbons , and I believe I may venture to say that I thought of this expedition before you did .
I  can not , indeed , Miss Darnley , I can not consent to my nephew 's marriage with the young woman here  you know I have been affronted . '


Sophia now urged some arguments in favour of Mrs. Lawson , but chiefly rested her defence upon her ignorance of those form 's of politeness and good breeding which Mrs. Gibbons was so perfectly mistress of .


This compliment put the old lady into so good a humour , that she cried out , ` Well , my dear Miss Darnley , in regard to you , I will take off the probition I laid on my nephew to visit here no more  and this I hope , added she smiling , will set matters right in another place  as for the rest , I shall take no resolution till I see how they behave . '


Sophia , in her transport at having succeeded so well with the old lady , felt all her own griefs suspended  and indeed when she reflected upon what had happened with regard to herself , she found she had less cause for reflection than Mr. Herbert , or her own fears , had suggested .


Mrs. Gibbons acknowledged that she had flattered herself with the hope of her nephew 's being well received by her  and that , in consequence of it , she had talked of their marriage as an event which was very likely to happen , and which would give her great joy .
Sophia , being fully persuaded that these reports had reached Sir Charles , though by what means she was not so well able to determine , easily accounted for that jealousy and resentment which had produced so strange an inconsistency in his behaviour , and which Mr. Herbert considered as a piece of artifice to palliate his lightness and inconstancy .


 The good old man , animated by his affection for the poor afflicted Sophia , rode with the utmost speed to town , and alighted at the house of the young baronet .
The servants informed him , that their master was in the country , which was all the intelligence they could give him  for they neither knew where he was , nor when he would return .
Mr. Herbert , perplexed and concerned at this new disappointment , repaired immediately to Mrs. Darnley 's , hoping to hear some news of him there .


Harriot , in answer to his enquiries , told him with an air of triumph , that the same day they returned from visiting Sophia , Sir Charles had waited on her mamma and her , and had as usual past great part of the afternoon with them .


Mr. Herbert , who was struck with this incident , endeavoured to make some discoveries concerning their conversation , and Harriot 's malice made this no difficult matter : for she could not forbear throwing out some sarcasms against her sister , whose extreme sensibility , she insinuated , had already found out a new object .


Mr. Herbert , by his artful questions , drew her into a confession of all that had passed between her and the baronet upon this subject  and was convinced that her malignant hints had poisoned his mind with suspicions unfavourable to Sophia .


He went away full of indignation at her treachery , and still doubtful of Sir Charles 's sincerity , who he could not suppose would have been so easily influenced by Harriot 's suggestions , ( whose envious disposition he well knew , ) if his intentions had been absolutely right .


 The next morning he received a letter from Sophia , in which she acquainted him with the discoveries she had made  and modestly hinted her belief that Sir Charles had been imposed upon by this report of her intended marriage , which she found was spread through the village , and which , as it was very probable , he had intelligence from thence , had confirmed any idle raillery to that purpose , which her sister might have indulged herself in .


Mr. Herbert reflecting upon all these unlucky circumstances , began to suppose it possible that Sir Charles had been really deceived .
He went again to his house , but had the mortification to hear from a servant whom he had not seen the day before , that the baronet was at his seat in -


Thither the good old man resolved to go  the inconveniencies and expence of such a journey , which in his years , and narrow circumstances were not inconsiderable , had not weight enough with him to make him balance a moment whether he should transact this affair by letter , or in person .
The happiness of his dear and amiable charge depended upon his success : he therefore delayed no longer than to make the necessary preparations for his journey , and , after writing to Sophia to acquaint her with his design , he set out for Sir Charles 's seat , where he met with a new and more severe disappointment .
The first news he heard was , that the baronet was not in that part of the country  and , upon a fuller enquiry of his servants , he was informed that their master had the morning before set out for Dover with an intention to go to Paris .


 Mr. Herbert , dispirited with this news , and fatigued with his fruitless journey , retired to his inn , where he passed the lonely hours in melancholy reflections upon the capricious behaviour of Sir Charles , and the undeserved distresses of the innocent Sophia .


Sir Charles , however , notwithstanding appearances , was at present more unhappy than guilty .
His resolution to marry Sophia , though suddenly formed , was not the less sincere : he had always loved her with the most ardent passion , and had not the light character of her mother and sister concurred with those prejudices which his youth , his fortune , and his converse with the gay world led him into , his heart , which never ceased to do homage to her virtue , would have sooner suggested to him the only means of being truly happy .


An overstrained delicacy likewise proved another source of disquietude to him .
The inequality of their circumstances gave rise to a thousand tormenting doubts : he was afraid , that dazzled with the splendor of his fortune , she would sacrifice her inclinations to her interest , and give him her hand without her heart  and when doing justice to the greatness of her mind , and the real delicacy of her sentiments , he rejected this supposition as too injurious to her , his busy imagination conjured up new forms of distrust : he trembled left , mistaking gratitude for love , she should be deceived by her own generosity and nice sense of obligation , and imagine it was the lover she prefered , when the benefactor only touched her heart .


 Such was the perplexed state of his mind , when Mrs. Darnley and Harriot proposed making her a visit .
With some difficulty he conquered his desire of accompanying them  but his impatience to hear of her , carried him again to Mrs. Darnley 's much earlier in the evening than it was likely they would return  presuming on his intimacy in the family , he scrupled not to go up stairs , telling the servant he would wait till the ladies came home .


He sat down in the dining room , where he gazed on Sophia 's picture a long time .
At last a sudden fancy seized him to visit her apartment , which he knew was on the second floor : he ascended the stairs without being perceived , and with a tender emotion entered the room where his beloved Sophia used to pass so many of her retired hours .


It was still elegantly neat , as when its lovely inmate was there  for Harriot , who hated this room , because it contained so many monuments of her sister 's taste and industry , never went into it  and it remained in the same order that she had left it .


The first thing that drew the young baronet 's attention , was a fire screen of excellent workmanship  it was a flower-piece , and executed with peculiar taste and propriety : the wainscot was adorned with several drawings , neatly framed and glassed .
In this art Sophia took great delight , having while her father lived , appropriated all her pocket-money to the payment of a master to instruct her in it .
Sir Charles considered the subjects of these drawings with peculiar pleasure .
The delicate pencil of Sophia had here represented the  virtues and the graces , from those lively ideas which existed in her own charming mind .


Her little library next engaged his notice : many of the books that composed it he had presented her  but he was curious to see those which her own choice had directed her to , and in this examination he met with many proofs of her piety as well as of the excellence of her taste .


Several compositions of her own now fell into his hands  he read them with eagerness , and , charmed with this discovery of those treasures of wit , which she with modest diffidence so carefully concealed , he felt his admiration and tenderness for her encrease every moment .


While he was anxiously searching for more of her papers , a little shagreen case fell from one of the shelves upon the ground .
He took it up , and as every thing that belonged to her excited his curiosity , he opened it immediately , and with equal surprise and pleasure , saw his own miniature in water colours , which was evidently the performance of Sophia herself .


Had it been possible for her to imagine the sudden and powerful effect the sight of this picture would have upon the heart of Sir Charles , she would not have suffered so much uneasiness for the loss of it as she really had  for forgetting where she had laid it , she supposed it had dropt out of her pocket , and was apprehensive of its having fallen into her sister 's hands , who she knew would not fail to turn this incident to her disadvantage .


While Sir Charles gazed upon this artless testimony of Sophia 's affection for him , the softest gratitude ,  the tenderest compassion filled his soul .
` Oh my Sophia , said he , do you then truly love me !
and have I cruelly trifled with your tenderness ! '


This thought melted him even to tears  he felt in himself a detestation of those depraved principles which had suggested to him a design of debasing such purity !
he wondered at the hardness of his own heart , that could so long resist the influence of her gentle virtues , and suffer such sweet sensibility to waste itself in anxious doubts , and disappointed hope .


Being now determined to do justice to her merit , and make himself happy , his first design was to go immediately to Mr. Lawson 's  but , reflecting that Sophia had great reason to be dissatisfied with his conduct , and that to remove her prejudices , the utmost caution and delicacy was to be observed , he conceived it would be more proper to make a direct application to Mr. Herbert , whom she loved and reverenced as a father , than to present himself before her , while her mind yet laboured with those unfavourable suspicions for which he had given but too much cause  and hence new fears and doubts arose to torment him .
He dreaded left her just resentment for his injurious designs should have weakened those tender impressions she had once received , and that in the pride of offended virtue every softer sentiment would be lost .


Impatient of this cruel state of suspense and inquietude , he left Sophia 's apartment , and repairing to the dining-room , rang the bell for the servant , of whom he enquired where Mr. Herbert lodged .
 Having obtained a direction , he went immediately to the house  Mr. Herbert was not at home , and Sir Charles grieved at this disappointment , and at Mrs. Darnley 's not returning that night , from whom he hoped to have heard some news of Sophia  the agitation of his mind made him think it an age till the next day , in which he determined to put an end to all his perplexities , and to fix his fate .


After his interview with Mr. Herbert , and the good old man 's departure to prepare Sophia for his intended visit , the young baronet resigned his whole soul to tenderness and joy .
His impatience to see Sophia encreased with his hope of finding her sentiments for him unchanged , and he regretted a thousand times his having suffered Mr. Herbert to go away without him .


Mean time a card came from Mrs. Darnley and Harriot , acquainting him that they were returned , and thanking him for the use of his servants and chariot .
Sir Charles , eager to hear news of his Sophia , went immediately to wait on them , and scarce were the first compliments over , when he enquired for her with such apparent emotion , that , Harriot mortified to the last degree , resolved to be even with him , and said every thing that she thought would torment him , and prejudice her sister .


She told him that Sophia was the most contented creature in the world , and that she was so charmed with her present way of life , and her new companions , that she seemed to have forgot all her old friends , and even her relations .
` She is grown a meer country girl , said she , is always wandering about in the fields and meadows , followed by a  young rustic who has fallen in love with her .
I rallied her a little upon her taste  but I found she could not bear it , and indeed he is extremely handsome , and she says , has had a genteel education . '


Harriot was at once pleased and grieved at observing the effect these insinuations had on Sir Charles  his colour changed , he trembled , and fixing his eyes on the ground , he remained pensive and silent , while Harriot , notwithstanding her mother 's significant frowns , proceeded in a malicious detail of little circumstances partly invented , and partly mistaken , which fixed the sharpest stings of jealousy in his heart .


If in dealing with cunning persons we were always to consider their ends , in order to interpret their speeches , much of their artifice would lose its effect  but Sir Charles had so contemptible an opinion of Harriot 's understanding , that although he knew she was malicious , he never suspected her of being capable of laying schemes to gratify her malice , and did not suppose she was mistress of invention enough to form so plausible a tale as that she had told .


Impatient under those cruel doubts which now possessed him , he resolved to go , late as it was in the evening , to Mr. Lawson 's house , and taking an abrupt leave of Mrs. Darnley and her daughter , he went home , and ordered his horses to be got ready .
He scarce knew his own design by taking this journey at so improper a time  but in the extreme agitation of his mind , the first idea of relief that naturally presented itself was to see Sophia ,  who alone could destroy or confirm his fears  and this he eagerly pursued without any farther reflection .


The servant to whom he had sent his orders , made no haste to execute them , as conceiving it to be a most extravagant whim in his master to set out upon a journey so late , and in that manner .
While he with studied delays protracted the time , hoping for some change in his resolutions , Sir Charles racked with impatience , counted moments for hours  message after message was dispatched to the groom .
The horses at length were brought , and Sir Charles with only one servant gallop'd away , never stopping till he came to the place where Sophia resided .


It was now night , and the indecorum of making a visit at such a time in a family where he was a stranger first striking his thoughts , he resolved to alight at an inn which he saw at a small distance , and there consider what it was best for him to do .


A guest of his appearance soon engaged the attention of the host and his wife .
They quitted two men with whom they had then been talking , and , with a great deal of officious civility , attended upon Sir Charles , who desired to be shewn into a room .
As he was following the good woman , who declared he should have the best in her house , the two men with whom she had been talking , bowed to him when he passed by them  the salute of the younger having a certain grace in it that drew his attention , he looked back on him , and at the sight of a very handsome face , and a person uncommonly  genteel , his heart , by its throbbing emotion , immediately suggested to him , that this beautiful youth was the lover of his Sophia .


The jealousy which Harriot 's insinuations had kindled in his heart , now raged with redoubled force  this rival , whom she had called a rustic , and whom he fondly hoped to find such , possessed the most attractive graces of form , and probably wanted neither wit nor politeness .
Sophia 's youth , her tenderness , her sensibility wounded by his dissembled indifference , and the cruel capriciousness of his conduct , all disposed her to receive a new impression , and who so proper to touch her heart as this lovely youth , whose passion , as innocent as it was ardent and sincere , banished all doubt and suspicion , and left her whole soul open to the soft pleadings of gratitude and love ?


While he was wholly absorb'd in these tormenting reflections , and incapable of taking any resolution , the officious landlady entered his chamber to take his orders for supper .


Sir Charles , surprised to find it was so late , resolved to stay there all night , and after giving the good woman some directions , his restless curiosity impelled him to ask her several questions concerning the old man and the youth whom he had seen talking to her .


The hostess , who was as communicative as he could desire , told him , that the old man was one farmer Gibbons , of whom she had been buying a load of hay  that the young one was his son , and a great scholard .
` His aunt , pursued she , breeds  him up to be a gentleman , and she has a power of money , and designs to leave it all to him , much good may it do him , for he is as handsome a young man as one would desire to see .
Some time ago it was all over our town that he was going to be married to the parson 's youngest daughter , and she is a pretty creature , and disarves him if he was more richer , and handsomer than he is  but whatever is the matter , the old folks have changed their mind , and his aunt , they say , wants to make up a match between him and a fine London lady that boards at the parson 's  but I 'll never believe it till I see it , for she and the parson 's daughter are great friends , they say , and it would not be a friendly part to rob the poor girl of her sweetheart .
To say the truth , I believe there is some juggling among them  but this I keep to myself , for I would not make mischief  therefore I never tell my thoughts to any body , but I wish the young folks well . '


Sir Charles , who had listened to her with great emotion , dismissed her now , that he might be at liberty to reflect on what he had heard , which although it did not lead him to a full discovery of the truth , yet it suggested thoughts which relieved him in some degree from those dreadful pangs of jealousy with which he had hitherto been tortured , and balanced at least his fears and his hopes .


His impatience to free himself from this state of perplexity and suspence , allowed him but little repose that night  he rose as soon as the day appeared , and it was with some difficulty that he prevailed  upon himself to defer his visit till a seasonable hour  and then being informed that Mr. Lawson 's house was scarce a mile distant , he left his servant and horses at the inn , and walked thither , amidst a thousand anxious thoughts , which made him dread as much as he wished for an interview , which was to decide his fate .


As he drew near the house , he perceived a young man sauntering about in an adjacent field , whose air and mien had a great resemblance of the youth whom he had seen in the inn .
Sir Charles , eager to satisfy his doubts , followed him at a distance , and the youth turning again his wishing eyes towards the house , the baronet had a full view of his face .


At the sight of his young rival his heart throbbed as if it would leave his breast : he hastily retreated behind the hedge , determined to watch his motions  for he imagined , and with reason , that he came there to meet his mistress  and who that mistress was , whether Sophia , or the curate 's daugher , was the distracting doubt , which he now expected to have satisfied .


He walked along by the side of the hedge , still keeping William in sight , who suddenly turning back , rather flew than ran to meet a woman who beckoned to him .
Sir Charles saw at once his Sophia , and the fatal sign , which planted a thousand daggers in his heart .
Trembling and pale he leaned against a tree , which concealed him from view , and saw her advance towards his rival , saw her in earnest discourse with him  and , to compleat his distraction and despair , saw the happy youth throw himself at  her feet , doubtless to thank her for the sacrifice she made to him of a richer lover .


Such was the inference he drew from this action  and now rage and indignation succeeding to grief , in these first transports , he was upon the point of discovering himself , and sacrificing the hated youth to his vengeance  but a moment 's reflection shewed him the dishonour of a contest with so despicable a rival , and turned all his resentment against Sophia , who having quitted her supposed lover , took her way back again to the house .
Sir Charles followed her with disordered haste , resolved to load her with reproaches for her inconstancy  then , unwilling to gratify her pride by such an acknowledgment of his weakness , he turned back , cursing love , women , and his own ill fate .
In this temper he wandered about a long time  at last he again returned to the inn , where after giving orders to have his horses got ready , he wrote that letter to Mr. Herbert , in which he so well disguised the anguish of his heart , that the good old man believed his breaking off the affair was the effect of his lightness and inconstancy only , though Sophia 's quicker penetration easily discovered the latent jealousy that had dictated it .


Sir Charles ordered his servant to deliver the letter into Mr. Herbert 's hands  then mounting his horse , he bid him follow him as soon as he had executed his commission .
The young baronet , who retired to his country seat to conceal his melancholy , and fondly flattered himself that he should soon overcome that fatal passion which had been  the source of so much disgust to him , found his mind so cruelly tortured with the remembrance of Sophia , that he reassumed his first design of going abroad , and unfortunately set out for Dover , the day before Mr. Herbert 's arrival .


The good old man being obliged to send Sophia this bad news , filled his letter with tender consolations , and wise and prudent counsels : he exhorted her to bear this stroke of fortune with that dignity of patience which distinguishes the good and wise .


` The virtue of prosperity , said he , is temperance , the virtue of adversity fortitude  it is this last which you are now called upon to exert , and which the innocence of your life may well inspire you with  for be assured , my dear child , that it is the greatest consolation under misfortunes to be conscious of having always meant well , and to be convinced that nothing but guilt deserves to be considered as a severe evil . '


Sophia in her answer displayed a mind struggling against its own tenderness , offering up its disappointed hopes , its griefs , and desires , in pious sacrifice to the will of Providence , and seeking in religion all its consolation and support .


` Can a virtuous person , said she , however oppressed by poverty , and in consequence neglected by the world , be said to want friends and comforters who can look into his own mind with modest approbation , and to whom recollection furnishes a source of joy ?
Every good action he has performed is a friend , every instance  of pious resignation is a comforter , who cheer him with present peace , and support him with hopes of future happiness .
Can he be said to be alone , and deprived of the pleasures of society , who converses with saints and angels ?
is he without distinction and reward whose life his almighty Creator approves ? '


[ To be continued . ]
 MADAM ,


THE inclosed little poem was written by the celebrated Earl of Dorset .
It was never published , and may possibly be acceptable to some of your readers : I am , madam ,


Your most humble servant , J F .


' Lord DORSET to his LADY .


Not , Chloe , that I truer am , Or juster than the rest  For I could change each hour like them Were it my interest .
But I am tied to very thee By ev'ry thought I have , And would you now my heart set free , I 'd be again your slave .
All that in woman is ador'd , Tn thy dear self I find  For the whole sex can but afford The handsome and the kind .
Why should I then seek farther store , And still make love anew  Since change itself can give no more , 'T is easy to be true . '
18 .
ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of GREAT BRITAIN , CONTINUED .


 OUR modern writers , with indefatigable industry , have given us a most exact historical dictionary of the several Saxon monarchs , who successively reigned in the seven kingdoms of Britain .
Dictionaries are always voluminous , but always useful  they are lesser libraries , and the compilers of them are entitled to the highest acknowledgements from all lovers of learning .
I have gone through these biographical lexicons , which , like the chronicles of the kings of Israel , give us many barbarous names that tend rather to weary than to indulge our curiosity .
The times indeed are at such a distance , and the face of government has been long since so entirely changed , that we are scarce any farther interested in the Saxon heptarchy , than as it serves to continue and compleat the line of our English history .


Within the space of sixty years from the arrival of Augustine , the people of England were entirely converted from paganism to christianity  but , as in general they had been converted by monks , most of them were taught , that a monkish life was the  surest , and perhaps the only road to heaven : and , in obedience to this doctrine , several of the kings renounced their thrones , quitted all commerce with the world , and retired into monasteries .


The heptarchy is a field where so little grain is to be reaped , and where the small produce is mixed and choaked with so many monastic tares and brambles , the most succinct and effectual method will be only to mention some of those princes who , by remarkable actions , or from particular events , have particularly deserved the attention of posterity .


In the history of Northumberland , Edwin distinguished himself more than any other of the Saxon kings .
He was son of Alla , king of Deira  but his father dying when he was only three years old , Adelfrid , king of Bernicia , who had married Edwin 's sister , seized the kingdom of Deira , and possessed himself of the orphan 's throne .
By such an union of the two kingdoms , Adelfrid became extremely powerful , and was able to raise a considerable body of forces against the Welch , the Picts , and the Scots .
But the unfortunate Edwin was reduced to the greatest extremities , and was in perpetual danger .
All the princes of England stood in awe of Adelfrid , and were afraid to give a sanctuary to his rival  till Redwald , king of East Anglia , from a compassion to Edwin 's miserable situation , openly received him at his court .
Adelfrid , the Cromwell of those days , sent ambassadors to the king of the East Angles , to require the surrender of Edwin 's person , or in case of refusal , to threaten an immediate declaration of war .
Redwald  for some time was staggered and disconcerted by the embassy .
He found within his breast a struggle between honour and prudence .
If he protected Edwin , he run the hazard of losing his own kingdom : if he yielded up a guest whom he had voluntarily received , where was the faith of princes ?
who could rely upon the honour of a king ?
This last consideration , fortified again by the persuasion of his queen , determined Redwald to protect Edwin , and not only to protect his person , but to take up arms in his defence .
Courage was the characteristic of those times .
Redwald , Edwin , Adelfrid , were all equally brave : the two former entered the kingdom of Northumberland , and came to an engagement with Adelfrid , in which the Northumbrians were entirely conquered .
Adelfrid fell like Cataline : Longe a suis inter hostium cadavera repertus est , paululum etiam spirans serociamque animi quam habuerat vivus in vultu retinens .
` His body was found at a distance from his own troops , in the midst of a heap of enemies whom he had slain .
He still breathed , and his features still maintained that fierceness of soul , which they had expressed during the vigour of his life . '


Edwin , after the death of Adelfrid , by the consent , or rather by the gift of Redwald , whose troops had gained the conquest , took possession of the kingdom of Northumberland .
His reign , during several years , was prosperous , and except some successless plots against his person , was , in every respect , happy to himself , and to his people .
His spirit and his conduct made him the chief monarch of the heptarchy .
His laws were executed  with so much efficacy , that a child might pass through Northumberland holding open a purse of gold , without danger of being robbed .
He was a pagan when he ascended the throne , but after his marriage with Ethelburga , sister of the king of Kent , he became a christian , and in the year 627 , was publicly baptized at York .


Edwin maintained his dignity with true splendor .
An ensign , in the form of a globe , was constantly carried before him , as a symbol , that in his person was united the heptarchical government .
What a loss have we in being totally ignorant of his laws !
for although historians represent him as a prince of great ambition , his understanding , policy , and conduct are remarkably extolled .
His greatness drew upon him the envy of all the other monarchs in Britain  especially of Cadwallo , king of Wales , and Penda , king of Mercia .
These two princes joined their forces against Edwin , who with undaunted bravery , and an inferior number of troops , gave them battle at Heathfield , in Yorkshire .
The victory seemed to be inclining on the side of the king of Northumberland , when his eldest son Offrid , was killed by an arrow , and fell dead at his father 's feet .
Edwin , in the instantaneous rage of a parent , lost all his steadiness and presence of mind , and rushing with all the violence of despair , into the midst of his enemies , he soon gained the death which he desired  and by his death , his subjects the Northumbrians , lost the day .


The ensuing wars , and the confusion that followed in Northumberland , are described with all the horrors of devastation and slaughter .
The  kingdom remained in the utmost misery , till it was secured by Oswald the son of Adelfrid , who after his father 's death had taken refuge in Scotland .
He is represented as a prince of great virtue , and of abilities necessary and proper for a throne .
He was slain * in a battle against an invader of his kingdom .
Penda , king of Mercia , who finding among the slain the dead body of Oswald , ordered it to be cut into small pieces , and each piece to be placed upon a stake , as so many visible trophies of victory : such was the barbarous rage of those times  nor did that barbarity subside , unless when it was sometimes changed by the power of the monks , into the folly of superstition , and the dronishness of indolence .
To represent such scenes would be only tedious and disagreeable .
However , there are some remaining kings of Northumberland who deserve to be remembered .


Among these Egfrid may claim particular notice .
In the year 670 , he succeeded his father Oswy , in the kingdom of Bernicia , and soon afterwards possessed himself of Deira .
† In the year 684 , he sent over an army to conquer Ireland .
The enterprize was frustrated , and the Northumbrians were repulsed .
In the following year , he personally attacked Scotland , and was joined by a consederate army of Picts  his allies soon deserted him , and he was compelled to return wounded to his own dominions .
In the year 686 , he endeavoured  to revenge himself against the Picts , who retired hastily before him , and by that stratagem led him forward into an ambush , where he was slain .


These instances shew him to have been of a martial aspiring genius : he was the first British prince who resisted , or rather defied , the papal authority .
The popes had been always looked upon as sacred and infallible  but Alfrid paid no regard to their assumed infallibility .
He deprived Wilfred , bishop of York , of his bishopric , and seized all his possessions , which were great , even to an amazing degree of opulency .
Wilfred appealed to the pope : the synod of Rome ordered that Wilfred should be restored to his bishopric .
He returned to England , and produced an authentic copy of the sentence .
Egfrid , in a full council of nobility and clergy , treated the papal ordinances and jurisdiction , not only with contempt , but with resentment .
Wilfred , instead of being restored , or receiving any kind of compensation , was taken into custody , and sentenced to a close imprisonment .
So spirited a resistance against the see of Rome in times so slavishly superstitious ought to be remembered with honour  Agatho was then the reigning pope .


It is scarce worth while to enter into any particular character of the succeeding kings of Northumberland , especially since they will find few who are distinguishably great in the exact catalogue which has been made of them by several of our historians .
From the death of Egfrid , who left no children , the Northumbrian kingdom seems  to have declined .
The succession became uncertain : the civil wars encreased  so that after the continuance of three hundred and twenty-eight years , Northumberland , torn to pieces by intestine calamities , was totally absorbed in the kingdom of Mercia .


The next century produced a king of Mercia , Offa , who rendered himself most eminently renowned in arms : with some virtues , he had the particular vices which are inseparable from ambition and a boundless thirst of power .
He was one of those dauntless heroes , who imagine that , ` Whoever will be great must be wicked . '
Such men will be terrible , not beloved .
They neglect the affection , and work only on the fears of the people .
They may be followed , but will never be respected .
Their actions may strike wonder , but can not excite applause : however , they are frequently , if not always , the immediate means made use of by providence to bring about extraordinary revolutions .
Their success and their greatness make them vain : like the fly upon the chariot , they imagine that they raise all the dust , while the secret hand of heaven turns the wheel .


Offa well knew that the first maxim of ambition is an extent of territories : he had his eye upon the kingdom of East Anglia .
Ethelbert , a prince of a very amiable character , reigned there .
Offa , with the greatest shew of friendship , invited him to his court .
The king of the East Angles accepted the invitation : Offa murdered him in the most treacherous manner .
Ethelbert was the last of his race , and with him perished his kingdom .
It was  united to Mercia , after a separate , but tributary existence of two hundred and seventeen years .


Offa died , I think , in the year 794 , after a reign of thirty-nine years , in which his many victories rendered him exceeding powerful and tremendous .
With him , perhaps , it will be most proper to end the particular account of the heptarchy , since , although it may be said to have subsisted about thirty years longer , till England became subject to one monarch only , yet the several kingdoms were so often ravaged , their governments disjointed , and their boundaries attenuated , extended , or laid waste , that the distant description of such changes must be almost as much confused as the original scenes themselves .
Mercia held out the longest , as the conquests gained by Offa had rendered it very formidable : but Mercia yielded at last , after having subdued a great part of Kent , Sussex , Wales , and several other provinces in Britain .


The heptarchy was so different a form of government from any that had before prevailed , and gave so total an alteration to the English state , that a summary review of it may not be unacceptable .
It began as all new systems of empire begin , with wisdom and order .
Whether the Saxons were called in , or whether they landed of their own accord , is a point not absolutely decided  but most certainly some years after their arrival , they became our conquerors .
Some of their battles with the Britons were bloody and cruel : their adversaries , in their turn , shewed little less compassion or humanity .
When the seven kingdoms were settled and divided , the Saxon religion was established ,  and it seems to have gained considerable ground over christianity , till the arrival of St. Austin .


The outward forms of the Romish church were so much finer and more embellished than the plainer ceremonies of Woden and Thor , that the people were easily induced to quit paganism for what was called christianity .
The ignorance of the times contributed much to their conversion .
All appearances of learning were centered in the priests  and , with the true art of sacerdotal cunning , they pointed out different paths to heaven , according to the different dispositions of the persons who were desirous to travel the road : so that after the first monkish times of melancholy and retirement , journies were undertaken to Rome , miraculous images were gorgeously dressed up , various sorts of idolatry were practised in the most public manner , with equal devotion by the princes , and their subjects of every degree .
The truth is , many of the heptarchical monarchs were either weakly devout , or wickedly inhuman  governed by hypocritical prelates , or governing by lawless tyranny  inferior to common sense , or superior to all religion and morality  tamely submissive or brutally destructive .
How was it possible for such a government to subsist ?
only by the accidental succession of some kings of abilities and understanding : by the prudence of some prelates , who at the same time that they supported the church , defended the state  and by the wise resolutions taken in the wittenagemot , or great council of the land .
During the intestine wars of the heptarchy , it is to be presumed that this council could neither  meet so often , nor bear so great an influence , as in more peaceable and settled times  yet it was the most essential institution of the Saxon government .
Before the arrival of St. Austin , few records are to be found of it .
The clergy , as they grew more powerful , became very leading members in the wittenagemot .
They appeared , and gave their voices in that assembly  and at the same time they lost no opportunities of assuming all possible power and prerogatives entirely to themselves , so as to become superior to the king in most if not all ecclesiastical affairs .
Thus in one of the canons passed by a synod , anno 694 , we find this expression , Neque de hac re aliquid pertineat ad regis saecularis imperium .
`` With this affair , '' [ the government and appointment of abbots , abbotesses , presbyters , and deacons , ] `` the king has nothing to do . ''


But what are become of the native Britons ?
Lost and buried as it were among the Saxons .
Few , very few remaining , and those in corners of the island , unseen and unknown .
Unhappy people !
hidden at home in rocks and fastnesses , or driven abroad , like vagabonds , in quest of habitations : destroyed by wars , wasted by time , wounded by persecution , and sunk into eternal oblivion .


To the Saxons therefore the present race of English may be said to owe their original , those parts of Wales and Cornwall excepted , whose inhabitants by their mountainous situation may possibly have flowed in an uninterrupted channel , from the Aborigines of our island .


It is asserted , if I am not mistaken , by Bede , that now and then a true British chieftain stept into  one of the thrones .
This might have happened towards the latter end of the heptarchy , when all was confusion  but the successive line of kings , in general , consisted of English Saxons  not chosen in an hereditary , nor absolutely in an elective manner , oftner by caprice than by judgment .
They sometimes succeeded by accident , sometimes by cunning , sometimes by force .
Many of them were murdered , many were dethroned , many fell in battle , and many crept into religious cells .


Hitherto I have represented the black part of the tablet  let us turn to a fairer side .
The Britons certainly owe the first institution of order and government to the Saxons .
The Saxons owe the first institution of their church-government to St. Austin .
Their civil policy , which they transplanted with them , had been long established in Germany : it was Gothick , but it was regular .
As soon as they settled themselves in England , a king became an additional part of their constitution .
The contract between the king and his people was mutual  they were bound to defend each other : the properties on both sides were ascertained : the people had their patrimonies , the king had his regalities .


The nobility were next to the king in dignity .
This high rank could only be attained by remarkable and brave actions  either by great atchievements in war , or by sagacity and wisdom in peace .
The honour , when attained , went in succession to the next heir , but was still to be forfeited by baseness and degeneracy .


The subsequent order of people were the freemen : they were joined in judicature with the nobility :  they were above all arbitrary power  nor were they liable to any compulsive law to which they did not voluntarily give their consent .
They were much more numerous than the nobles , and consequently were the chief bulwarks of legal justice , and every other branch of liberty .
They were divided into two sets , being chosen to the rank of freemen , either from their superior merit , or from their great military service , and the large possessions which they had gained in war .


The inferior and meanest classes of the Saxons were in a state of bondage  subject to the will , disposition , and commands of their landlords .
They were called villains , because the lands which they occupied were held in villenage , or servitude .
These were the only people who were exempted from the power of voting in the wittenagemot .


One of these councils , convened by Ina , king of the West Saxons , is entitled Consilium omnium sapientum senicrum et populorum totius regni . '
A council of all the wise men , the elders , and the people of the whole kingdom . '
In another council convened at Winchester , in the year 855 , it is said to have been held in presence of the great , men , alixum fidelium infinita multitudine , ` And of an infinite number of other faithful freemen . '
The inconveniencies arising from so general and unlimited a privilege must have been very great .


I have so often mentioned the Picts , that before we quit entirely a view of the heptarchy , it may be necessary to attempt some account of their original .
Authors differ widely upon the point : some are of opinion that the Picts broke in upon  Scotland , at a time when the Caledonians were in a reduced languishing state , unable to defend themselves .
Bishop Stillingfleet imagines that they came from European Scythia * , others suppose that they arrived from a different part of the northern continent .
The most probable conjecture is Tyrrhel 's : † he says , ` That the Picts were the remainder of those Britons who preserved their liberty by resisting the Roman arms , and were at last divided from the Roman Britons , by a wall , now called the Picts wall , ( the vestiges of which are to be seen to this day , ) drawn between the mouths of the rivers Tyne , and Eske , to hinder their farther incursions into those parts which were then under the Roman empire . '
They may be said to be the same people with the Caledonians , as the Welch are said to be the same people with the English .
They were a colony who kept themselves separated from the main body , and were distinguished from the rest of the Scots , by the name of Picts , as they continued the custom , which originally had been common to all the British islands , of painting their bodies with various figures  even after that practice had been long neglected , and laid aside by all the rest of the Britons .
The perpetual incursions of the Picts into the more southern parts of the island may have proceeded from an  one , a more composed and regular system of government presented itself to view .


The heptarchy was a fabric which for some years had been growing too heavy for itself .
Several of the partitions which had been framed and fitted within it , had either burst asunder , or were forcibly destroyed .
The building had been tottering long before it fell .
A skilful artist was wanting to gather up the best materials , and to form a new edifice of magnificence and duration .
Such an architect was found in the person of Egbert , king of the West Saxons .


[ To be continued . ]
19 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONTINUED .


 ` BE not apprehensive of any harm , said he to me , as he approached  I come by the command of madame de Benavides : she has had esteem enough for me , to trust me with every thing relating to you , probably , ( added he , with a sigh which he could not suppress , ) she would have judged differently if she had known me well  but I will be just to her confidence  I will save you , and I will save her , if I can . '


` You shall not save me , replied I  it is my duty to justify the innocence of madame de Benavides , and I will do it at the expence of a thousand lives , if I had them to lose . '
I then acquainted him with my design of keeping myself concealed , and passing for an assassin , to prevent any imputation falling upon her .


` This project might be necessary , replied Don Gabriel , if my brother was dead , as I perceive you think , but his wound , although great , is probably not mortal , and the first sign of life and  sense he gave , was to order that madame de Benavides should be confined to her own apartment : this proves that he suspects you are her lover , and if you persist in your design , you will lose your own life , without preserving hers .
Let us go , added he , the safety I offer you to-day , I probably can not afford you to-morrow . '


` And what will become of madame de Benavides ?
cried I  no , I can never resolve to withdraw myself from danger , and to leave her in it . '


' I have already told you , replied Don Gabriel , that your presence will only render her situation worse . '
` Well , said I , sighing , I will fly , since you will have it so , and that her interest demands it .
I had hoped that by the sacrifice I had intended to make her of my life , I should at least have been pitied by her  but I deserve not to have this consolation : I am an unhappy wretch , who am not even worthy to die for her .
Protect her , added I , to Don Gabriel , the tears streaming from my eyes as I spoke : you are generous  her innocence , her misfortunes must move you . '


` You may judge , said he , by what has escaped me , that I am too much for my own quiet concerned in the fate of madame de Benavides .
I will do every thing for her .
Alas !
added he , I should have thought myself well paid , if I could have hoped that she had loved no one .
How is it possible that you should not be satisfied with your good fortune in having touched a heart like hers ?
but let us go , pursued he , let us take advantage of the night . '
Then taking my hand  and turning a dark lanthorn , he led me through the courts of the castle .
Transported with rage against myself for what I had done , in the wildness of my despair , I wished myself still more miserable than I was .


Don Gabriel , when he left me , advised me to retire to a convent of religious , which was within a quarter of a league of the castle .
` You must , said he , keep yourself concealed in their house for some days , that you may not be in danger from the search I myself shall be obliged to make for you  and here is a letter for one of those religious , which will procure you admission into the house . '


I loitered a long time about the castle after he left me , not being able to remove myself from the place where Adelaida was  at length the desire of hearing all that happened to her , determined me to set out for the convent .
I arrived there just at day-break , the religious to whom I presented Don Gabriel 's letter received me very civilly , and conducted me into a chamber near his own .
My paleness , and the blood he observed on my cloaths , made him apprehensive that I was wounded .
He was beginning to enquire after my health , when I fainted away .
With the assistance of a servant he put me to bed , and sent for a surgeon belonging to the convent to examine my wound : he declared that it was in a dangerous condition , through the fatigue and cold I had suffered .


When I was alone with the good father to whom I was recommended , I intreated him to send to a house in a certain village , which I named to him ,  to enquire for Saint Laurent , for I supposed he would take refuge there : I was not mistaken  he came with the messenger I had sent to him : the poor fellow was in excessive affliction when he heard that I was wounded : he approached my bed-side , and anxiously enquired how I did .


` If you would save my life , said I to him , you must learn in what state madame de Benavides is , inform yourself of all that has passed  haste , lose not a moment , and remember that what I suffer in this uncertainty , is ten thousand times worse than death . '
Saint Laurent promised to do every thing I desired , and went away to take proper measures to satisfy me .


Mean time I was seized with a violent fever , my wound grew more dangerous , they were obliged to make great incisions , but the torments of my mind made me almost insensible to those of my body  the image of madame de Benavides bathed in tears , as I had seen her when I left her chamber , and kneeling by her husband , whom I had wounded , was continually before my eyes .
I took a review of the misfortunes of her life  I found myself in all : her marriage , to which she was forced on my account , her fatal choice of the most jealous and brutal man in the world for a husband , was made for my sake  and I had lately compleated all her misfortunes , by exposing her reputation to injurious censures .
I called to my remembrance the unjust jealousy I had discovered , which although it had lasted but a few moments , and was banished by a single word from her , yet I could never pardon myself for .
Adelaida could not but think  me unworthy of her esteem  she could do no otherwise than hate me .


Saint Laurent returned the next day  he informed me that Benavides was still extremely ill of his wound  that Adelaida was in the utmost affliction  and that Don Gabriel made a shew of seeking for me every where .
This news was not very likely to calm the perturbation of my mind .
I know not what I ought to wish for , every thing was against me .
I could not even wish for death  I thought I owed the prolonging of my wretched life to the justification of madame de Benavides .


The good father to whom I was recommended beheld me with great compassion : he heard me sigh continually , and always found my face bathed in tears .
He was a man of sense and politeness , who had been long in the world , and whom a concurrence of strange accidents had driven into a cloister : he did not endeavour to reason me out of my grief , or to console me by the usual methods  he only expressed great sensibility of my misfortunes .
This way succeeded  by degrees he entirely gained my confidence , perhaps also I only wanted an opportunity to speak and to complain to him .
I conceived so great an affection and esteem for him , that I related to him my whole story .
He became so necessary to me after a few days stay in the convent , that I could not bear him to be absent from me a moment .
I never met with a man that had more goodness of heart : I repeated to him the same things a thousand times over  he always listened to me with the utmost attention , and sympathised in all my griefs .


 It was through him that I learned every thing that passed in the house of Benavides : he had been in great danger from his wound , but it was at length cured .
I was informed of it by Don Jerome , so was my friend the religious called .
He afterwards told me , that all seemed quiet in the castle  that madame de Benavides lived more retired than before , and that she was in a very languishing state of health .
He added , that I must resolve to remove as soon as I was able  for if it should be discovered that I was concealed there , it would expose the lady to new distresses .


It was not likely that I should be soon in a condition to leave the convent  I was wasting away with a continual fever , and my wound was not yet healed .
I had been in this religious house above two months , when one day I observed Don Jerome to be pensive and melancholy  he always turned his eyes away when they met mine  he seemed studiously to avoid looking at me , and with difficulty answered my questions .
I had conceived a very tender friendship for him  misfortunes give sensibility to the heart .
I was going to express my concern for his uneasiness , and to enquire into the cause , when Saint Laurent entering my chamber , told me that Don Gabriel was in the convent , and that he had just met him .


` Don Gabriel here , said I , looking at Don Jerome , and you never to mention to me his coming !
what is the meaning of this reserve ?
you fill me with the most dreadful apprehensions  what is become of madame de Benavides ?
for pity draw me out of this cruel uncertainty . '
 `` Would I could leave you always in it . ''
said Don Jerome at length , embracing me .


` Ah , cried I , she is dead , Adelaida is dead  Benavides has sacrificed her to his rage .
You answer me not - alas !
then I have nothing to hope : Ah !
it was not Benavides , but I who have plunged the poniard into her breast : had it not been for my fatal passion she might have been still alive - Adelaida is dead  I shall never behold her more - I have lost her for ever , she is dead , and I still live !
why do I not follow her ?
why do I delay to revenge her upon her murderer ?
alas !
death would be too great an indulgence to me  it would separate me from myself , and I am made up of horror and anguish . '


The violent agitation I was in caused my wound , which was not well healed , to open again .
I lost so much blood that I fell into a swoon , which lasted so long that they thought me dead : but after continuing several hours in this happy state of insensibility , I woke to grief unutterable .
Don Jerome , apprehensive that I should make an attempt upon my own life , charged Saint Laurent to watch me with the strictest attention .
My despair now took another form : I complained not , I shed not a tear  then it was that I formed a resolution to go and inhabit some solitude , where I might , without controul , deliver myself up a prey to my affliction .


I was desirous of seeing Don Gabriel , for I eagerly caught every thing that could heighten my despair .
I intreated Don Jerone to bring him , and the next day they came together into my chamber  Don Gabriel seated himself upon the side of my bed .
 We continued along time silent  neither of us was able to speak , he looked upon me with eyes swimming in tears .
` You are very generous , monsieur , said I at length , to visit a wretch whom you have so much reason to hate . '


` You are too miserable , replied he , to make it possible for me to hate you . '


` Ah , cried I , tell me , I beseech you , every circumstance of my misfortunes , leave me ignorant of nothing  the explanation I desire of you may possibly  prevent my taking some measures which you have an interest to hinder . '


' I shall redouble your affliction and my own , replied he , but I can not help it - I will satisfy you  and in the recital I am going to make you , you will find you are not the only person to be pitied .
Take then the incidents in order as they happened  we shall too soon come to the melancholy catastrophe . '


' I had never seen madame de Benavides till she became my sister-in-law .
My brother , who had some affairs of consequence to settle at Bourdeaux , saw her there , and fell in love with her , and although he had several rivals , whose birth and riches were superior to his , yet madame de Benavides , for reasons I never could guess at , preferred him to them all .
A short time after their marriage , he brought her to his estate in Biscay , and there it was that I saw her for the first time  if her beauty excited my admiration , I was still more charmed with the graces of her mind , and the extreme sweetness of her temper , which my brother put every day to new trials .
 However , the passion I then had for a very amiable young person , made me believe that I was secured from the influence of her charms , which it was impossible to behold without love : I even designed to make use of my sister-in-law 's interest with my brother , to prevail upon him to consent to our marriage .
The father of my mistress , offended at my brother 's refusal , had given me but a very short time to bring him to a compliance , declaring that when it was expired , he would marry his daughter to another . '


` The friendship and esteem which madame de Benavides expressed for me , gave me courage to implore her assistance .
I often went to her apartment with an intention to speak to her  but the slightest obstacle imaginable restrained me .
Mean while , the time which had been prescribed to me drew towards a period  I had received several letters from my mistress , in which she prest me to use every method to gain my brother 's consent .
My answers did not satisfy her : without my perceiving it , an air of coldness ran through them , which drew many complaints from her  these complaints appeared to me to be unjust , and I reproached her with it .
She now believed herself abandoned , and resentment , joined to the commands of her father , determined her to marry the person he proposed to her .
She herself in a letter she wrote to me , informed me of her marriage  she reproached me , but it was with tenderness , and concluded with earnestly intreating me never to see her more .
I had loved her passionately  I imagined I still  loved her , and I could not learn that I had lost her for ever without feeling a real affliction .
I was afraid she was unhappy , and I reproached myself with being the cause of it .
Absorbed with these reflections , I continued walking in a melancholy manner , in the little wood which you used often to visit  there I was met by madame de Benavides , who , observing my uneasiness , kindly desired to know the cause of it .
A secret repugnance which I felt within myself restrained me from telling her : I could not resolve to own to her that I had been in love  but the pleasure of speaking to her of that passion carried it over that consideration .
All these emotions passed in my heart without my perceiving the cause : as yet I had not dared to examine into the nature of what I felt for my sister-in-law .
I related my story to her : I shewed her the letter which Isabella had wrote me . '


` Why did you not mention this sooner to me ?
said madame de Benavides  perhaps I might have been able to obtain the consent of your brother , though he refused it to you .
My God !
how much I pity you , how greatly I am concerned for her : she doubtless will be miserable . '


` The compassion which madame de Benavides expressed for Isabella , made me apprehensive that she would think hardly of me , as the person who had made her unhappy .
To diminish therefore this compassion , I eagerly told her that the husband of Isabella was a man of birth and merit  that he held a very considerable rank in  the world  and that it was highly probable his fortune would be still more so . '


` You are deceived , answered my lovely sister-in-law , if you think all these advantages can make her happy  nothing can make a mends for the loss of what one loves .
It is a cruel misfortune , added she , when we are obliged to act contrary to our inclination , to comply with our duty . '


` She sighed several times during this conversation  I even perceived that it was with difficulty she restrained her tears .
She left me soon afterwards  I had not power to follow her , I remained in a trouble and confusion I am not able to describe .
I now for the first time perceived what I had hitherto industriously concealed from myself , that I was in love with my sister-in-law , and I thought I could discover a secret passion in her heart  a thousand circumstances then rushed upon my memory , which before I had given no attention to : her taste for solitude , her indifference for all those amusements which make the delight of persons of her sex and age .
Her extreme melancholy , which I had attributed to my brother 's bad treatment of her , now seemed to me to proceed from another cause .
How many sad reflections now rose in my mind !
I found myself in love with a person whom I ought not to love , and this person 's heart in the possession of another . '


` If she loved nothing , said I , my passion although without hope would not be without sweetness : I might pretend to the blessing of her friendship  in that I would place my felicity .
But this friendship will not satisfy my heart ,  since she has sentiments more tender for another .
I was sensible I ought to use my utmost endeavours to vanquish a passion so dangerous to my quiet , and which honour would not permit me to entertain .
I took a resolution to fly from my too lovely sister  and I returned to the castle to tell my brother that some affairs called me from him , but the sight of madame de Benavides left me no power to follow the dictates of my reason .
All my resolutions vanished into air  yet to furnish myself with some pretence to continue near her , I persuaded myself that I was necessary to her , in being sometimes able to calm the tempestuous humour of her husband .
About this time you arrived  I found in your air and behaviour somewhat greatly above the condition you appeared in : I treated you with familiarity and kindness .
I would have entered into your confidence and have made you my friend .
My intention was to prevail upon you afterwards to draw a picture of madame de Benavides for me  for notwithstanding the delusive reasons my passion found for staying with my sister , yet I resolved some time or other to leave the castle : but in this separation so just , so necessary , I was willing at least to have her picture .
The manner in which you received the advances I made you , shewed me that I had nothing to hope for from you  and I was gone to bring another painter into the house that unhappy day when you wounded my brother .
Judge of my surprise at my return , when I was informed of what had happened .
My brother , who was desperately  kept a gloomy silence , casting from time to time a terrible look upon madame de Benavides .
As soon as he saw me , he called me to his bed-side .
Deliver me , said he , from the sight of a woman who has betrayed me  cause her to be conducted to her own apartment , and give strict orders not to suffer her to stir out of it . '


' I would have said something against this rigorous order to my brother  but he interrupted me at the first word . '


` Do as I desire you , said he , or never see me more .
I was obliged to obey  and , approaching my sister-in-law , I intreated her to let me speak to her in her own chamber .
Let us go , said she weeping , execute the order you have received . '


` These words , which had the air of a reproach , pierced me to the soul : I durst not make her any answer in the place we were then in  but no sooner had I led her to her chamber , than looking on her with that grief and tenderness my heart was full of , what madam , said I , do you confound me with your persecutor  I who feel your trouble as sensible as you do yourself  I who would sacrifice my life to save you ?
I grieve to say it , but I tremble for you  retire for some time to a place of safety , I will endeavour to have you conducted wherever you please , provided it is a secure asylum from your furious husband . '


' I know not whether monsieur de Benavides has any design to take away my life , but I know it is my duty not to abandon him , and I will  fulfil it , though I perish . '
Then after a short pause me added , ' I am going , by placing an entire confidence in you , to give you the greatest mark of my esteem it is in my power to give  and indeed the confession I have to make you is necessary to preserve yours for me .
But go and attend your brother , a longer conversation may make you suspected by him  return hither as soon as you conveniently can . '


' I obeyed madame de Benavides , and went to my brother 's apartment  the surgeon had visited him , and desired that no one might be allowed to come into his chamber .
I flew back again to his wife , agitated with a thousand different thoughts : I was anxious to know what she had to say to me , and yet I feared to hear it .
She related to me the manner in which she became acquainted with you , the passion you conceived for her the moment you saw her , the generous sacrifice you had made her , and she did not conceal the tenderness with which you had inspired her . '


` Ah , interupted I , have I then been dear to the most perfect woman upon earth , and have I lost her ? '
This idea filled my soul with such tender sorrow , that my tears which had hitherto been restrained by the excess of my despair , began now to stream in great abundance from my eyes .


` Yes , continued Don Gabriel , with a sigh , you were beloved .
Good heaven !
what tenderness did I not discover for you in her heart !
Notwithstanding her misfortunes , and the horror of her present situation , I perceived that she indulged  with pleasure the thought , that her affection for you was authorised by what you had done for her .
She confessed to me , that when I led her into the chamber where you was painting , she knew you  and that she had wrote to you , to command you to leave the castle , but that she could not find an opportunity to give you her letter : she afterwards related to me how her husband had surprised you together , at the very moment when you was bidding her an eternal farewel , that he attempted to kill her , but that you interposed and wounded him in defending her . '


` Save this unhappy man , added she , you only can preserve him from the fate that waits him  for I know that in the fear of exposing me to the least suspicion , he will suffer the most cruel death , rather than declare who he is . '


` He is well rewarded for all he can suffer , madam , replied I , by the good opinion you have of him . '


' I have owned my weakness to you , said she  but you have seen that if I am not mistress of my affections , I have at least been so of my conduct  and that I have taken no steps which the most rigorous virtue could condemn . '


` Alas !
madam , interupted I , it is not necessary that you should condescend to justify yourself to me .
Too well am I convinced by my own experience , that it is not always in our power to dispose of our own hearts : I will use my utmost endeavours to obey you and deliver the count de Comminge  but , oh madam , permit me to  assure you , that I am more miserable than he is . '


' I left the room as I pronounced these words , without daring to raise my eyes to madame de Benavides .
I shut myself up in my own chamber , to consider what I had to do .
I had already taken a resolution to deliver you  but I was doubtful whether I ought not to fly from the castle myself .
The torments I had suffered during the relation madame de Benavides had made me , shewed me the excess of my passion for her .
It was necessary that I should suppress sentiments so dangerous to our virtue  and in order to suppress them , it was necessary I should see her no more  but it seemed cruel to abandon her in such a distressful situation  to leave her unprotected , in the hands of a husband who believed himself wronged by her .
After continuing long irresolute , I determined at once to assist madame de Benavides , and to avoid seeing her as much as possible .
I could not inform her of your escape till next day : she seemed to be a little more easy on your account  but I thought I could perceive that her grief was increased , and I doubted not but the declaration I had made of my sentiments was the cause .
I quitted her immediately , in order to free her from the embarrassment my presence threw her into .
I was several days without seeing her  my brother grew worse , and his physician thought him in great danger .
I was obliged to make her a visit to acquaint her with this news . '


 ` If I had lost Monsieur Benavides , said she , in the ordinary methods of providence , his death would have less sensibly affected me  but the part I have unfortunately had in it , makes it an insupportable affliction to me .
I am not apprehensive of the ill treatment I may meet with from him  I am only afraid of his dying in a persuasion that I have wronged him .
If he lives I may hope that he will one day be convinced of my innocence , and restore me to his esteem . '


` Suffer me , madam , said I , to endeavour to merit yours  I implore your pardon for these sentiments I have dared to let you perceive .
I was not able to prevent their birth , or to conceal them from you  I even know not whether I can subdue them , but I swear to you that I will never importune you with them .
I had taken a resolution to fly from you , but your interest retains me here . '


' I confess to you , replied Madame de Benavides , that you have given me great uneasiness  Fortune seemed desirous of taking from me the consolation I have found in your friendship . '


The tears she shed when she spoke to me were more powerful than all the efforts of my reason  I was ashamed of having augmented the miseries of one already so unhappy .
` No , madam , replied I , you shall never be deprived of that friendship you have the goodness to set some value upon  and I will endeavour to render myself worthy of yours , by my solicitude to make you forget the extravagance I have been guilty of . '


 ` In effect , when I left her , I found myself more calm and easy than I had ever been since I first beheld her .
Far from leaving her , I endeavoured , by the resolutions I vowed to take when in her presence , to furnish myself with arguments for performing my duty .
This method succeeded  I accustomed myself by degrees to reduce my former sentiments to friendship and esteem : I told her ingenuously the progress I made in my cure .
She thanked me for it as for some consideble service I had rendered her , and to reward me , gave me every day new marks of her confidence .
Still my heart would sometimes revolt , but reason always got the victory .
My brother , after languishing a long time , at length began to recover : he would never be prevailed upon to give his wife permission to see him , though she often requested it .
He was not yet in a condition to leave his chamber , when Madame de Benavides fell ill in her turn .
Her youth saved her this time , and I was full of hope that her illness had softened her husband 's heart  for though he had continued obstinately resolute not to see her during his own danger , notwithstanding her earnest entreaties , yet he shewed some solicitude in enquiring for her when she was ill .
She was almost recovered , when my brother ordered me to be called to him . '


[ To be continued . ]
20 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONTINUED .


 20.1 .
Indirect Instructions , and that Children ought not to be urged .


NOW , though we ought not to make a practice of threatning and never punishing , lest our threats become contemptible , yet should not punishment be as often inflicted as threatned  and as to punishments , the pain ought to be as light as possible , but accompanied with all circumstances that may affect the child with shame and remorse  for instance , shew him what you have done to avoid coming to that extremity  appear concerned at it  speak in his hearing of the misfortune of people that are so wanting in reason and honour as to call for punishment  abate of your usual kindness , till you perceive he stands in need of consolation : let the punishment be either public or private , as you shall judge it most for his benefit , either to put him to great shame , or to let him see that you choose to spare him : let a public exposure be in reserve for the last remedy .


 Sometimes make use of a discreet person to comfort the child , and say such things to him as will not be proper for yourself to speak  one that may cure him of that false shame , and dispose him to seek your favour  one to whom he may in his concern open his heart with more freedom than he can do in your presence : but above all , let it never appear that you require aught more than the necessary submission  so endeavour to manage that he shall condemn himself , readily and freely , insomuch that it may be your part to mollify the pain he shall have felt : these general rules may be employed as each particular case requires .
Men , and more especially , children , are not at all times the same  what is good for them to-day , will be dangerous to morrow : a conduct invariably uniform can not be useful .
The fewer formal lessons we make use of the better  a thousand instructions more beneficial than what lessons afford , may be insinuated by the means of sprightly conversation .


I have seen several children learn to read in diverting themselves  one need only relate some pleasant stories out of a book in their presence , to teach them to know the letters insensibly : after this they will of themselves be eager to get at the source of what has given them so much entertainment .
There are two things which do great mischief  one is , that they must presently be put to read in Latin , which robs them of all the pleasure of reading  the other , that they are used to read with a forced and ridiculous emphasis , or accent .
It will be right to supply them with a book handsomely bound , even gilt on the edges , with pretty  figures in it , and of a good type .
Whatever delights the fancy , is an assistance to study : endeavour to choose him one that shall contain a number of stories , short and surprising  this done , fear not but he will learn to read .
Neither teaze him to do it exactly well : let him pronounce in his natural way as he speaks , other tones are always bad , and taste of collegiate declamation .
When in time , his tongue shall be at liberty , his breast stronger , and the habit of reading more enlarged , he will perform it without trouble to himself , more gracefully , and more distinctly .


They should be taught to write nearly after the same method .
When children know a little how to read , one may make it a diversion to them to form their letters , and where there are several of them , it is good to stir up an emulation : they have a propensity to making figures upon paper  assist this inclination a little , without constraining them , and they will learn to form the letters by way of play , and by degrees come to write .
One may also incite them , by proposing some kind of reward that shall be agreeable to their taste , and innocent in its nature .


Let me see you write a letter , one may say  acquaint your brother or your cousin with that affair .
All this pleases the child , provided no frightful appearance of a set task comes to molest him .
St. Austin says , upon his own experience , that a free curiosity allowed , is a much greater incitement to the spirit of a child than formal rules and compulsion derived from fear .


 There is one remarkable and great fault in the course of common education  that is , all the pleasure is supposed to lie on one side , all the pain on the other  in study all the pain , in diversion all the pleasure .
What will a child naturally do but be impatient under the prescribed rule , and run eagerly to his diversion ?
therefore let us try to change the order of these things , and make application agreeable under the disguise of liberty and pleasure : let us suffer them to break off in little sallies of play .
These interruptions are necessary in order to refresh their minds  let their eyes wander a while  let them digress or trifle a little to disencumber themselves , and after that we may gently bring them back to the subject .


To require an uninterupted application to their studies does them a great deal of mischief : it is common for governors to affect this exact regularity , because it is more for their ease and conveniency than to be obliged to lie in watch for the more serviceable moments .
At the same time , whatever diversions we allow them , let us see they are such as have not the least tendency to throw them into passions  whatever will refresh the mind , or afford an agreeable variety , or please their curiosity in useful subjects , or practise their limbs in any commendable art , that is the proper matter of children 's diversions  and they are best pleased with such as consist of bodily motion , so they do but change place , a shuttle-cock , a bowl , is enough .
Neither need we be at much trouble about what will please them , for they will invent for themselves .
It is sufficient to let them proceed their own way ,  to look on with a pleasant countenance , and to interpose when they seem to grow too warm .


It would be good to give them a notion , so far as they will receive it , of the pleasures which the understanding affords , as conversation , news , histories , and divers games of application that contain some instruction , All this will have its use in time  but we must not force a taste for these things : we must only make them the offer  the time will come when their bodies will be less disposed to motion , their minds more active .
In the mean time the care we shall take care to season employments of a serious nature with the relish of pleasure , will be a great means to abate the propensity of youth to dangerous entertainments .
It is subjection and uneasiness that excite such an impatience for diversion  where a girl is not uneasy in her mother 's presence she will have no such violent desire to get away , and look out for worse company .


As to the choice of diversions , all society capable of doing harm is to be avoided .
No boys among girls , nor even girls that have not an orderly turn of mind .
All plays that are apt to dissipate or transport the thoughts , or that accustom the body to gestures unbecoming a girl  all frequent excursions from home , and all conversations likely to excite a desire of such excursions , are to be avoided carefully .


So long as we continue unprejudiced by any high entertainment , so long as no violent passions have sprung up in us , we are easily susceptible of delight .
Health and innocence will produce it  for they are true sources of it : whereas , they who have unfortunately been habituated to the perceptions  of violent pleasures , lose the sense for more moderate ones , and fret themselves in a perpetual uneasy search after joy .


Our taste for entertainment is spoiled , as is our taste for victuals  we so accustom ourselves to things of a quick relish , that ordinary meats and plain , become flat and insipid .
Let us then be fearful of those strong sensations which are but preparations to uneasiness and disgust  they are more especially to be feared for children , who are less able to resist what they feel , and love to be affected : let us keep them in the taste for plain things , no high seasoned food for their support , nor entertainments for their delight .
Sobriety itself ever bestows sufficient appetite , without the provocation of sauces , which betray us to intemperance .
A certain antient hath said , The very best artificer of pleasure is temperance  that temperance which is the health both of body and mind , under whose influence we feel ourselves in a state of gentle and moderate delight , without wanting the contrivance of machinery , or public shows , or expence for its production .
A game of our own invention , a book , some task undertaken , a pleasant walk , an innocent conversation , as a refreshment after we have been employed , afford a more pure perception of delight than the finest concert of musick .


[ To be continued . ]
21 .
Figure 1 .
The EPHEMERON or DAY-FLY .
in his several Changes .


 PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONTINUED .


 21.1 .
The Natural History of the EPHEMERON , or DAY-FLY .


THERE is nothing more trite and common than the ridicule which persons unused to the study of nature endeavour to throw on those whom a more speculative turn of mind induces to follow her into her inmost recesses , and examine even into the extremest minutiae of her works .
The titles of gimcrack , cockle-shell merchant , fly hunter , c. are lavishly bestowed on them by such as either ignorance , indolence , or a natural want of curiosity , have excluded from the great garden of nature : they find no amusement or instruction in a box of cockle-shells , a bundle of weeds , or a cluster of caterpillars ( for so in general terms are all the objects of natural enquiry stiled by them ) and therefore conclude that neither is capable of being drawn from them  and consequently , ` to what use is all this , ' is ever their general cry .


 But the real philosopher , the man of clear reflection , and accurate discernment , who traverses every path , and explores every winding of this regular wilderness , will meet not only with entertainment , but also with great improvement from every object that he sees .
Each step he takes a text presents itself , from which his genius may draw out a sermon of admirable service to his fellow-creatures .
Nor can the apparent insignificance of the subjects in themselves render the lesson they convey the less important , but quite the contrary .
For if in the minutest animals we perceive the care and wisdom of an infinite power exerted for their formation and protection  if we perceive them endued with all those faculties which are or can be necessary for their preservation , and those faculties even most punctually employed to the purposes for which they were intended  with what an awe and adoration ought it to turn our thoughts towards the great Creator of them all !
with what gratitude should it inspire our hearts for him who has still so much more taken care for us , and bestowed on us faculties and powers so greatly superior to the rest of his creatures !
and lastly , with how much self-reproach should it fill us when we consider that from a misapplication of those powers we so frequently defeat the all-wise designs of heaven , and even render them more fallible than the uncorrupted instinct even of the smallest reptile !


In short , there is no object from which the speculative man may not deduce a lesson , or on which he may not moralize with advantage .
Nay , useless as the study of natural history may now appear to the unlearned , yet let them seriously reflect from  whence they have acquired some of their most valuable improvements , to whom they stand indebted for their most useful arts , and they will find them owing to observations of this kind made by men in the more early periods of the world  and that the greatest part of that genius which man so proudly boasts of is very little more than the noticed instinct of other animals improved upon by his own reason .


To instance only in a very few examples .
- Who taught us the art of building but the beaver ?
who that of spinning but the silk worm ?
of weaving but the spider ?
of navigation but the nautilus ?
are not the faculties of the mind also greatly to be improved by observation of other animals ?
can the necessity of regular subordination and strictness of government be better pointed out than in that of the bees ?
do not the ants instruct us in industry and frugality ?
or can we observe the lion-pismire without being taught a noble lesson of patience and perseverance ?


But if reflection and moral contemplation are to be sought for in these researches , what object offers an ampler scope for them than the animal which I am now going to introduce to the acquaintance of my fair readert ?
for what can possibly afford a more just idea of the real value of time , and the necessity of employing every moment of it to the best advantage , than the observing a creature whose whole allotted period of life is no more than the space of five hours , and that in the general not half attained to , but cut off in the middle by some insidious enemy who lies in wait to destroy it ?


 This fly ( for in the fly-state only is it to be considered in this view ) is called by the authors who have written concerning it by the names of the ephemeron , hemerobios , and diaria  all which mean no more than an animal of but a single day 's existence .
It is a native of Germany , and appears every year for about three days successively , fluttering on the surface of the water at the mouths of the Rhine , the Meuse , the Wael , the Leck , and the Ysel , about the middle of June .
But this continued appearance of them is kept up by a regular succession  for those who begin to live and flutter about towards the noon of the first day are dead before night , a new set makes its appearance on the second , and the third in like manner is supplied by a fresh generation .
After which no more of them are to be seen , till the succeeding year renews this three day 's phaenomenon .


Altho ' the life of the ephemeron in its fly-state , which we shall more particularly dwell on hereafter , is so extremely short , yet as it has an existence under another form , and in another element , which continues through a space of three years , it will be necessary that we should dwell a little on its history during that period , and relate the manner of its several changes .


In short , although this animal , when arrived at the state of full perfection , is an enlivened flutterer of the airy regions , yet his original existence is in the waters , where the eggs being deposited by the female , aed impregnated by the male , in the same manner as the spawn of fishes , are scattered over the muddy bottoms of the rivers by the motion of the water , and there deposited in that bed , which  is the most proper for their being hatched and brought into life .


As these eggs are not united together by any glutinous or gelatinous substance , nor deposited in clusters as the spawn of the frog , of the watersnail , and of several other insects , but entirely dispersed and separate from each other , it is no very easy matter to ascertain how long it is before the insect contained within them acquires life , and breaks through its shelly integument .
It is sufficient to observe , that after a certain period they produce a little worm , with six legs , which at one year 's growth is of the size and form represented in the annexed plate , at Fig .
I .
At this age it is not only without wings , or those prominences which cover the wings , but also without the least signs or vestiges of any such part .
When they come to be two years old , the little sheaths of the wings appear very plainly  and the animal , then very greatly enlarged in bulk , appeas as at Fig .
II .
And when it has reached its third year , at which time it is to undergo its grand metamorphosis , these cases are then as conspicuous as possible , resembling a little flower that increases by degrees , and is ready to break out of its cup .
Its appearance is then such as is shewn in Fig .
III .


This animal is made great use of by the fishermen , by whom it is called by the name of bankbait : for although they can swim very swiftly , yet it is seldom that they do so , but are always found near the banks of rivers , and there live in the most quiet parts .
The more mud there is at the bottom out of which they first rise , the greater number of the worms are usually to be met  with .
Yet are they very rarely to be found either lying on the mud or adhering to it  but they live within the mud or clay itself , in hollows made oblong and smooth , and which they constantly bore , not obliquely or perpendicularly , but ever parallel to the horison , each several animal living in a separate cell .


The worm of the ephemeron as soon as it hatched from the egg , prepares for the building of these cells or houses , which they make larger and larger as the size of their body increases  so that the full grown worms are always to be found in larger , the younger in smaller tubes .
For this purpose nature has furnished them with parts particularly adapted thereto , their two fore-legs being formed in some measure like those of the mole , or mole cricket , and their jaws furnished with two teeth , somewhat like the forcipes or claws of crabs , which are of great service to their making their way into the mud .


If you throw some of them into a little mud mixed with water , you will instantly perceive them begin this work of piercing and boring  and if the quantity of mud you give them is not sufficient entirely to immerge them , they will nevertheless continue to undermine what they have , hiding at one time their heads , at another their bodies , and at others their tails , in the attempt to form new cells .


In these cells then the worm of the ephemeron continues , till the time when it is to undergo its final metamorphosis , which as I have before observed is at the period of three years  previous to which the cases of the wings appear very protuberant  on the back , the smooth , and depressed form of the upper part of the body is changed into a more swollen and rounder shape , and the wings themselves become in some degree visible through their external skin .


At the time that this metamorphosis is to begin , which is generally about six o'clock in the evening , the worm quits his cell , and goes into the water , from the bottom of which he immediately makes all the expedition he can to the surface , and there fixing on any thing solid that he can meet with , either wood , stone , earth , a tree , a boat , a beast , or a man , all appearing equally indifferent to him , he appears to be seized all over with a shuddering or trembling motion , when immediately the skin opens on the middle of the back , the slit enlarging towards the fore parts , till it becomes so wide , that the animal is able to thrust his head out at it  after which he draws his legs also out of the skin , as in Fig .
IV .
whilst the claws , adhering to the cast skin , are in the mean time firmly fixed in their places , which greatly contributes towards enabling him to slip the rest of his body out of its covering .
It must moreover be observed that the head and legs are stript of their skin in the same manner that we draw our feet out of our shoes  but that as to the other parts , that is to say the first and second pair of wings , the skin is drawn off from them in such a manner as that they become turned inside out , as we invert a limber pair of gloves , the inward surface or inside of the fingers being pulled out  so that the exuvium , or case which is left behind , bears the form represented at Fig .
V .


 When it has thus quitted its case , and consequently compleated its change , it appears a perfect fly , with two pair of very fine filmy wings , as at Fig .
VI .
*


From this period then may be dated the commencement of its life , the whole duration of which afterwards is never more than about five hours , in which short space it generates , lays eggs , grows old , and dies .
- That is to say if it even reaches to the extent of that very short allotted space  for short as it is , it is frequently cut off before the conclusion of it by the means of some of the very numerous enemies whereby this innocent unhappy little creature is persecuted in the course of it .
Fond as it were of the element from whence he sprung , no sooner is his change compleated , than he instantly repairs to it again , and flutters towards its surface , where if he ventures too near , he becomes an easy prey to the trout , and many other kinds of fish , who watch to take him , and to whom he is a most delicious morsel  and if he soars higher into the air , he is as liable to be snapp'd up by the birds , who are no less fond of him .
They frequently even seize and devour him whilst he is engaged in the great work of changing his skin  nay , numbers of the worms are destroyed by the inhabitants of the waters , in their very birth , before they can reach the surface to become the tenants of a purer element .


Such , so short , and so full of peril is the life of this harmless little insect  and such , O man !
is thine !


22 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER IX . ]


 Dear Mrs. TRIFLER ,


I Can not help suspecting that you artfully mean to cajole your fair readers into sense and seriousness , and that you only bait your periodical labours with a Trifler merely to captivate our attention , while you mean nothing less than our acquaintance with all useful and polite literature .
Notwithstanding this pretty stratagem of yours , which is like teaching children their letters by gingerbread alphabets , we are resolved to disappoint your endeavours , and the purpose of this letter is to inform you of the very pernicious consequences which must necessarily result from your projected reformation .


 There is one general argument which has always appeared to me unanswerable upon this subject : if we poor women furnished our minds with moral and historical truth , and took pains to acquire the true principles of taste and criticism , we should be very apt upon this supposition to discern the deficiencies of our admirers in these articles  and from a total dissimilitude of manners and pursuits , grow quickly disgusted at each other , and so risk our establishments for the sake of accomplishments no longer respected .


Pray , madam , have you ever known any ladies advantageously settled in life on account of their mental qualifications , where the metallic charms were wanting ?
I question extremely whether even a precedent could be found for so irregular a proceeding , so true it is what the poet sings .


` Wit must wear the willow with the bays . '
Indeed , my dear , you entirely mistake the point  a woman of knowledge is at present no object of request , and I am afraid literature , like virtue , is insufficient for its own reward - so well satisfied is the whole tribe of Triflers of this maxim , that there is not one of them who would not rather endanger their health and impair their sight by needle-work , than read ten pages of English history , or acquaint themselves with the very rudiments of the religion of their country .


Your ladies of literature were commonly susceptible of tenderness , ( for I have looked into a translation of Ovid 's Epistles , ) and this is a quality the Triflers have totally divested themselves of .
I suppose  you would endeavour , by enlarging our ideas , to soften and refine our affections , but that would be the most unfortunate thing in the world for us , for I can assure you , we have already more light in our minds than is friendly to our pursuits and desires , and we are not a little incommoded by its impertinent suggestions .


You know that our whole family has a mortal antipathy to every thing that is severe and formal , and I have been told that method and attention are very necessary to obtain the proper fruit of study and application : now , as to the method , we are utter strangers to it , and we have never been accustomed to bestow the least attention upon any thing but the adorning and exhibiting our dear persons - not that we are so averse to letters , as totally to neglect every species of composition , but we manage that affair in so compendious and pleasing a manner , that it becomes a mere amusement .
Message-cards afford us a great deal of employment  nor are there wanting very elegant models of that pretty stile of writing .


There is a judicious gentleman in this town who advertises to teach all sorts of penmanship in a very few hours , the Italian hand in nineteen hours , and in proportion all the rest  I am credibly informed , that , in imitation of so worthy an original , there is a lady very shortly expected here from Brussels , who will undertake to teach French in a fortnight , history in sixteen hours , morality in half an hour , and religion in a quarter of an hour .


I have heard it said by a gentleman , that he knew only two books of any use , a bible and almanac   for my part , I think a spelling dictionary , and Grey 's Love Letters very ample furniture for a lady 's library .


You can say , no doubt , many plausible things in recommendation of your Platonic system , such as , that you do not purpose to convert ladies into philosophers and mathematicians , but only to qualify them for rational conversation  that you ca n't apprehend any danger that ladies may be more remiss in the proper discharge of all duties , merely because they understand better the obligations they lie under to the performance of them : that ignorance of such matters as are necessary to be known , is not only highly contemptible but even criminal - all this and a great deal more you may urge to the same purpose , but be assured your remonstrances will be infallibly drowned amidst the noise and dissipation of public life ,


I am , madam , Your very Humble Servant , PARTHENISSA .


23 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 THE loss of Sir Charles having clouded all Sophia 's views of happiness , she earnestly intreated Mr. Herbert 's permission to settle herself in that humble station to which providence seemed to call her  and as she believed Mrs. Gibbons might be very useful to her upon this occasion , she resolved to apply to her as soon as she had his answer .


Notwithstanding all her endeavours to bear this shock of fate with patience , a fixed melancholy took possession of her mind , convinced that Sir Charles had loved her , and that by an unfortunate concurrence of circumstances he had been prevented from giving her the utmost proof of his affection  her tenderness no longer combatted by suspicions to his prejudice , gained new force every day , and all his actions now appeared to her in a favourable point of view : so true it is , that when a person is found less guilty than he is suspected , he is concluded more innocent than he really is .


Mr. Herbert , after a long silence , at length acquainted her , that he was ill , and desired her not to leave Mr Lawson 's till she heard further from him .


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  The shortness of this billet , the trembling hand with which it appeared to be written , filled Sophia with the most dreadful apprehensions .
Sir Charles was now forgot , and all her thoughts were taken up with the danger of her worthy friend : she determined to go to him  and although Mr. Lawson and his wife endeavoured to , dissuade her from taking such a journey , and William , urged by Dolly , and his own eagerness to serve her , offered to go and bring her an exact account of the state of his health , yet her purpose remained unalterable .


` My dear benefactor is ill , said she , and has none but strangers about him : it is fit that I should go and attend him  and if I must lose him , pursued she , bursting into tears , it will be some comfort to me to reflect that I have done my duty . '


She set out early the next , morning in the stage-coach : Dolly wept at parting , and engaged her lover to attend Sophia to her journey 's end  that if Mr. Herbert should be worse than they apprehended , he might be near to assist and comfort her .


Sophia , when she saw him riding by the side of the coach , attempted to persuade him to return  but William charmed to have an opportunity of expressing his zeal for her service , would not quit her  and her spirits being too weak to contest this point with him , she was obliged to suffer his attendance .


They reached the place where Mr. Herbert was , in the evening of the third day : he had taken  lodgings at the house , of a farmer , where he was attended with great tenderness and care .


Sophia , appeared with so deep a concern upon her countenance , and enquired for him with such extreme emotion , that the good woman of the house concluding she was his daughter , thought it necessary before she answered her questions , to preach patience and submission to her , wisely observing , that we are all mortal , and that death spares nobody , from the squire to the plowman .


She ran on in this manner till she perceived Sophia grow as pale as death , and close her eyes : she had just time to prevent her from falling , and with William 's assistance , placed her in a chair , where while she applied remedies to recover her from her swoon , the youth with tears in his eyes , asked her softly how long Mr. Herbert had been dead .


` Dead !
repeated the farmer 's wife , who told you he was dead ?
no , no , it is not so bad as that neither . '


William rejoiced to hear this , and as soon as Sophia shewed some signs of returning life , he greeted her with the welcome , news .
She cast a look full of doubt and anguish upon the countrywoman , who confirmed his report , and offered to go with her to the gentleman 's room .
Sophia instantly found her strength return  she followed her with trembling haste  and , left her presence should surprise Mr. Herbert , she directed the good woman to tell him , that a friend of his was come to see him .


 She heard him answer in a weak voice , but with some emotion , `` It is my dear child , bring her to me . ''


Sophia immediately appeared , and throwing herself upon her knees at his bed-side , burst into tears , and was unable to speak .


The good old man holding one of her hands prest in his , tenderly blamed her for the trouble she had given herself in coming so far to visit him  but acknowledged at the same time , that this instance of her affection was extremely dear to him , and that her presence gave him inexpressible comfort .


Sophia entered immediately upon the office of a nurse to her benefactor , and performed all the duties of the most affectionate child to the best of parents .


Mr. Herbert employed the little remaining strength he had in endeavours to comfort her , and in pious exhortations .
` Weep not for me , my dear child , would he say , but rather rejoice that the innocence of my life has diverted death of his terrors , and enabled me to meet him with calm resignation , and with humble hope .
At this awful hour how little would it avail me , that I had been rich , that I had been great and powerful ?
but what comforts do I not feel from an unreproving conscience ?
these comforts every one has it in his power to procure  live virtuous then , my dear Sophia , that you may die in peace : how small is the difference between the longest and the shortest life !
if its pleasures be few , its miseries are so likewise  how little do they enjoy whom the world calls happy !
how little  do they suffer whom it pronounces wretched !
one point of fleeting time past , and death reduces all to an equality .
But the distinction between virtue and vice , and its future happiness and misery are eternal . '


Sophia had need of all the consolation she derived from her reflections on the virtue and piety of her friend , to enable her to bear the apprehensions of his approaching death with any degree of fortitude  but when she least expected it , his distemper took a favourable turn , and in a few days the most dangerous symptoms were removed .


The Bath waters being judged absolutely necessary for the entire reestablishment of his health , he resolved to go thither as soon as he had recovered strength enough to bear the journey .


Sophia at his earnest desire consented to return to Mr. Lawson 's , and remain there till he came from Bath , but she would not quit him till he was able to take this journey  and by the sweetness of her conversation , her tender assiduity , and watchful care , contributed so much towards his recovery , that he was soon in a condition to travel with safety .


He accompanied her the first day 's journey to Mr. Lawson 's  and being met at the inn by this worthy friend and young William , he consigned his beloved charge to their care , and pursued his way to Bath .


Sophia was received with great joy by Mrs. Lawson and her daughters : Dolly hung a long time upon her neck in transports , and as soon as they were alone , informed her that Mrs. Gibbons and her mother were perfectly reconciled  that she had  consented to her nephew 's marriage , and even shewed an impatience to conclude it : but I prevailed , said she , to have the ceremony delayed till you , my dear friend , could be present  for I could not think of being happy , while , you to whom I owe all , was afflicted .


Sophia embraced her tenderly , congratulated her upon her change of fortune , and gave many praises to her lover , to whom she acknowledged great obligations for his care and attention to her .


Dolly 's cheeks glowed with pleasure while she heard her William commended by one whom she so much loved and revered .


The young lovers were married a few days afterwards  and Sophia , who had so earnestly endeavoured to bring about this union , and had suffered so much in her own interest by her solicitude concerning it , was one of those to whom it gave the most satisfaction .


Mean time Mr. Herbert continued indisposed at Bath , and Sophia uneasy , left in this increase of his expences , her residence at Mr. Lawson 's should lay him under some difficulties , resolved to ease him as soon as possible of the charge of her maintenance : she explained her situation to Mrs. Gibbons , and requested her assistance in procuring her a place .


Mrs. Gibbons expressed great tenderness and concern for her upon this occasion , and assured her she would employ all her interest in her service .
She accordingly mentioned her with great praise to a widow lady of a very affluent fortune , who had established such a character for generosity and  goodness , that she hoped if she could be induced to take Sophia under her protection her fortune would be made .


Mrs. Howard , so was the lady called , no sooner heard that a young woman of merit , well born , and genteely educated was reduced to go to service for subsistence , than she exclaimed with great vehemence against the avarice and luxury of the rich and great , who either hoarded for their unthankful heirs , or lavished in expensive pleasures those superfluous sums which ought to be applied to the relief of the indigent .
` Oh that I had a fortune , cried she , as large as my heart , there should not be one distressed person in the world !
I must see this young lady Mrs. Gibbons , and I must do something for her .
You have obliged me infinitely by putting it in my power to gratify the unbounded benevolence of my heart upon a deserving object . '


Mrs. Gibbons , when she related this conversation to Sophia , filled her with an extreme impatience to see the lady , not from any mean considerations of advantage to herself , but admiration of so excellent a character .
She accompanied Mrs. Gibbons in a visit to her at her country-seat , which was but a few miles distant from the village where they lived  and Mrs. Howard was so pleased with her at this first interview , that she gave her an invitation to spend the remainder of the summer with her , and this in so obliging a manner , that Sophia immediately complied , not thinking it necessary to wait till she had consulted Mr. Herbert upon this offer , as she was fully persuaded he could  have no objections to her accepting it , Mrs. Howard being so considerable by her family and fortune , and so estimable by her character .


This lady , who had made an early discovery of Sophia 's economical talents , set her to work immediately after her arrival  her task was to embroider a white sattin negligee , which she undertook with great readiness , pleased at having an opportunity of obliging a woman of so generous a disposition , and in some degree to requite her for her hospitality .


Mrs. Howard indeed always prevented those on whom she conferred favours from incurring the guilt of ingratitude  for she took care to be fully repaid for any act of benevolence  and having a wonderful art in extracting advantage to herself from the necessities of others , she sometimes sought out the unfortunate with a solicitude that did great honour to her charity , which was sure to be its own reward .
A few ostentatious benefactions had sufficiently established her character  and while her name appeared among the subscribers to some fashionable charity , who could suspect that her table was served with a parsimony which would have disgraced a much smaller fortune  that her rents from her indigent tenants were exacted with the most unrelenting rigor , and the naked and hungry sent sighing from her gate ?


Nothing is more certain than what is called liberality is often no more than the vanity of giving , of which some persons are fonder than of what they give .
But the vanity of giving publicly is most prevailing  and hence it happens , that those who are most celebrated  for their charity , are in reality least sensible to the feelings of humanity : and the same persons from whom the most affecting representation of private distress could not force the least relief , have been among the first to send their contributions to any new foundation .


Sophia knew not how to reconcile many circumstances in Mrs. Howard 's conduct , with her general professions of benevolence and generosity  but that lady had been so used to disguise herself to others , that at last she did not know herself  and the warmth and vehemence with which she delivered her sentiments imposed almost as much upon herself as her hearers .


Sophia 's amiable qualities however soon produced their usual effects , and inspired Mrs. Howard with as much friendship for her as so interested a temper was capable of .
She wished to see her fortune established , and was very desirous of serving her as far as she could , consistent with her prudent maxims , which were to make other persons the source of those benefits , the merit of which she arrogated to herself .


Chance soon furnished her with an opportunity of exerting her talents in favour of Sophia , and of engaging , as she conceived , her eternal gratitude .
A country lady of her acquaintance coming one day to visit her , with her son , a clownish ignorant youth , Mrs. Howard was encouraged by the frequent glances he gave Sophia , to form a scheme for marrying her to him  and in this she foresaw so many possible advantages to  herself from Sophia 's grateful disposition , that she pursued it with the most anxious solicitude .


Mr. Barton , so was the young squire called , having conceived a liking for Sophia , repeated his visits frequently , emboldened by Mrs. Howard 's civilities , who took every occasion of praising Sophia , and insinuating that he would be extremely happy in such a wife .


She sometimes left him alone with Sophia , in hopes that he would declare his passion to her : but the rustic , awed by the dignity of her person and manners , durst not even raise his eyes to look on her  so that Mrs. Howard finding the affair did not advance so fast as she wished , rallied Sophia upon her : ill-timed reserve , and hinted her views in her favour , which she considering as an effect of her friendship , listened to with respect and even gratitude , though her heart refused to concur in them .


This conversation passed in the presence of Mrs. Howard 's only son , a youth about nineteen , who had come from the university to pass a few days with his mother .
As soon as she had quitted Sophia he approached her , and with a look of tenderness and concern , told her , ` He was sorry to find his mother so zealous an advocate for Mr. Barton , who could not possibly deserve her . '


` Nor can I possibly deserve him , replied Sophia with a smile  he is too rich . '


` Love only and merit can deserve you , resumed the young student , sighing , and if love was merit , I know one who might - hope - '


He paused and hesitated , and Sophia , to whom the language of love in any mouth but Sir Charles 's  was odious , suddenly quitted him , to avoid the continuance of a discourse which she considered as mere unmeaning gallantry .


Mean time , her rustic lover not having courage enough to declare his passion to her , had recourse to the indulgence of his mother , who till that time had never refused any of his desires .


He told her that he never liked any young woman so well in his life as Mrs. Sophia Darnley  and that he was sure she would make a good wife , because Mrs. Howard had told him so , and encouraged him to break his mind to her , but he was ashamed : he declared he would marry no body else , and begged his mother to get her for him .


Mrs. Barton , full of rage against her neighbour , for thus endeavouring to ensnare her son into a marriage , as she conceived unworthy of him , resolved to go to her and load her with reproaches .
While her chariot was getting ready , she continued to question her son , and heard a great many particulars from him which convinced her that his affections were more deeply engaged than she had imagined .


After ordering the young squire to be locked up till her return , she flew to Mrs. Howard , and with the most violent transports of rage , upbraided her with the treacherous part she had acted , by seducing her son into a liking for a poor creature who was a dependent upon her charity , and whom she took this method to get rid of .


Mrs. Howard , who held Mrs. Barton in great contempt , on account of her ignorance , and valued herself extremely upon her philosophic command  over her passions , listened with an affected calmness to all Mrs. Barton 's invectives  and when she found she had railed herself out of breath , she began to declaim in a solemn accent against avarice , and that vile and fordid disposition of parents , who in the marriage of their children preferred the dross of riches to the real treasures of wisdom and virtue .
She very charitably lamented Mrs. Barton 's want of discernment , and littleness of mind  and concluded that Miss Sophia 's , merit rendered her deserving of a husband even more considerable than Mr. Barton .


` Then marry her to your own son , replied Mrs. Barton , with a sneer  no doubt but he will be more worthy of her . '


` If my son should declare a passion for Miss Sophia , resumed Mrs. Howard , it would soon be seen how far my sentiments are exalted above yours . '


' I am glad to hear this , returned Mrs. Barton , for I am very sure Mr. Howard is in love with this wonderful creature whom you praise so much  and since you are so willing to make her your daughter-in-law , I shall be under no fear of my son 's marrying her . '


Mrs. Howard , at this unexpected stroke , turned as pale as death , and with a faultering voice , asked her , ` What reason she had for supposing her son was in love with Miss Sophia ? '


Mrs. Barton , who enjoyed her perplexity and confusion , suffered her to repeat her questions several times , and then maliciously referred her to the young gentleman himself , ` Who , said she , upon  finding you so favourably disposed , will , I doubt not , be ready enough to own his inclinations . '


Mrs. Howard was now so far humbled , that she condescended to intreat Mrs. Barton to tell her what she knew of this affair .


` All my information , said Mrs. Barton , comes from my son , to whom Mr. Howard , considering him as his rival , declared his better right to the lady , as having acquainted her with his passion . '


At this intelligence Mrs. Howards rage got so much the better of her prudence , that she uttered a thousand invectives against the innocent Sophia , which drew some severe sarcasms from Mrs. Barton , who being now fully revenged , rose up to be gone  but Mrs. Howard , sensible that a quarrel upon this occasion might have consequences very unfavourable to her reputation , seized her hand , and led her half reluctant , again to her chair , where , after she had soothed her into good humour , by some flattering expressions , which coming from one of her acknowledged understanding , had great weight .
She told her with the most unblushing confidence , that she was now convinced she had been deceived in the character of the young woman on whom she had with her usual generosity conferred so many benefits . '
I find to my inexpressible concern , pursued she , that this modest , sensible , and virtuous young creature , as I once believed her , is in reality an artful hypocrite , whose only aim is to make her fortune , by ensnaring some unexperienced youth into a marriage .
Let us join our endeavours then , my dear Mrs. Barton , to preserve our sons from this danger : this is a  common cause , all mothers are concerned in it  we will shew the young dissembler in her true colours , and prevent her imposing upon others as she has done on us . '


Mrs. Barton , who never carried her reflections very far , was so well pleased with Mrs. Howard 's present behaviour , that she forgot all the past : these two ladies became on a sudden the best friends in the world , and this union was to be cemented with the ruin of Sophia 's fame  such beginnings have certain female friendships , and such are the leagues in which the wicked join .


Mrs. Barton proposed to have her sent for into their presence , and after reproaching her severely , dismiss her with contempt  but the more politic Mrs. Howard , whose views were at once to destroy Sophia 's reputation , and to secure her own , disapproved of this harsh treatment , as she called it , and charitably resolved to ruin her with all possible gentleness .


She wrote to Mrs. Gibbons , and acquainted her , that having discovered an intrigue carrying on between Sophia and her son , she thought it necessary to dismiss her immediately out of her family  but that the poor young creature might be exposed as little as possible to censure , she begged she would come herself to fetch her away , and deliver her to her friends , with a caution to watch her conduct carefully .


She recommended secrecy to her for Sophia 's sake  and assured her that if it had not been for this discovery of her bad conduct , she had resolved to have provided for her handsomely .


 Mrs. Gibbons , whom this letter threw into the utmost astonishment , immediately communicated the contents of it to Dolly and William , with whom she now lived .


Dolly burst into tears of grief and indignation , and earnestly intreated her to go immediately and take Miss Sophia out of a house where her merit was so little understood  but William , who looked farther into the consequences of this affair than either his wife or his aunt , believed it necessary for the justification of Sophia 's honour , that Mr. Lawson should wait upon Mrs. Howard , and demand an explanation of those censures which she had cast upon a young lady confided to his care  rightly judging , that if malice was the source of her accusation , she would not dare to pursue it with a man of his character  and if it arose from the information of others , he would be able to detect the falshood of it .


These reasons prevailed with Mrs. Gibbons , who had been very desirous to shew her eloquence upon this occasion , and was resolved , she said , not to have spared Mrs. Howard for her immature conclusions .


William went immediately to his father-in-law , and acquainted him with what had happened .
Mr. Lawson was grieved from the consideration of what Sophia 's delicate sensibility would feel from such an attack upon her reputation  and this was the worst that he apprehended could happen from calumnies which the purity of her manners and the innocency of her life would be always a sufficient refutation of .
A wise and virtuous person , he  knew , was out of the reach of fortune , though not free from the malice of it .
All attempts against such a one are , as the poet says , like the arrows of Xerxes  they may darken the day , but can not stifle the sun .


His impatience to take Sophia out of the hands of a woman whom he conceived to be either very malicious , or very imprudent , made him defer his visit no longer than till the afternoon .


When he sent in his name , Mrs. Howard , who had no suspicion of the occasion of his coming , ordered him to be shewn into a parlour , where she suffered him to wait near an hour before she admitted him to her presence  a country curate being in her opinion a person too insignificant to lay claim to any degree of consideration , and besides , this sort of neglect being affected by many persons of quality , to whom it certainly gives great importance and dignity , their imitators never lose any opportunity of exercising it .


Mr. Lawson was at last summoned to the lady 's dressing-room , where he expected to have found Sophia , but was glad to see Mrs. Howard alone .
She asked him with a little superciliousness , if he had any business with her  to which he replied , with a solemnity in his look and accent that surprised her , ` That being a friend to miss Sophia Darnley , and the person to whose care she was confided by her relations , he thought it his duty to enquire what part of her conduct had given occasion for those unfavourable suspicions which were entertained of her . '


 ` Mrs. Gibbons , madam , pursued he , has communicated to me a letter which she has received from you , wherein there is a heavy charge against miss Sophia  a charge which none who know her can think it possible for her to deserve .
There must certainly be some mistake here , madam  you have been misinformed , or appearances have deceived you , and in justice to you , as well as to one of the most virtuous and amiable young women in the world , I am resolved to trace the source of these calumnies , that her innocence may be fully cleared .
I beg of you then , madam , let me know what foundation you have for believing that Miss Sophia - '


Mrs. Howard , whom this speech had thrown into great confusion , interrupted him here , to prevent his repeating those expressions in her letter , the meaning of which , though obvious , she durst not avow .


' I find , said she , that you and Mrs. Gibbons have seen this affair in a worse light than I intended you should  my son has been foolish enough to entertain a liking for this girl , whom I took under my protection , with a view to provide for her handsomely , and she has been wise enough pursued she , with an ironical smile , to give him encouragement , I suppose  but with all her excellencies , I am not disposed to make her my daughter-in-law . '


Mrs. Howard threw in this last softening expression , in hopes it would satisfy Mr. Lawson , and added , that to prevent any thing happening , which might  be disagreeable to her , she begged he would take Sophia home with him .


` Most willingly , madam , said he  but since it seems to be your opinion , that this young gentlewoman has encouraged the clandestine addresses of your son , I think it will be proper to examine first into the truth of these suspicions , that you may not part with worse thoughts of her than she deserves . '


Mrs. Howard being thus prest , and unwilling to enter into an explanation that would expose all her artifices , was forced to acknowledge that she had no other foundation for her fears than the passion her son had owned for her  and having made this unwilling concession , she left him with a countenance inflamed with stifled rage , saying she would send Sophia to him .


Accordingly she went into the room where she was at work , and told her , her friend the curate was waiting to carry her home .
Observing her to look extremely surprised , ` If you consider , said she , what returns you have made me for the benefits I have conferred upon you , you will not think it strange that we should part in this manner . '


` Bless me , cried Sophia , what have I done to deserve such reproaches ? '


' I can not stay to talk to you now , said Mrs. Howard  I have explained myself to Mr. Lawson , I am sorry to say , that I now can only wish you well . '


She hurried out of the room when she had said this  and Sophia , in the utmost perplexity and concern ,  flew down stairs to Mr. Lawson , who was already at the gate waiting to help her into the chaise : she gave him her hand , asking him at the same time , with great emotion , ` What Mrs. Howard accused her of ? '


As soon as they drove away , Mr. Lawson related all that had past between that lady and him , which filled Sophia with new astonishment : she could not comprehend Mrs. Howard 's motives for acting in the manner she had done with regard to her  all her conduct appeared to her highly extravagant and inconsistent  she asked Mr. Lawson a thousand questions , full of that simplicity which ever accompanies real goodness of heart .


He gave her some notion of the dangerous character of Mrs Howard , and greatly blamed her for having so suddenly accepted her invitation , without first consulting Mr. Herbert .
` It is a maxim , pursued he , of one of the wisest of the antients , that in forming new connections of every sort , it is of great importance in what manner the first approaches are made , and by whose hands the avenues of friendship are laid open . '


Mr. Lawson , by this hint , gave Sophia to understand , that he did not think Mrs. Gibbons , a proper person to introduce her into the world .
She was now sensible that she had been too precipitate  but her motives were so generous , that Mr. Herbert , whom in a letter she acquainted with the whole affair , easily justified her in his own opinion , though he earnestly , recommended it to her not to let her apprehensions of being burthensome to him draw her into new inconveniencies .


 Mr. Lawson having , as he imagined , prevented Mrs. Howard from making any future attack upon Sophia 's reputation , by obliging her to acknowledge her innocence , was surprised to hear whereever he went , of the calumnies she invented against her .


Nothing is more common than for persons to hate with extreme inveteracy those whom they have injured  and although Mrs. Howard was convinced , that Sophia would not admit a visit from her son , ( who now openly avowed his passion for her )  that she refused to receive his letters , and shunned every place where she thought it possible to meet him  yet pretending to be apprehensive that the youth would be drawn into a clandestine marriage , she sent him away precipitately upon his travels , and this gave a colour to new invectives against Sophia , who trusting only to her innocence for her justification , had the satisfaction to find that innocence fully acknowledged in the esteem and respect with which she was treated by all the persons of fashion in the neighbourhood .


Mr. Herbert , who in every new trial to which she was exposed , found greater cause for admiration of her character , praised the gentleness and forgiving spirit which she discovered upon this occasion  but Mrs. Gibbons was not wholly satisfied with her conduct , ` You ought to discriminate upon Mrs. Howard , said she , and tell the world how desirous she was to have you married to her friend 's son , though she makes such a clutter about her own : indeed you want spirit , miss  Sophia , ' added the old lady , with a little contempt .


' I am not of your opinion , madam , replied Sophia  for in taking revenge upon our enemies , we are only even with them  in passing over their malice we are superior . '


` Well , well , interrupted Mrs. Gibbons , I have no notion of such superiousness : I always resent injuries , and Mrs. Howard shall feel my resentment for her malice to you .
I have not returned her last visit yet , and perhaps I may not this month  this is pretty severe I think . '


Sophia , composing her countenance as well as she could , thanked Mrs. Gibbons for this instance of her friendship to her  but she had no opportunity to observe whether she kept her word , for she was summoned to town by a letter from her mother , which gave her a melancholy account of her affairs .


Mrs. Darnley acquainted her that the gentleman was dead who paid her the annuity which Sir Charles had stipulated for her when he procured him her late husband 's place .
She desired her to come immediately to town to assist her under her misfortunes  and added in a postscript , as if reluctantly , that Harriot had left her , and was not so dutiful as she could wish .


Sophia read this letter with tears  and , impatient to comfort her afflicted mother , she instantly prepared for her little journey .


All Mr. Lawson 's family parted from her with great regret  but Dolly 's affliction was extreme , and Sophia amidst so many greater causes of sorrow ,  felt a new pang when she took leave of her tender and innocent friend .


To spare Mr. Lawson the trouble of conducting her to town , she accepted a place in the coach of a lady with whom she had lately become acquainted , and who professed a particular esteem for her .


On her arrival at her mother 's house , she found only a servant there , who informed her that her mistress had taken lodgings at Kensington for the air , having been indisposed for some weeks past .


Sophia ordered her to get a hackney coach to the door , and was hurrying away without daring to enquire for her sister , when the maid told her Miss Darnley desired to see her before she went to Kensington .


`` Where is my sister , '' said Sophia , with a faultering accent .


The answer she received was a stroke of fortune more cruel than any she had yet experienced : her sister , she found , lived in the house which Sir Charles had once offered to her .


Trembling and pale she ordered the coachman to drive thither , and drawing up the windows , relieved her labouring heart with a shower of tears .


[ To be continued . ]
24 .
On reading HUTCHINSON on the PASSIONS .


 THOU , who thro ' nature 's various maze can ` st rove , And shew what springs the rapid passions move  Teach us to combat anger , grief , and fear , Recal the sigh , and check the flatting tear  Why was thy soft philosophy addrest , All to the vacant ear , and quiet breast ?
With ease may peaceful apathy be taught To those who stagnate in a calm of thought Whose hearts by love or hate were ne'er possest  Who ne'er were wretched , and who ne'er were blest : Who one dull slumber through their lives maintain , And only dream of pleasures and of pain .
Serenely stupid .
So some gentle stream Steals thro ' the winding valleys still the same  So silent down the muddy channel creeps  While the soft zephyr on its bosom sleeps .
My fervent soul a nobler art requires , Not to suppress , but regulate her fires : Some better guides , who temperately wife Allow to feel , yet teach us to despise .
To reason 's sway subject the soul 's domain , And not subdue the passions , but restrain .
25 .
SHALUM , Master of MOUNT TIRZAH , to HILPA , mistress of the Valleys .
An Ante-diluvian Love Letter .
By a Young Lady .


 WHAT thought can represent my vast distress ?
What words the anguish of my soul express , When to my rival you resign'd your charms And fill'd his richer , but less faithful arms ?
These threescore years and ten thy loss I 've mourn'd , While Tirzah 's hills my loud complaint return'd : Those hills which gilded by the sun 's bright ray , Ill suited my sad soul that loath'd the day .
Thick groves I rais'd , and hid my sorrows there , And left the rest to bounteous nature 's care .
Her happy hand in every part appears , And a new Eden rises ` midst my tears .
Here opening flowers the ravish'd sense invade  There spreading cedars form a grateful shade  Soft gliding streams , which murmur as they flow , And gales that o'er Arabia 's odours blow .
Come up then , my belov'd , oh !
come and grace This blissful spot with a young beauteous race .
With sons and daughters let us fill these groves , Soft pledges of their parent 's faithful loves .
Daughter of Zilpah , think on life 's short date  To a poor thousand years 't is fix'd by fate .
How soon are beauty 's transient glories past  Its fading bloom will scarce four centuries last .
 So the fair cedar on the mountains height Displays its spreading branches to the sight : When worn with age , it falls , nor thought of more Till some young shoot , its memory restore , Which with increasing verdure still may rise , And like its parent tree , invade the skies .
Think well on this , then haste to make me blest  Be happy now , and leave to fate the rest .
26 .
HILPA , Mistress of the Valleys , to SHALUM , Master of Mount Tirzah .
By the same .


O Shalum cease , nor vainly try to move The heart of Hilpa , to receive thy love .
These praises of my form I well could spare , Thou know ` st me rich , and therefore call ` st me fair .
For say , dissembler , does my beauty fire Thy faithful breast , and raise this soft desire : Or is it on my wealth thy fancy feeds , My yellow fields , soft shades , and verdant meads ?
Do not the bleating of my numerous flocks Make a glad eccho on thy lonely rocks ?
Can my faint beauties Shalum 's bosom warm ?
Ah no !
my large possessions make the charm .
What tho ' thy tow ` ring forests strike my eyes With awful pleasure , and my soul surprise  Tho ' edg'd with clouds , thy waving trees are seen , And shade thy walks with an eternal green  Tho ' from thy Tirzah spicy breezes flow , And shed ambrosial fragrance all below :  Yet these but please the sense , nor can prevail Above the solid riches of the vale .
I know thee , Shalum , happier , wiser far , Thou art , than the frail sons of Adam are .
Among the lofty cedars , thy abode , In knowledge blest , already half a God .
Thou mark ` st the seasons of the changing year , Skill'd in the influence of each ruling star .
To thee the difference of each soil is known , And all earth 's various secrets are thy own .
A soul like thine has beauty power to move  Say , canst thou feel the pleasing pangs of love ?
Ah , no !
pursue me not , nor hurt my peace , This artful strain of dangerous flattery cease .
May bounteous nature all thy labours aid  May ` st thou add wood to wood , and shade to shade : But tempt not Hilpa to renounce her groves , The silent , soft recess , her fancy loves , With wedded cares to interupt thy joy , And the lone sweets of solitude destroy .
27 .
The MORNING .
By the same .


THE moon , pale majesty of night , retires , To gild remoter climes with fainter fires : The shadows fly before the breaking dawn , Now rise to view each hill and verdant lawn , Like the sick lamp of life , one parting ray Each waning star emits , then dies away .
The morning breathes mild fragrance all around , And kindly dews impearl the flow ` ry ground :  Fair streaks of light , the face of heaven o'erspread , The smiling ether glows with purpled red .
Enliven'd by the sun 's all powerful ray , Glad nature smiles , and hails returning day .
Each plant his life-renewing spirit meets , Expands its leaves , and gives forth all its sweets  Touch'd by his kindly warmth the roses blow .
Increas'd their odour , and more deep their glow .
The velvet lillies milder scents exhale , And lend their fragrance to the passing gale .
The feather'd choir their artless notes renew , Wing through the air , or warble on the bough : Swift o'er the fields the peasant takes his way , And pleas'd , resumes the labours of the day .
These are thy works , oh , great creator , these The wonders of thy power earth , air , and seas  Are thine  thy animating breath sustains Whate'er creation 's boundless vast contains .
28 .
An ODE .
By a LADY .


I. AH , why my love that pensive air ?
Why dost thou droop with secret care ?
Big tears fall silent from thy eyes , Thy bosom heaves with frequent sighs  And from that dear , that much-lov'd face Is banish'd every smiling grace .
 II .
These cares , these griefs , should all be mine , Didst thou for greater ills repine  But tho ' we feel the storms of fate , Tho ' various woes around us wait , Yet love is ours , the smiling pow ' r Can fortune 's fiercest rage endure .
III .
In me he reigns without controul , Possesses all , and fills my soul .
In my fond breast no wishes rise , But those the charming God supplies  What can my hope , or envy move , Who seek no other wealth but love ?
29 .
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNT DE COMMINGE CONCLUDED .


 ' I HAVE some important business , said he , which demands my presence in Saragossa  my health will not permit me to take this journey , I must intreat you therefore to go in my stead  I have ordered my equipage to be got ready , and you will oblige me by setting out immediately . '


` The Marquis de Benavides is older than me by a great number of years  I have always had the same respect for him as for a father , and he has held the place of one to me .
Besides , I had no reason to urge which could dispense with my doing as he desired .
I was obliged therefore to resolve to go  but I thought this ready compliance gave me a right to speak to him in favour of Madame de Benavides .
What did I not say to soften him !
he appeared to me to be shaken  I even fancied I saw tears in his eyes . '


' I have loved Madame de Benavides , said he to me , with the most ardent passion , it is not yet extinguished in my heart  but time and her future  conduct can only efface the remembrance of what I have seen . '


' I durst not enter into any discourse with him concerning the cause of his complaints  that would have again recalled his former rage  I only desired permission to acquaint my sister-in-law with the hopes he had given me .
He granted my request .
This poor lady received the news I brought her with a kind of joy . '


' I know , said she , that I can never be happy with Monsieur de Benavides  but I shall at least have the consolation of being where my duty calls me . '


` After having again assured her of my brother 's good disposition to her , I took my leave of her .
One of the chief domestics of the house , in whom I confided , had promised to be strictly attentive to every thing that regarded her , and to give me information . '


` After these precautions , which I thought necessary , I set out for Saragossa .
I had been there fifteen days without having any news from the castle , and was beginning to be very uneasy at this long silence , when I received a letter from the faithful domestic I mentioned .
He informed me that three days after my departure , Monsieur de Benavides had discharged him and all the rest of his servants , except one man whom he named to me , and the wife of that man .
I trembled as I read this letter , and without troubling myself any further about the business with which I was charged , I hired post-horses to return to the castle .
When I was within a day 's journey of this place ,  received the fatal news of the death of Madame de Benavides .
My brother , who wrote to me himself , appeared so greatly affected , that I could not suppose he had been accessary to it .
He told me , the great love he had for his wife had subdued his resentment , and that he was ready to pardon her when death matched her from him : that she had relapsed a short time after my departure , and her fever encreasing , she died upon the fifteenth day of her illness .
Since I came hither to seek some consolation in the company of Don Jerome , I have been informed my brother is plunged in the deepest sadness  that he sees no one , and he has even entreated me to defer seeing him for some time . '


' I find no difficulty in complying with his request , continued Don Gabriel  those places in which I have seen the unfortunate Madame de Benavides , and where I shall no more see her , would increase my grief .
Her death seems to have awakened all my former sentiments , and I know not whether the tears I shed do not more proceed from love than friendship : I have determined to go into Hungary , where I hope either to find death in the war , or to recover the peace I have lost . '


Here Don Gabriel ceased to speak .
I was not able to answer him , but with tears  my voice was lost in sighs , Don Gabriel also wept bitterly : at length he left me without my being able to utter a single word .
Don Jerome attended him out , and I was left alone .
The melancholy relation I had just heard increased my impatience to see myself  in a place where I might abandon myself , without interruption , to the excess of my grief .


The desire of executing this scheme hastened my cure : after having been long in a languishing condition , my wound was healed , my strength returned , and I found myself able in a little time to leave the convent .


The parting between Don Jerome and me was on his side full of tenderness and friendly concern  but the loss of Adelaida had left me insensible to all other impressions .
I would not acquaint him with my design , lest he should endeavour to oppose it : I wrote to my mother , and sent my letter by Saint Laurent , making him believe that I would wait for an answer , in the place I then was .


This letter contained an account of all that had happened to me since I saw her last : I earnestly asked her pardon for leaving her , as I resolved to do , for ever .
I added , that in tenderness to her maternal affection , I chose to spare her the sight of a miserable wretch , who had now nothing left to wish for but death  and lastly , I conjured her not to make any attempts to discover the place of my retreat , and recommended the faithful Saint Laurent to her protection .


When I parted with him , I gave him all the money I had about me , reserving only what was sufficient to defray my expences during my journey .
The letter I had received from Madame de Benavides , and her picture , which I wore next my heart , was all the wealth I was possessed of .
I travelled with an impatience which hardly allowed me to stop a moment , to the abbey de la F -  Upon my arrival I demanded the habit of the order .
The father abbot obliged me to undergo the probationary forms  and when they were finished , asked me whether the wretched diet , and other austerities did not appear more than equal to my strength .
Absorbed in grief , I had not even perceived the difference of my diet , and the austerities he mentioned : my insensibility was taken for a mark of zeal , and I was received .


The certainty I now had that my tears might flow uninterrupted , and that I might pass my whole life in this sad employment , gave me some consolation  the horrid solitude , the melancholy silence that reigned in this cloister , the mortified countenances of all about me , left me wholly devoted to that grief which was become so precious to me , that it supplied the place of all I had lost .
I performed , all the exercises of the cloister without thinking of their severity , for every thing was alike indifferent to me .
I went every day into the thickest part of the wood  there would I read over the letter , and gaze on the picture of my Adelaida , bathe them both with my tears , and replacing them upon my heart , return with greater weight of grief .


Three years I led this melancholy life , while time neither alleviated my sorrow , nor brought the period to it which I so earnestly desired , when one morning I was summoned by the tolling of the bell to be present at the death of one of the religious .
He was already laid upon the ashes , the last sacrament was going to be administred to him , when he desired to speak to the father abbot .


 ` What I am going to say father , said the dying penitent , will animate with new fervour all who shall hear me , since by methods so extraordinary , I have been drawn out of the abyss of sin and misery into which I was plunged , and conducted into the port of salvation  I am unworthy of the name of brother , with which these holy religious have honoured me : in me you behold an unhappy woman , whom a profane passion has led to this sanctified place .
I loved and was beloved by a young man of a rank equal to my own  the mutual hatred of our fathers was an insurmountable obstacle to our marriage : I was even obliged for the safety of my lover , to give my hand to another person , and in the choice of my husband , I endeavoured still to give him proofs of the continuance of my passion .
The man who could not be supposed to inspire me with any sentiments but those of hatred or contempt , was preferred to every other who addressed me , because the sacrifice I made him should be compleat , and that he might have no cause for jealousy .
The Almighty decreed that a marriage contracted with such criminal views should prove a source of misery to me .
Although I would never after consent to see my lover , yet my husband and he met and wounded each other before my eyes .
Terror and grief threw me into a violent illness  I was scarcely recovered when my husband shut me up in a private apartment of his castle , and caused it to be reported that I was dead . '


' I continued two years in that melancholy confinement , with no other consolation , than  what the compassion of her who daily brought me my food afforded me .
My husband , not satisfied with the miseries he inflicted on me , had the cruelty to insult me under them .
Oh my God , what do I say !
dare I accuse of cruelty the instrument thou wast pleased to make use of for my punishment ?
these afflictions did not bring me to a just sense of the extravagances of my conduct : instead of weeping for my faults , I wept only for my lover . '


` The death of my husband set me at liberty .
The woman who served me , being the only person who knew the truth of my condition , came to open the doors of my prison , and informed me that I had passed for dead from the moment I entered it .
Not doubting but the treatment I had met with from my husband had given rise to very unfavourable suspicions of my virtue , I deliberated whether it was not necessary I should pass the rest of my days in a convent  and I was confirmed in this design when I learned that the only person who could retain me in the world had not been heard of for a long time .
I disguised myself in the habit of a man , that I might leave the castle without being known . '


` The convent to which I resolved to retire was that in which I was educated , and is but a few leagues distant from hence .
I was travelling to it when the solitariness of this place striking my imagination as I passed by , I alighted from my chaise , in order to indulge my sad reflections a few moments : a secret impulse which I could not resist led me into your chapel .
Scarce had I entered  when among the voices that sung the praises of our Lord , I distinguished one too well accustomed to reach my heart .
I thought at first that my disordered imagination had deceived me by a fancied resemblance  but when I approached , notwithstanding the alteration which time , grief , and the austerities of a cloister had made in his countenance , I immediately knew that lover so dear to my remembrance . '


` Great God !
what became of me at this sight !
what were the cruel agitations of my mind !
far from praising the Almighty for calling him to so holy a profession , I blasphemed against him for having deprived me of him : you punished not my impious murmurs , oh my God !
and you made use of my own folly and misery to draw me to your self ! '


' I was not able to leave a place which inclosed what I loved  and that we might no more be separated , I discharged my guide , and presented myself , father , to you .
Deceived by the eagerness I discovered to be admitted into your cloister , you received me willingly .
Alas !
what were the dispositions I brought to your holy exercises ?
a heart filled with a profane passion , and every thought employed on the dear object of its tenderness . '


` The Almighty , who by abandoning me to my wild affections , would give me greater cause for humbling myself one day before him , doubtless permitted those impoisoned delights which I tasted in breathing the same air , and living in the same house with him I loved .
I followed  him every where : I assisted him in his labours as much as my strength would allow , and in those moments I thought myself over-paid for all that I had suffered  but yet my imprudent tenderness did not carry me so far as to make myself known to him .
But what was the motive that hindered me ?
the fear of disturbing the quiet of him for whom I had lost my own : but for this fear I should perhaps have attempted to snatch from God a soul which I believed wholly devoted to him . '


` Two months are now elapsed , since in obedience to a regulation of our holy founder , who was desirous by a continual idea of death , to sanctify the lives of his religious , we have been obliged each to dig his own grave .
I followed as usual him to whom I was attached by ties so shameful .
The sight of his grave , the ardour with which he dug it , pierced my heart with such an excess of sorrow , that I was obliged to leave him , and retire to the most unfrequented part of the wood , to give free course to my tears .
From that moment I was in continual apprehensions of losing him  the idea of his death was ever present to my mind  my tenderness increased , I followed him every where  and if I was some hours of the day without seeing him , I feared I should never see him more . '


` But now the happy moment arrived when God was pleased to draw me to himself .
I went with the man my soul so fondly loved , into the forest to get wood for the use of the house  after some time spent in this employment , I perceived that  my companion had left me : anxious and uneasy at his absence , I could not help going to seek for him .
After having wandered through great part of the forest , I saw him at length in one of the most retired parts of it , employed in gazing earnestly upon something he had taken from his bosom : he was in so profound a revery , that I came up close to him , and had leisure to look upon what he held in his hand , without his perceiving me .
How great was my astonishment when I saw it was my own picture ! '


' I was now sensible , that far from enjoying that quiet I had been so unwilling to interrupt , he was like me , the miserable victim of a criminal passion .
I saw the powerful hand of God ready to fall upon him  that fatal passion which I had carried with me even to the foot of his altar , seemed to have drawn the vengeance of heaven upon him who was the object of it . '


` Full of this terrifying idea I came to prostrate myself before those altars  I implored of God my own conversion , in order to obtain that of my lover .
Yes , oh my God , it was for him that I offered up my supplications to thee !
for him I shed tears of remorse and grief  it was the desire of his salvation that brought me to thee .
Thou hadst compassion upon my weakness  my prayer , profane as it was , thou didst not reject : my heart became sensible of the healing power of thy grace : from that blissful moment I experienced the peace of a soul which is with thee , and desires only thee  thou wast pleased to purify me by sufferings  I was seized with sickness  soon after .
If the partner of my wild affections still groans under the weight of his profane passion , let him cast his eyes upon me : let him view the wretch whom he has so madly loved : let him reflect upon that tremendous moment to which I am now arrived , and to which he shall shortly arrive .
Oh , let him seek God ere he has silenced his mercy to listen only to his justice .
But I feel the time of my last sacrifice approaching .
I beseech these holy religious to offer up their prayers for my departing soul .
I humbly intreat their pardon for the offence I have given them , and I acknowledge myself unworthy to partake of their sepulchre . '


The sound of that adored voice , now undisguised , and always present to my remembrance , made me know Adelaida at the first words she pronounced .
What language can convey an idea of what I then felt !
all that the most ardent love , all that the tenderest companion , all that the most poignant grief , and wildest despair could inspire , tore my distracted soul that moment .
I was prostrate on the ground , like the other religious , while she was speaking : the fear of losing any one of her words restrained my cries  but when I found , that in uttering the last she had expired , the house ecchoed with my agonizing shrieks .


The religious running to me raised me from the ground  I tore myself put of their arms , flew to the corps of Adelaida , and kneeling down beside it , I bathed one of her lifeless hands with my tears . '
I have lost you then a second time , my dear Adelaida , cried I , and I have lost you for  ever .
What !
have you been so long with me , and did not my ungrateful heart acknowledge you ?
but we will never more be separated : death , added I , folding her in my arms , death , less cruel than my inexorable father , shall now , in spite of him , unite us for ever . '


True piety is never severe .
The father abbot , moved at this light , endeavoured by the tenderest condolences , and the most holy exhortations to soften my grief , and prevail upon me to abandon the corps of Adelaida , which I held fast locked in my arms : finding me deaf to all he could urge , he was obliged to use force  they dragged me from the lovely body into my own cell , whither the father-abbot followed me : he staid with me the whole night , vainly attempting to calm my mind , my despair was increased by the consolations he offered me .


` Give me Adelaida , said I , why have you separated us ?
oh , why did not my soul take its flight with hers ?
Alas !
I can live no longer in a place where I have lost her , and where she suffered so many miseries .
Permit me , added I , throwing myself at his feet , permit me to leave this cloister  what will you do with a miserable wretch whose despair will trouble your repose ?
suffer me to retire to some other solitude , there to wait for a final end to all my sorrows .
My dear Adelaida will obtain of God that my penitence and prayers may be affectual for my salvation : and oh , father , do not refuse my last request , promise me that the same tomb shall unite our ashes , and I in return engage not to  hasten that moment which my soul so ardently pants after . '


The father-abbot moved with compassion for my misfortunes , and perhaps desirous of removing from the eyes of his religious , an object which gave so much scandal to their piety , granted my request , and promised to do what I desired .
I left the convent that moment , and came to this solitary wild , where I have lived several years , having no other consolation than that of weeping for what I have lost .


30 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONTINUED .


 30.1 .
Indirect Instructions , and that Children ought not to be urged .


THE simple pleasures are less poignant , less affecting it is true , the others transport the soul , as they stir the springs of the passions  but the first are most eligible , seeing they afford an equal and durable satisfaction without any evil consequences .
They are always benign , whereas those others resemble adulterated wines , that please the palate indeed more than the genuine , but create a thirst and hurt the health  in like manner the temperament of the soul is damaged by a pursuit after pleasures of a quick and poignant nature .


All that we can do for children entrusted to our care , is to use them to a plain way of life , to fortify the habit of it in them for as long as we can  to give them timely apprehensions of the inconveniences consequent to other sorts of pleasure , and never to leave them to their own conduct , as is generally done , just at the time when the passions begin to make themselves be felt , and when , of  consequence , there is the greatest necessity for restraint .


It must be confessed , that of all the pains of educating none is comparable to that of bringing up a child who is deficient in sensibility : lively and sensible tempers are subject to terrible deviations  passion and presumption hurry them away , nevertheless have they great resources , and frequently are seen to come back , after having ran great lengths .
Instruction is in them a concealed bud that shoots out and some times bears fruit , when experience brings its assistance to reason , and the passions are grown cool  at least one finds something in them , by which to make them attentive and awaken their curiosity  something whereby to interest them in what we would teach , and to affect their sense of honour  whereas we have no hold upon indolent tempers , their thoughts are but the wandering of the mind , they are never where they ought to be  there is no touching them to the quick , even by correction  they hear all , they feel nothing .
This indolence make the child negligent , and disgusted with every thing he does  here it is that the best scheme of education runs the risk of failing , in case great diligence is not used to obviate the evil from their earliest infancy .


Many people that do not fathom deep enough , conclude from this ill success , that it is nature which performs all in making men of merit , education nothing  whereas , the true conclusion should be , that some tempers ate like some ungrateful soils , upon which cultivation has but small effect  and the matter is made worse when these edecations so difficult  to accomplish are obstructed , or neglected , or badly regulated in the first outset .


Further than this we ought to observe that there are some sorts of tempers which we are apt greatly to mistake  they appear at first pretty and promising , because the early graces of infancy throw a lustre over all : there is an inexpressible something of the tender and amiable , that keeps us off from a close examination of the composition of features  every instance of wit in them surprises , because not expected at that age  all the faultiness of judgment is excused , and carries the grace of ingenuousness  we mistake a certain corporeal vivacity , which never fails to appear in children for mental .
Hence it is that infancy seems to promise so much and yields so little .
One has been remarkable for his wit at five years old , and in proportion as he grew up , fallen into obscurity or contempt .


Of all the qualities of children , there is but one to be depended on , that is , a good reasoning faculty  this grows up with them , provided it be cultivated  the graces of infancy will fade , the vivacity decay , nay the tenderness of heart often be lost , forasmuch as the passions and converse with a designing world , insensibly harden young people , as they come forward on the stage of life .


Try then to discover , beyond these graces of infancy , whether the disposition which you have to direct , be void of curiosity , or too little sensible to generous emulation .
Should this be the case , it is scarce possible but that every person engaged in his education , will quickly be discouraged at so fruitless so knotty a task  wherefore we should endeavour  immediately to put in motion every spring of the soul of that child , in order to rouze him from his lethargy .
Whenever you perceive this difficulty , do not attempt a series of instruction  take great care not to load his memory , this is what would amaze and oppress the brain  fatigue him not with rules and restrictions  spirit him up , far he is fallen into the contrary extreme to presumption  fear not to demonstrate to him , with discretion , what he is capable of doing  be pleased with a little  make him observe even his smallest success  represent to him how needlesly he was afraid of miscarrying in things that he performs well  set emulation to work  jealousy is more prevalent in children than one would imagine , one may see some of them growing lean and pining with a secret anguish , because others are more loved or more caressed than themselves .
It is a cruelty too commonly found among mothers , to make them suffer this torment  nevertheless , on pressing occasions , we ought to be skilled in the use of this antidote to indolence .
Shew the child other children that hardly do better than he  for examples disproportioned to his weakness would discourage him utterly : from time to time give him little victories over his rivals  bring him , if possible , to laugh freely with you at his own timidity  point out some as fearful as himself that have got the better of their disposition  inform him , but indirectly , as it were speaking of others , that want of courage , and idleness , sti [ ... ] le the soul  that the listless , and the inattentive , whatever genius they may have , destroy their own faculties and degrade themselves .


 But beware of speaking with an austere and impatient tone of voice  for nothing so confounds a dull and faint-hearted child as harshness  on the contrary , bend all your care to season with ease and pleasure proportionable to his temper every task you desire he should perform  and perhaps upon proper occasions it would not be amiss to irritate him by some degree of contempt , and some reproaches , but not by yourself in person  let another do it , an inferior , or another child , without your seeming to know what passes .


St. Austin relates , that one single reproach of a servant wench cast upon his mother Monica when a girl , so shocked her , as immediately to make her leave off drinking wine unmixed , a bad habit which not all the violence and severity of her governess had been able to keep her from : in short , we must endeavour to raise up a taste in the minds of these kind of children , in like manner as is practised with regard to the palates of some sick people  these are permitted to try every thing to cure their want of relish  their fancies are complied with , even at the expence of propriety of physical rule , provided they do not run to a dangerous excess .
It is much more difficult to inspire with a taste those who are without one , than to regulate it in others where it is not such as it ought to be .


There is another sort of sensibility , which to excite is still more difficult , and more important , and that is friendship  the moment a child is capable , no time should be lost in turning his affections towards their proper objects , persons who will be of service to him .


 By friendship he will be led to every thing that can be desired of him : it is a sure attachment to draw him to his good , provided we know how to make use of it : all that is to be feared is either too excessive , or ill-placed affections .


But there are other children that are born politic , close , unconcerned , but drawing every thing secretly to their own ends : they deceive their parents , whose tenderness makes them credulous  they pretend to love them  they study their inclinations , in order to conform to them  they seem more docile than other children of their age , who act without disguise , as it were upon honour  their suppleness , while it conceals a stubborn self-will , has the appearance of true and innate gentleness  and their real temper , long dissembled , does not entirely display itself till the opportunity of reforming it is past and gone .


If there is a temper upon which education can have no effect , we may say this is it  and at the same time must own , that the number of such is greater than will be easily imagined .
Parents can not quickly come into the belief that their child has a bad heart  and what they will not see themselves , no others will have the courage to try to convince them of , and thus the evil augments continually  the principal remedy would be , to give them entire liberty from their earliest infancy of shewing their disposition : before we correct we must know them thoroughly .
Naturally , they are plain and open  but , constrain them never so little , give them but an example of disguise , they never come back to the original simplicity .
True  it is , that God alone bestoweth a tender and good heart : we can but incite , by examples of generosity , by maxims of honesty and disinterestedness , by manifesting contempt for persons guilty of too much self-love .


We must endeavour , before they have parted with this first simplicity of the most natural motions of the mind , to give them a taste for cordial and reciprocal friendship .
This purpose can not be better promoted than by bringing such persons about them as shall never display any thing harsh , false , low , or interested .
It would be right again to command them for any thing they have done out of friendship , provided it be not very wrong placed or carried too far .
Their parents likewise should appear full of love and kindness for them  for children often learn of their own parents to love nothing : and besides all this , I am even for cutting off , in their presence , all superfluous compliments to friends , and all sorts of false caresses , as from whence they get a custom of paying with empty shews , persons they ought really to love .
There is a defect quite contrary to this we have been speaking of , and which is often to be found in a young woman , and that is , to interest themselves passionately in matters merely indifferent .
They can not see two persons at variance without heartily espousing one side or the other  their affections and aversions run high without proper grounds : in the party they happen to esteem , they can see no defects , in whom they happen to dislike , no one good quality .
Now this is not to be directly opposed  for contradiction makes these fancies  more obstinate  but we must remark by little and little , to the young person , that we are better acquainted than her with every good quality of her favourite , and with every bad one of the object of her dislike : at the same time , take care to point out , as occasion serves , the inconvenience of some defects in the agreeable person , as well as the convenience of certain advantageous qualities to be found in the person under her displeasure .
Do not press the matter , you will find she will come to of herself .


This done , lay before her consideration her strong prejudices in their most unreasonable circumstances , and say gently , that she will hereafter be as sensible of others which at present prevail with her , when they have had their course .


Relate similar mistakes of your own at her time of life  but principally demonstrate , as clearly as you are able , the great mixture of good and evil in every object of our love or hatred , thereby to abate the intenseness of her friendships and aversions .


As to rewards which you shall promise children , never let them consist in matters of dress , or any trifling ornaments , it is doing them a double mischief  first giving them an esteem for what they ought to despise , and secondly disabling yourself from establishing such things for rewards as would in their nature assist your endeavours .
Be very careful not to threaten them , with obliging them to study , and keeping them under certain rules : let as little as possible be said about rules  and when there is no avoiding such a practice , let us get  into it , without giving any name , but only a reason drawn from convenience for doing so and so at one certain time , or in one place rather than another .


Were we never to praise children when they do well , there would be a hazard of discouraging them  therefore , although praise is somewhat dangerous , on account of conceit , we must venture to make use of it , so far as may animate without making them giddy .


We see that St. Paul , to encourage the weak , frequently intermixes commendations , that his rebukes may be more readily received - the fathers of the church do the same .
It is true , to render them useful , it is necessary so to qualify them as to keep clear of exaggeration or flattery , referring every good to God , as the only source thereof .


Recompense children we may by means of innocent plays that have some ingenuity in them  by walking out with them  by improving conversation  by little presents given like so many prizes , such as pictures or prints , or medals , or geographical cartes , or books prettily bound and gilt .


[ To be continued . ]
31 .
ESSAY ON THE Original Inhabitants of Great Britain , CONCLUDED .


 HAVING gone through the whole state of the heptarchy , I find , upon a retrospect of that government , that although particular princes are mentioned and particular atchievements are recited , there still seems wanting a chart of the whole , that at one view may give a list and description of the monarchs , their reigns , and their religion .
Such a map is exhibited in Mr , Guthrie 's History of England , vol .
I. page 126 .


How much is it to be regretted , that among such a number of monarchs , so few acts of greatness , policy , jurisprudence appear ?
how intricate and dark , how teizing and immaterial are the several historical accounts , from the invasion of Julius Caesar , to the reign of Egbert , king of the West Saxons , and afterwards sole king of England ?
The history of the Pagans during that period , produces nothing but blood and slaughter .
The history of the christian church , nothing but ridiculous miracles and fulsome enthusiasm .
All we perceive is , that the several monarchies were continually at war with each other  the motives and incitement of these wars scarce ever appear .
We know that  there was a general assembly , consisting of the chief and greatest men in each kingdom : we know that it was called the Wittenagemot , and in that assembly were debated , regulated , and ordered , the affairs of the nation .
Such a glimmering of light is very pleasing , as it seems to shew us the rise and bulwark of our freedom , a parliament .
This is almost the only interesting point of the heptarchy .
The tedious narratives of privileges , revenues , and immunities granted to the church , the endowments of monasteries , and the power of the clergy , are not only unprofitable and disgusting , but totally useless and despicable : at least they must appear so to these times , when the pope can scarce keep up his authority among the roman catholic states .
When his power as a prince is no longer dreaded , and his power as a pope held in a very diminutive degree of veneration .
When , on the other hand , sense , liberty , industry , and courage , unite and coincide to fortify , preserve , and augment the present glorious and happy state of England .


32 .
THE HISTORY OF THE PRINCESS PADMANI .


 AKEBAR , the seventh emperor of the Moguls , inherited the virtues and the courage of the illustrious Tamerlane : all the good qualities of the Mogul princes seemed to be united in his person , almost without a mixture of those vices which make us look upon them as barbarians .
There has scarce been known a prince of a more penetrating and extensive judgment , of a more generous and intrepid soul , and at the same time , tender , compassionate , and grateful .


Among the many triumphs that marked his glorious reign , the reduction of Chitor was not the least considerable .
An Indian Raja , or prince of the race of the famous Rana , who had formerly submitted to the power of Tamerlane , gave umbrage to Akebar , who could not endure that he should hold a kind of sovereignty in his neighbourhood .


This prince was called Rana , after the name of his ancestors , and boasted of being lineally descended from the antient Porus .
The territories of the Raja were not above twelve days journey from Dely  Chitor , the capital of his country , was  rather a fortress than a town of trade : it is situated on a high mountain , surrounded with water on every side , in the midst of a vast plain .
The top of the mountain on which the town is built is a flat .
It is about a league and a half in circumference , and half a league over in some places .
At the foot of the mountain , the Nug , a pretty large river , and very deep , glides gently along , a rivulet of the best water in the world takes its source in the town , makes a great many windings within it , and at last having formed several natural cascades on the break of the mountain , throws itself into the river .
Within the compass of the fortress are several beautiful fields sowed with rice , and watered by the overflowings of the rivulet .
It affords provisions enough to supply a tolerable large garrison .
A place inaccessible , which wants neither victuals nor water , passes in the Indies for impregnable .
However this was the place which Akebar undertook to conquer .


This young emperor 's passion for the princess Padmani , the wise of Rana , represented that enterprize easy to him , which every one else thought impracticable .
Before he would attempt so dangerous a siege , Akebar , by his ambassadors , let Rana understand , that ambition alone was not the motive of this undertaking , and that he might preserve his country from the ruin which threatned it , by giving up the most beautiful princess of the East , to the most potent monarch of the world .


A proposal of this kind is not so mocking in the Indies , as it would be in Europe , their laws allow divorce  however , Rana had too much tenderness for Padmani , to part with her to a rival , and would  hear nothing more upon that subject but the dictates of his own valour and the tears of his wife .


` Can you find in your heart to abandon me , ( says the virtuous princess , ) to a tyrant whom I detest ?
have we not strength enough in Chitor to consume your enemy 's forces , and extinguish his flame , by the length of a fruitless siege ?
at worst , if I must lose my life , I will lose it without regret , provided I am not so unhappy as to survive you . '


Words so moving , determined Rana to prefer an honourable war , to an ignominious peace .
He answered the ambassador of Akebar , that he would not advise his master to sit down before Chitor  but if his passion had the ascendant over his reason , Akebar should find in the person of Rana , a true Ragepute , capable of maintaining his rights , and incapable of violating his faith to Padmani .


The emperor was surprised at so haughty a reply  he was not accustomed to meet with any opposition to his will , or be crossed in his designs .
` Can it be possible , cried he , that there is a man upon earth that dares disobey me ? '
He quickly assembled his victorious troops , which had newly conquered two kingdoms .


Nor was Rana less adive , but made preparations for maintaining a long siege in Chitor : he rouzed up , by his ambassadors , the slothful Rajas in his neighbourhood : he gave them to understand , that their negligence must soon expose them to the tyranny of a Mahometan  that the Moguls were a race of people but lately arrived in the Indies ,  and who grew formidable only by the divisions of the Indians  that if the princes , votaries of Brama , would unite against the sectaries of Mahomet , they might easily destroy them .


Jamee and Tala , both Rajas , and princes of two provinces bordering on Chitor , joined their troops to those of Rana , and came in person to make war against Akebar .
They appeared in the field at the head of their armies  but the Mogul , who advanced by long marches towards Chitor , quickly dispersed them .
The two brothers had no other remedy but that of retiring into the strong places of their provinces , and there expect the enemy , whose forces they were not able to withstand in the field .


Never was there seen in Indostan a finer nor a more numerous army than that of the Mogul : he spared no cost to shew himself before Chitor in the utmost splendor .
The richness of his tents is hardly to be conceived by us in Europe  all was gold about them .
He thought , by his magnificent equipage , to dazzle the Princess Padmani , and by the number of his troops to frighten Rana into submission .


Akebar found by experience , that virtue and valour are sometimes proof against the greatest hopes or the greatest fears .
The gallant Indians beheld without emotion , from the top of their mountain , the magnificence and prodigious extent of the enemy 's camp .
The Mogul in the beginning of the siege , acted at once the soldier and the lover : he shot arrows into the town which ried letters for Padmani  the princess took no notice  of them : he pushed the siege like one in despair .
He fired terribly upon the place from several batteries  but his cannon shooting upwards , had little or no effect .


The Indians from their ramparts insulted the Mahometans , and reproached them with their want of bravery , though animated to the fight by more passions than one .


A Portuguese historian tells us , that the siege of Troy was acted over again in that of Chitor : he adds , that it lasted twelve years , and that Padmani had time to grow old , while the Mogul endeavoured to win her by his arms This is an exaggeration which the Mogul Chronocle does not confirm .
The siege lasted at most but two years , and then concluded by a very extraordinary adventure .


Akebar , wearied out by so obstinate a resistance , made shew of raising the siege of Chitor , and wrote to Rana a very obliging artful letter .
He commended the Raja for his courage , but desired he would grant him two favours , before he quitted an enterprize which he had undertaken to his confusion  first , that the Raja would give him a sight of the princess , whom he had not known but by public same  next , that he would permit him to go into Chitor , and see the only place in the world capable of resisting his power .


The Raja granted him the second demand very freely , but refused the first .
He contented that the Mogul should enter Chitor , attended by only fifty of his officers , but would not promise that he should see Padmani .


 Akebar , accepted the Raja 's offer  and having received hostages for the security of his person , he entered Chitor with a smaller number of attendants than was allowed him .
The emperor received from Rana all the respect and all the distinction due to his rank .
He was regaled in the palace after the Indian manner .
The entertainment was civil on both sides  but Akebar , who possessed the most persuasive eloquence , had the art to make Rana grant him more than he had promised .
When he saw the Indian warmed with wine , he intreated him to send for Padmani for one moment .
The Raja was willing , but they had great difficulty to get the princess to consent .
At last in compliance to her husband , she shewed herself , but disappeared in an instant .
This indiscretion of Rana cost him dear : Akebar 's passion was much more inflamed upon sight of the princess , however he had command enough over himself to dissemble it : he made Rana believe that he was resolved to raise the siege from a place which had already given him but too much trouble , and prudently forbore to intermix in his discourse any praises of Padmani , but such as were cold and indifferent .


Rana , thus deceived by appearances , treated his most cruel enemy without the least distrust : he received his presents , and gave him others in return .
Akebar bestowed on the prince a scymetar adorned with diamonds , and Rana made the emperor accept of some jewels , and now the hour of their parting drew near .
Akebar walked towards the gate of the fortress , followed only by forty of his attendants  Rana , to shew his respect , insisted upon waiting on  him to the gate .
During their walk , Akebar renewed his kind protestations .
At last they came to the gate of the fortress , where the Mogul , as a farther testimony of his friendship , would put about the neck of Rana one of those large pearl necklaces which in India the men wear as well as the women .
He took care to string it with some of the strongest twist  and dragged him by this collar out of the gate , while his forty soldiers opposed the guard , who made a motion to rescue their prince .
The Mogul forced the Indian to mount a horse  and after having received some discharges from the musquets on the ramparts , they conducted Rana alive to the emperor 's camp .


In the mean time the uproar made at the gate put the whole town into a consternation : the people thought the enemy had surprised it  and certainly had the Mogul been but a little better provided with an armed force to second his design , he might easily have carried the place .


Fame , which ever magnifies , brought to Padmani 's ears the news of a sudden eruption of the enemy , and that her husband was missing in the tumult .
The gallant princess did not suffer herself to be overwhelmed with this unexpected disaster  she immediately got on horseback , and with her lance in her hand , appeared at the head of her troops , resolved to conquer or die .
She did not learn the truth of Akebar 's treachery , and the forcing away of Rana , till she came upon the very spot : she perceived plainly enough that she had been the true cause of his misfortune , but she thought sit to conceal that part .
` He is dead , she cried , that , dearest husband is dead , whom my  tenderness has undone .
Let us think no more of recovering him by a dishonourable composition , but revenge his death by seeing the authors of it fall in heaps about us . '


Padmani , without shedding a tear , though pierced with the sharpest sorrow , walked round the ramparts , gave all the necessary orders , encouraged the soldiers , and animated the principal leaders .
In fine , she shewed herself as much superior to the men in prudence and courage , as she surpassed in beauty all those of her own sex .


Akebar had now flattered himself that he should quickly become master of the fortress , and gave the besieged to understand , that if they did not deliver up the place , and the princess , he would first cause Rana 's head to be struck off , and conclude his revenge by sacking the town , and putting the inhabitants to the sword .
The brave Amazon answered , that her husband having fallen into the hands of a perjured man , she was no longer in doubt of his death  but still there remained Rageputes enough of his nation to revenge their sovereign : that for her part , she would employ all the authority heaven had given her over her people , to raise up to the Mogul enemies yet more formidable than Rana  and that the principal leaders of her army had sworn to lose their lives rather than surrender the place .


Akebar was not ignorant of the firmness of the Rageputes in all their resolutions  he chose therefore to raise the siege , and endeavour to obtain the princess by way of negotiation .
An ambassador was sent to Padmani , loaded with rich presents , and the most passionate letters , Akebar  represented to the princess , that she had given proofs enough of the fidelity due to her husband  that it was now time to make some condescension in favour of a great emperor , and her own interest  that her tenderness for Rana could not better appear than by procuring the liberty of her captive husband  that by redeeming Rana from his captivity , she might make herself the greatest queen in the world .


They shewed her at the same time letters extorted from the captive prince , in which he conjured her to make herself happy by setting him at liberty .
The heroine rightly apprehended , that Rana 's was only a forced consent , and that her own glory depended upon an inviolable fidelity to him  yet she thought it not unlawful to play the hypocrite , and deceive a deceiver , who had robbed her of her husband .
She let the Mogul understand , that she began to waver in her resolution , and that ambition had shaken her constancy  that if her vows did not bind her indispensibly to Rana , she would think herself happy in being sultaness to so great a prince  but that she had sworn to her first husband , by all their gods , that she would never be the wife of another , without an express consent from his own mouth  that the emperor might chuse either to suffer Rana to come to Chitor , or permit Padmani to go and demand her husband 's consent , in the place of his captivity .


Akebar embraced the last proposal , and consented to let the princess come with a good guard to pay her husband a visit .
A castle in the neighbourhood of Agra was Rana 's prison : it is impossible  to express the impatience of Akebar for the arrival of a princess at his capital for whom he had expended such vast treasures , and exposed himself to so many dangers .
Couriers upon couriers were dispatched to entreat her not to defer her departure .
The emperor sent her presents every hour of jewels , fruits , and a mysterious kind of nosegays , which are made use of in the east to express , by matching of flowers , the sentiments of the heart .


The princese got ready her equipage with all possible speed  the most sumptuous pallanquins were prepared for her journey .
These are a kind of Indian chaises , in which people of quality are carried on the shoulders of ten or a dozen slaves  they are long enough to sleep in , as in a litter : those for the men are open at top  but the women 's are close , and of a much larger size .
Four may sit conveniently in one of them  so that there is need of twenty slaves to bear those in which the princesses are carried .


Padmani shut up eight of the bravest of her subjects in the two pallanquins , and enjoined them a profound silence during the journey  for her own part she remained at Chitor , and sent away the pallanquins with a good guard .
The project was executed with so much secrecy that the whole town was deceived .
The people were all in tears at the supposed departure of their princess , and followed the pallanquins in crouds out of the town .
Mean time Padmani keeping very private in her palace , had the pleasure to see the sorrow of her people for their imaginary loss .


 As soon as the emperor was informed that the princess was set out for Agra , he appointed several persons to meet and compliment her .
The princess 's first eunuch , who managed the intrigue , and was shut up in the pallanquin , in which the princess was supposed to be , made answers for her .
Among other things , he let the emperor know , in the name of Padmani , that if she met with the least interruption in her journey , or was hindered from proceeding directly to her husband , without going through the capital  or even , if she was disturbed in her conversation with Rana , that she was determined to stab herself with a dagger which she brought for that purpose , and held ready in her hand for fear of any surprise .


Akebar had not a thought of making the least opposition to the princess 's will .
He sent her word , that she should be at full liberty to see Rana , to discourse with him , and bid him adieu .
The nearer the pallanquins approached Agra , the more couriers were dispatched to wait on them .
They were met by them at every village , and still the eunuch gave answers to the letters of Akebar .
About half a day 's journey from Agra , and three or four leagues from the castle where Rana was prisoner , they met a magnificent equipage , which the emperor had sent to receive the princess .
The Rageputes arrived about the evening at the place where Rana was prisoner .


The two pallanquins only , and some officers of Padmani 's guard , were permitted to enter the castle  these officers , together with the Rageputes shut up in the pallanquins , dispatched the governor of the castle , who first advanced to receive the princess   afterwards becoming matters of the guard , they delivered Rana from his imprisonment .
They mounted him on a very fleet horse  and , as they had posted change enough on the road , the raja soon arrived at Chitor , where he made Padmani all the acknowledgments due to his deliverer .


Mean time Akebar was waiting impatiently in a garden for the arrival of the princess .
When word was brought him that Rana had made his escape , and that some armed men had been concealed in the pallanquins instead of Padmani , he commanded the messenger 's head to be struck off who brought this news  but coming to himself a moment after , he was contented to forbid him his presence for ever .
`` Pursue , pursue Rana , '' cries he  but Rana was got too far on his road to be overtaken .
As to the Rageputes , who had served as a convoy to the pallanquins , after having marched all night with great expedition , they found themselves about the morning in the territories of a raja , and a friend to the prince of Chitor , and at last got safe into their own country .


As soon as Rana was returned to his fortress , he wrote an insulting letter to Akebar  he reproached him with his perfidiousness , and rallied him on the ill success of his amours  he haughtily defied him to come a second time to try his fortune against the citadel of Chitor  and added , that after having been baffled and outwitted by a woman , he might very well expect to be vanquished by an army of Rageputes , who waited his arrival with impatience .
Rana did more than insult his enemy with letters  he erected in the market-place of Chitor a pillar , on which were engraven these words , Never trust the Moguls who have betrayed you .


 The behaviour of Rana , and the indifference of the princess Padmani , provoked Akebar to such a degree , that he was no longer master of himself .
Once more he assembled his troops  he augmented his artillery  he prepared machines  in a word , he made such provision for the siege of Chitor , that he believed the taking of it infallible .
In this assurance he surrounded the place on every side  he raised platforms , on which he planted his engines : the assaults were furious , and were equally sustained .


The Mogul was now no more that amorous prince , who seemed tender of the lives of his princess 's people  but an emperor enraged to the last degree , who came to avenge a personal affront .
The two principals were continually attentive  one to push the siege , and the other to defeat it .
Rana scarce ever quitted the ramparts , where he encouraged his men , and repaired the breaches .
Akebar , on his side , often mounted the platforms , and gave his orders for forming the attacks .
One day as Akebar was taking a view of the place from one of those platforms , almost equal in heighth with the walls of Chitor , he perceived an officer walking carelesly on the ramparts  he took aim with his fusee , and shot the raja dead upon the spot .
Two days after the emperor had an account that he had killed his rival  that his body was burned in great pomp  and that the generous Padmani , according to the custom of the Ragepute princesses , had thrown herself into the flames , and mingled her ashes with those of her husband .
Chitor still made some resistance  but at last was forced to yield to the valour and fortune of Akebar .


33 .
THE LADY 's GEOGRAPHY .


 33.1 .
DESCRIPTION of the Island of CEYLON .
[ Continued from Page 480 . ]


THIS country , though mountainous , is watered by a great number of very fine rivers which fall from the mountains : - most of them are too full of rocks to be navigable , but they contain fish in great abundance .
The river of Mavelagongue , which is the principal of them , has its source in the Picus Adami , of which we shall give a description hereafter  it traverses the whole island towards the north , and falls into the sea at Trinquemale .
Its breadth is about a cross bow shot : the rocks , which render it very little navigable , afford harbour and retreat to a great number of alligators .
It runs within a quarter of a league of the town of Candi  but as the rapidity of its waters will not admit of any bridge being built over it , it can only be crossed in little canoes .
It is moreover a point of policy amongst the inhabitants , who are far from desirous to render travelling commodious in their country  but rather chuse to embarrass the roads as much as possible .
In some places this river flows for leagues together without meeting any interruption from the rocks .
But the Ceylonese in general reap very little advantages from the waters , either in the way of commerce , or for the conveyance of goods .


 Excepting the province of Ouvah , and the districts of Oudipollat and Dolusbang , the whole island is covered with wood .
It is well peopled about the centre , but very indifferently towards the borders .
The inhabitants do indeed shew many places where they pretend heretofore to have had very considerable cities , the names of which the places retain to this day  but there are scarcely the vestiges of any buildings remaining in them .
Knox , who traversed the island several times , takes notice of only five which can deserve that title  and in which the king has palaces , although they are all in ruins , excepting that which he particularly inhabits .
Of these cities Candi , or Conde , is the chief .
It has the advantage of being placed in the centre of the island  so that it may be approached with equal facility from every part of it .
Its form is triangular  and , according to the custom of the country , the king 's palace occupies the eastern angle of it .
It is fortified only to the south , because the access to it is more open there than from any other quarter .
This fortification , however , is nothing more than a rampart of earth about twenty feet high , which crosses the valley from one mountain to another .
All the avenues to the city , for two or three miles distance , are closed up with barriers of thorn , and a continual guard always kept at them  and the great river which comes down from the Picus Adami , passes within a quarter of a league of it towards the south .


The next city is Nellemby-neur , about twelve miles south of the preceding .
Allout-neur stands to the north-east of Candi , where the king keeps  large magazines of corn and rice in reserve against the time of war .
Badoula , which is the fourth city , is two days journey from Candi , towards the east of the province of Ouvah .
In this province the best tobacco in the island is cultivated : it is very well watered  but wood is scarce in it .
Rice and cattle , however , are in abundance in it  with respect to which , however , this very singular circumstance is observable , that the cattle reared there can not live for any considerable time when transported into any other province : the occasion of which , is attributed to a certain shrub , which is found in all the other provinces , and not in this .


The fifth and last of these cities is Digligyneur , situated also to the east of Candi .
In this city the king has kept his court ever since the year 1664 , when a revolt of his subjects drove him to quit Candi  and with his departure began the ruin of that city .
It is situated in the province of Hevoiattay , a country which is covered with mountains and rocks , that render the soil of it extremely infertile .
Yet has the king chosen it for his residence , as a place of security , by being in the neighbourhood of a very high mountain called Gauldua , which may , on any occasion , afford him a safe retreat  and where as much rice may be gathered as will amply maintain the garrison of three forts , which defend the entrance to it .
It is extremely sleep on all sides  and so invested with rocks , woods , and precipices , that a handful of men might stand their ground there against very numerous armies .


 As to the towns and villages of Ceylon , altho ' they are very numerous , there are few of them that are worth a traveller 's attention .
The most remarkable are those which are consecrated to their idols , in which some of their Devals , or temples , may be seen .
The inhabitants give themselves very little trouble about making their streets strait , or preserving any regularity in their houses  each family living in a seperate building , which is most usually surrounded with a hedge and ditch .
The Ceylonese never build in the high road , as they do not chuse to be observed by passengers .
Their largest villages do not contain above a hundred houses .
Their usual number is about forty or fifty , although there are some which consist of only eight or ten .
Besides which , they quit them whenever sickness happens to be in any degree frequent amongst them , or that two or three people chance to die within any small space of time .
They then imagine that the devil has taken possession of the place , and therefore immediately abandon their lands and habitations , in order to go in search of some more fortunate dwelling .


The king 's palace at Digligy-neur , is surrounded with a rampart of earth , cased with thatch , to prevent the rain 's beating it down .
This inclosure is full of various irregular buildings , most of them low , and covered with stubble , excepting some few , whose roofs are tiled .
These latter have two stories , with open galleries round them to let in air , surrounded with ballusters , some of ebony , and others of painted wood .
The windows also are inlaid with plates of silver and ebony  and the top of each edifice adorned with vases  of earth , or moresque .
These several buildings form a kind of labyrinth , to which there are a great number of very handsome gates , two of which have draw-bridges to them .
The porticoes of these are of a most admirable relief  and , even to the very locks and bolts , are decorated with carved work .
At each of these doors , and at every passage , are placed centinels , which are regularly relieved day and night .


The common houses of the inhabitants are little , low , and thatched .
Nor are they allowed to build them with more than one story , nor to cover them with tiles , nor even to whiten the walls of them with lime , though they have a kind of white clay which they might employ with advantage to this use .
As the country is very hot , they for the most part neglect the plaistering of their walls , contenting themselves with the branches and leaves of trees .
They have not even chimneys in their houses , but make what fire is necessary for the preparation of their victuals , in a corner of their apartment , which blackens the floor very much .
The grandees have houses very handsome and commodious , consisting for the most part of two buildings opposite to each other , and united by a wall , which forms a square court .
These walls are surrounded with borders of clay , rubbed over with cow dung , which renders them impenetrable by the rain .
Their domestics and slaves inhabit the houses round them .


As to the temperature of the air , it is very unwholsome in the southern parts , though all the rest of the country enjoys a very pure and healthy air .
The vallies are , for the most part , marshy ,  and full of fine springs .
Those which have these qualities are looked on as the best , because the rice , which is the principal subsistence of the inhabitants , requires a great deal of moisture .


The variety which is observed in the air and rains in the different parts of this island are very remarkable : - when the west winds begin to blow , the western parts have great falls of rain , and this is the proper season to plough and till the ground  and yet at the very same time the eastern parts of the island enjoy very dry weather , and gather in their harvest : - On the contrary , when the wind blows from the east , they plough and till in the easterly parts , and gather in the corn in the opposite ones , towards the west .
- Thus the business of ploughing and harvest employs the islanders almost all the year round in different seasons of the year .


This division of rain and drought is made about the middle of the island  and it frequently happens that there is rain on one side of the mountain of Cauragahing , whilst it is extremely hot and dry on the other side of it .
It is also remarked , that this difference is no less violent than it is sudden : for on the quitting a very wet spot of ground , you shall come immediately into a soil the heat of which shall scorch and burn your feet .


The southern parts of the island , however , are not subject to this great quantity of wet weather : - for there will sometimes continue there for three or four years together so great and constant a drought , that the ground shall be incapable of  receiving any kind of culture .
It is even difficult to dig any wells thereabouts deep enough to get water that can be drank  and even the very best that is to be got retains an acrimony and brackishness , which renders it extremely disagreeable .


On the south of Candi , and at about fourteen or fifteen leagues from Colombo , is a mountain , which is looked on as the highest in the island , and which , from its height and form , which is nearly that of a sugar-loaf , is very distinctly to be seen not only all through the island , but even at upwards of a dozen miles out at sea .
This is the famous Picus Adami , whereof all the travellers , who have ever been in this country , have spoken with so much admiration .
On a large flat stone , which is at the top of it , is an impression resembling that of a man 's foot , but upwards of twice the natural size of one .
The general superstition is , that this mark was left there by the foot of our first parent  from whom therefore the mountain receives its name .
In short , were we to recount all the fabulous things that the Ceylonese introduce in their history of this mountain , it would be only abusing the patience of our fair readers .
- let it suffice then to give a plain description of the place , such as it is , only adding , that these people look on it as a meritorious action to go and pay their adorations to this foot  especially on the first day of the year , which falls with them in the month of March : at which time are to be seen immense processions of men , women , and children , who have undertaken this pilgrimage .


 Before you come then to the foot of the mountain , you meet with a very large and pleasant plain , watered with a great many rills which fall from the Pic , and form at the bottom of it a pool to which the Gentiles frequently make a pilgrimage , never failing to bathe themselves in it , and wash their cloaths and linen also therein , from a persuasion that that water has a virtue to efface all their sins .
After this first act of superstition , they clamber to the top of the mountain , by the assistance of iron chains affixed thereto  and without which it would be impossible to get up , so very steep is it , although there have been steps wrought out in many parts of it .
The way to the top is at least a quarter of a league .
At a certain distance from the summit are erected two stone pillars , surmounted by another stone , which lies across them , and to which is suspended a large bell , made of metal , having its clapper pierced with a hole big enough to pass an iron thong through it , which all the pilgrims are obliged to pull , and striking one stroke on the bell to try whether they are purified  because these idolaters imagine , that if they are not so , the bell will give no sound .
This imaginary misfortune , however , never happens to them .
The summit of the mountain presents a plain surface , of an hundred and fifty paces in length , and an hundred and ten in breadth  in the middle of which is the flat stone which it is said bears the impression of a gigantic human foot , two palms long , and eight inches broad .
There are some trees planted about this stone  and to the left of it are a few huts , whither the pilgrims retire .
On the right  hand there was formerly a very fine pagod , whereof the Ceylonese relate wonders  and Baldeus describes sixty-eight statues and figures , which are to be met with in different cavities of the mountain .
From the Picus Adami , as we have observed before , issue most of the rivers which water the island of Ceylon .


33.2 .
NATURAL HISTORY of CEYLON .


This island produces a great quantity of rice : in the cultivation of which the industry of the inhabitants renders itself extremely conspicuous  for when we come to consider how necessary water is in the culture of that grain , and at the same time recollect that great part of the island is extremely mountainous , it will appear wonderful that it should be so fertile as it is .
The manner , however , that the Ceylonese have contrived for rendering it so , is by levelling the sides of these mountains at certain stages , from three to eight feet in breadth , so as to form a kind of staircase from the bottom of the hill to the uppermost of these stages , in which they sow their rice .
Now as the island is very much visited with rain , and that there is besides a great frequency of springs on the mountains , they have found means to dig large reservoirs nearly on a level with the highest springs  from whence the water is made to fall on the uppermost rows , and from them gradually to the others , so as to keep them continually supplied with water .
Some of these reservoirs are half a league in length , some less , and their depth usually from two to three yards .


 There are several kinds of rice distinguishable in the island of Ceylon , which are defined by different names , although they differ very little in their taste  and indeed scarcely in any thing more than the length of time they take in ripening .
Some is seven months in coming to perfection , whilst some will ripen at six , five , four , or three months end .
That which is soonest ripe is the best tasted  but does not yield so plentifully .
There is even a kind which ripens in dry ground , and is therefore sowed in those places where it is not in the power of art to convey water .
This would be a very great treasure to the inhabitants of the eastern parts , were it not much inferior to the other kinds both in taste and smell .


Besides the rice , this island furnishes various sorts of grain  which , although by no means approaching to it in goodness , are nevertheless a very good resource in times of scarcity .
They have also great quantities of excellent fruits  but they might reap much more advantage from them , if they were sufficiently fond of them , to bestow some care on their cultivation .
But as they pay very little regard to those which have nothing agreeable in them but their taste , and can not serve them by way of food when the grain is at any time deficient , the only trees which they plant are those that produce nutritive fruits .
The other kinds grow of themselves : and what still diminishes the care of the inhabitants , is , that in all places where nature produces any delicious fruits , the officers of the country tie a label round the tree in the king 's name , with three knots at the  end of it  which being done , no one dares touch it , without running the hazard of a very severe punishment , and sometimes even of death .
The fruit when ripe is generally carried in a white linen cloth to the governor of the province  who , selecting the finest , wraps it up in another linen cloth , and sends it to court , keeping the rest for himself , and returning none to the proprietors .


34 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER X. ]


 MADAM ,


IN a life of sixty-four years , alas how times are altered !
when I was young , what dread and reverence were paid to omens , dreams , visions , blue burning candles , knives and forks across each other , salt spilt by aukwardness , and every kind of prognostic that led into the avenues of fate !
The present times , or rather the last twenty years of my existence , treat these important points as trifles .
Owls screech unheard .
I myself dream and repeat my dreams unregarded .
Thieves appear in the watch-lights , and we lose a marrow-spoon the next day  no matter , nothing foretold our loss .
My elder sister ,  bed-rid and very old I confess , assures me , that her curtains have been drawn aside three times within these five weeks , by something in the shape of a dog without a head  but she , poor woman , is looked upon as doating .
Jett , my little spaniel , I am sure , often sees something that comes from the other world  but Jett 's a dog , and can only bark at it .


What a pity it is , madam , that we can not at the same time when we abhor the superstitions of popery , retain that veneration , I had almost said duty , to celestial warnings , which , no longer ago than the protestant reign of good queen Anne , I can very well remember , had an influence over every action of our lives .


It was then , madam , that a winding-sheet in the candle , or a cinder coffin jumping out of the fire , sent many a wicked maid to her prayers and repentance for a whole week together .


It was then , madam , that doctor Aaron Sandford , the star-gazing haberdasher , of Bednal green , and doctor Duncan Campbell , the deaf and dumb conjurer , in Buckingham Court , were followed and revered with as true devotion as the methodists are in these wicked days .


Witches indeed have pretty well kept their ground , notwithstanding the thunder of an act of parliament , and the execution of poor Thomas Colley , only for stifling Ruth Osborne , the witch of Tring , in a pond of water .
It is not six months ago since I read an account in one of the news-papers of a witch in Northumberland .
The best people in the parish assembled to take her  they surrounded  her house boldly , and in a body  they burst open the door , but they found she was flown , probably up the chimney , and upon a broomstick .


My mother and my grandmother have often informed me of many wonderful noises , apparitions , and visions , that have been seen and heard in our family .
My honoured parents were not only pious matrons but great believers  and shall I degenerate ?
All good stars forbid !
yet I foresee that with me must die the usual family-veneration for supernatural causes .


My two grand-daughters are incorrigibly obstinate and careless : they give each other knives and scissars , without considering the consequence , that such kind of instruments invisibly cut love and affection .
Sukey , the eldest , never fails to quit the room as soon as I begin to read my fate in coffee-grounds , and her sister Nancy seems not to pay the least regard to Childermas-day .


What can I do ?
pray madam , assist me in correcting these two girls , and in teaching them to stand in awe of spirits , hobgoblins , fairies , death-watches , and Will i ` the wisp .


I am , Madam , Your most Humble Servant , GRACE PYTHONESS .


35 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT AND SOPHIA CONTINUED .


 THE first thought that struck the amazed Sophia was , that Sir Charles , either following the motions of his natural inconstancy , or in revenge of her supposed contempt of him , had married Harriot .
Certain that she had now lost for ever this lover , who with all his real or imputed faults , she had never been able to banish from her heart , she resigned herself up to the sharpest agonies of despair , and had already arrived at her sister 's house before she was able to stop the course of her tears .


A servant in the livery of her own family opened the door .
This circumstance surprised Sophia , who pulling her hat over her eyes to conceal her disorder , asked him , with some hesitation , if his mistress was at home .


The fellow replied , he believed she was , and opening the coach-door , shewed her into a parlour , telling her , with a smart air , that he would enquire of his lady 's woman whether she was visible yet or no .


 Sophia having summoned all her fortitude to enable her to go through this severe trial with dignity , had time enough to recollect and compose herself before any one appeared  and now several circumstances rushed upon her memory which in the first transports of her astonishmentt and grief had escaped her attention .


Mrs. Darnley , in her letter , had not mentioned Harriot 's marriage , but barely said she had left her .
The servant who delivered her message called her miss Darnley  and though she lived in a house that belonged to Sir Charles , yet it was scarcely suitable to the quality of his wife .


A few moments reflection upon these appearances made the generous Sophia change the object of her concern .
The misfortune for which she had grieved so much , seemed light , compared with that she apprehended : she wept no longer for the inconstancy of her lover  she trembled for the honour of her sister  and her greatest fear now was , that Sir Charles was not married .


While she was absorbed in these melancholy thoughts , Harriot 's maid entered the room , who after glancing over Sophia , with a supercilious eye , ( for she was very simply drest , ) asked her , ` If she had any business with her lady . '


` Tell her , replied Sophia , that her sister is here . '


The girl blushed , courtesied , and flew to acquaint her mistress  and Sophia was instantly desired to walk up stairs .


She found Harriot in her dressing-room , in an elegant dishabille , having just finished her morning 's  work , which appeared in a suit of ribbons made up with great taste .


As soon as she saw Sophia , she rose from her chair , and saluted her with affected dignity  but at the same time with an air of embarrassment that encreased every moment : so that being unable to bear the sweet but penetrating looks of her sister , she resumed her work , altering and unripping , without any apparent design , yet affecting to be extremely busy , and to shew how perfectly she was at ease , talked of the most trifling matters imaginable , while Sophia gazed on her in silent anguish , anxious to know the truth of her situation , yet dreading to have it explained .
At length she told her that she was going to Kensington to her mother , and desired to know if she had any message to send to her .


Harriot suddenly interupting her , as if she feared some further questions , began to exclaim against her mother 's unreasonable temper , saying , that she had offended her violently only because she had it not in her power to comply with some very extravagant expectations which she had formed .


` Sister , said Sophia , I am wholly ignorant of your affairs  I know not what cause of discontent you have given my mother , but I see there is a great alteration in your condition of life , and I hope - '


` What do you hope , pray miss ?
interrupted Harriot , reddening : I suppose I am to have some of your satirical flings  your temper is not altered I find . '


 ` Dear Harriot , resumed Sophia , with tears in her eyes , this causeless anger confirming her suspicions , why do you reproach me with being satirical ?
is it a crime to be anxious for your happiness ? '


' I wish you would not trouble yourself about me , replied Harriot , I know best what will make me happy  you should not pretend to instruct your elders , miss Sophy  I am older than you  you know , you have often upbraided me with that . '


` Sister , said Sophia calmly , you desired to see me , have you any thing to say to me ? '


' I know , answered Harriot , that I shall meet with ungrateful returns for my kindness , nevertheless I shall act like a sister towards you , and it was to tell you so that I wished to see you : I very much doubt whether , if you were in prosperity , you would do the same by me . '


` Have I behaved so ill in adversity then , said Sophia , that you form this harsh judgment of me , sister ? '


` Pray do n't upbraid me with your behaviour , miss , said Harriot  other people may have behaved as well as you , though they are not prudes . '


` You say you are in prosperity , sister , said Sophia , but perhaps you and I have different notions of prosperity : let me know the truth of your situation , and if I find you happy according to my notions of happiness , you will soon be convinced that I can take a sister 's share in it . '


 ' I am not obliged to give an account of my conduct to you , replied Harriot , who had listened to this speech with great emotion  and I must tell you , sister Sophy , that if you go on taking this liberty of questioning and censuring me , I shall not care how seldom I see you .
As to my mother , I know that it is my duty to do every thing for her that is in my power  and this I have offered to do already . '


Saying this , she rang the bell , and her maid appearing , she gave her some orders which necessarily required her attendance in the room  so that Sophia , finding she could have no further discourse with her sister , rose up and took leave of her with an aching heart .
Her griefs all aggravated by the apprehension of her sister 's dishonour , and the hatred which she felt for Sir Charles , as her seducer , struggling with a tender remembrance , her gentle bosom was torn with conflicting passions , and she proved but too well the truth of that maxim , That philosophy easily triumphs over past and future evils , but the present triumph over her .


Mrs. Darnley received her daughter with unusual tenderness : she felt how much she stood in need of her filial care  and her behaviour was dictated by that interested kindness which only gives in expectation of receiving back doublefold .


Sophia saw her pale and emaciated , and was greatly affected with the sight : she would not mention her sister , for fear of discomposing her  but Mrs. Darnley soon introduced the subject that was most in her thoughts , and exclaimed against  Harriot 's undutifulness and want of affection with the most violent transports of passion .


' I have been the best of mothers to her , said she , melting into tears  I have always indulged her in all her wishes , and impaired my circumstances to support her extravagancies , and how has she returned this kindness !
would you think it , my dear Sophy , though she is in affluent circumstances , and I , by the loss of my annuity , am plunged into all my former distresses , she has refused to pay those debts which I contracted during the time she lived with me  and thinks it sufficient to invite me to reside in her house , where , no doubt , I should feel my dependence severely . '


` Sir Charles , said Sophia sighing , does not act with his usual generosity  if he has married my sister , why does he suffer you to be in distress ? '


`` Married your sister ! ''
repeated Mrs. Darnley , in astonishment .


` Ah , madam , resumed Sophia , is she not married then to Sir Charles ? '


` Why , is it possible that you can wish him to be married to Harriot ? '
said Mrs. Darnley .


` Alas !
cried Sophia , ought I not to wish it , when I see her in his house ? '


` Oh , resumed Mrs. Darnley , I perceive your mistake  but that house is not Sir Charles 's now  Lord L - bought it of him , with the furniture , some time ago  it might have been yours , and without any offence to your virtue too , yet you thought fit to refuse it : but I  will not pretend to reprove one so much wiser than myself - '


` Well , madam , interrupted Sophia eagerly , then it is not to Sir Charles that my sister is married , to whom is she married ? '


`` You have seen her , have you not ? ''
said Mrs. Darnley , looking a little confused .


' I have indeed seen her , said Sophia , but she did not explain her situation to me . '


` And do you imagine , resumed Mrs. Darnley peevishly , that she would be less reserved with her mother ?
and if she was afraid of telling you the truth , is it likely she would own it to me ? '


` Then I fear it is bad indeed with Harriot , cried Sophia , in a melancholy accent , since she has so much to conceal from a mother and a sister . '


` You were always censorious , Sophy , said Mrs. Darnley , with some passion  for my part , I am resolved to think the best .
If Lord L - is married privately to your sister , her character will one day be cleared to the world , and she thinks no prudent person can blame her , for chusing to bear for a time a few undeserved censures , rather than to struggle with poverty and contempt . '


Sophia , now convinced of Harriot 's unhappy conduct , burst into tears .
Mrs. Darnley after looking at her in silence a moment , said , with some confusion  ` Then you do not believe your sister is married , Sophy ? '


` Ah , madam , replied Sophia , you do not say that you know she is , and whatever reasons there  might be for concealing her marriage from the world , certainly there are none for hiding it from you .
- In vain , added she , with still greater emotion , would your parental tenderness seek to deceive yourself . '


` Reproach me no more with my tenderness for your sister , interrupted Mrs. Darnley , angrily  I am too much affected with her ingratitude already . '


' I am sorry she is ungrateful , said Sophia  but oh !
my dear mama , it is not fit you should accept of her assistance . '


' I hope , said Mrs. Darnley , calling down her eyes , that I know what is fit for me to do as well as my daughter .
- But Sophy , added she , after a little pause , I am sorry to tell you , if you do not know it already , that if you have still any thoughts of Sir Charles , you deceive yourself  I am very well informed , that a match has been proposed to him , and he has given so favourable an answer , that it is expected the marriage will be concluded , as soon as he comes from Paris : I heard it all from one of the young lady 's relations . '


This was a severe stroke to poor Sophia , who had just begun to breathe again , after the anguish she had suffered , in the belief that Sir Charles had forsaken her for her sister , and added perfidy and baseness to his inconstancy .


Mrs. Darnley , who saw her turn pale , and her eyes swimming in tears , while she struggled to conceal her emotions , could not help being affected  with her distress , and endeavoured to console her .


Sophia , more softened by this tenderness , suffered her tears to flow a few moments unrestrained  then suddenly wiping her charming eyes , ` Pardon this weakness , madam , said she  this indeed is not a time to weep for myself , your sorrows claim all my tears . '


` Aye , I have sorrows enough , Heaven knows , said Mrs. Darnley , my debts unpaid , my annuity gone , what have I to trust to ? '


` Providence , interrupted Sophia , your piety and my industry .
Alas !
my dear mama , your greatest affliction is not the loss of your annuity , or the debts with which you are encumbered , it is my sister 's unhappy fall from virtue .
That parent , pursued she , who sees a beloved child become a prey to licentious passions , who sees her publicly incur shame and reproach , expelled the society of the good and virtuous , and lead a life of dishonour , embittered with the contempt of the world , and the secret upbraidings of her own conscience  that parent can best judge of your anguish now : I have only a sister 's feelings for this misfortune !
but these feelings are strong enough to make me very unhappy . '


Mrs. Darnley appeared so much moved with this discourse , that Sophia pursued it , till she brought her mother to declare , that she would rather suffer all the inconveniencies of poverty , than give a sanction to Harriot 's guilt , by partaking of its reward .


 Sophia , to relieve her anxiety , laid down a plan for their future subsistence , and proved to her , that by her skill in several little useful arts , it would be easy for her to supply her with all the necessaries of life .
`` We will first , said she , pay your debts . ''


`` How is that to be done ? ''
said Mrs. Darnley , hastily .


` The furniture of your house , said Sophia , the plate , and other pieces of finery , which Sir Charles Stanley presented to you , will , if converted into money , not only pay your debts , but provide a little fund for present expences , and a reserve for future exigencies  mean while , my industry and care will , I hope , keep want far from you .
I have friends , who will find employment for my little talents  and if I can but make your life easy and comfortable , I shall think myself happy . '


Mrs. Darnley , with tears in her eyes , embraced her daughter , bid her dispose of every thing as she pleased , and assured her she would endeavour to bear her new condition of life with patience and resignation .


Sophia immediately wrote to a gentleman of the law , who had been an intimate friend of her father 's ?
and he undertook to manage their little affairs in town .
A few days afterwards he brought them fifty pounds , which was all that remained from the sale , after every demand upon Mrs. Darnley was paid .


She read over the accounts with great emotion , bitterly regretting every trinket she had  parted with , and told Sophia , that it was absolutely necessary they should settle in some village near town , for she could not bear the thoughts of exposing her poverty to her acquaintance , and of being seen in a worse condition than formerly .


Sophia , who thought her declining health a better reason for not residing in London , hired in an adjacent village , at a very small rent , a little house , or rather cottage , so neat , and situated so happily , that an imagination lively as hers was , and a little romantick , could not fail of being charmed with it .
To this place she removed her books , and being provided by her friend Dolly , with an innocent country girl for a servant , she conducted her mother to her rural abode , and had the satisfaction to find her pleased with it , novelty having always charms for her , and here for a few days , it supplied the place of those other gratifications to which she had been accustomed .


In the midst of these cares , Sophia did not forget her unhappy sister : she wrote several letters to her , in which she employed all the power of virtuous eloquence to bring her to a sense of her errors , but in vain .


Harriot did not deign to answer her , but in a letter to her mother , she complained of the injurious treatment she received from Sophia , and earnestly intreated her to leave her sister , and reside with her .


Although Mrs. Darnley refused this offer with seeming steadiness , yet her discontent was but too apparent .
A life of retirement , which often obliged  her to seek in herself , those resources against languor and melancholy , which she used to find in the dissipations of the town , could not be grateful to one who had never accustomed herself to reflection , whose mind was filled with trifles , and its whole stock of ideas derived from dress , cards , and every other fashionable folly .


To be capable of enjoying a rural life , there is something more necessary than a good understandin : innocence and purity of manners must contribute to give a relish to pleasures , which are founded in reason , virtue , and piety .


Hence it was , that Sophia , in the bloom of youth , found happiness in the solitude of a village , while her mother , in a declining age , panted after the vanities of the town .


In vain , did Mr. Herbert fill the letters he wrote to Mrs. Darnley , with maxims of morality and pious admonitions  he experienced here the truth of that observation , that it is a work of great difficulty , to dispossess vice from a heart , where long possession seems to plead prescription .


Sophia , who knew her mother 's taste for living at ease , that she might be able to gratify it , applied herself diligently to her work , which was a piece of embroidery , that had been bespoke by a benevolent lady , in order to give her present employmen  and , by exhibiting it as a proof of her ingenuity , to procure her more .
She likewise exercised her invention in drawing little designs for fanmounts  and always chose such subjects as conveyed some moral lesson to the mind , while they pleased the imagination .


 Some of these drawings were disposed of , by the lady her friend , so advantageously , that Sophia was encouraged to pursue her labour  and Mrs. Darnley , flattered by the prospect of more easy circumstances , began to enlarge her scheme of expence , made little excursions about the country in a post-chaise , talked of hiring a better house , and of passing two months at least in London during the winter .


Mean time Harriot became more earnest in her solicitations to her mother , to come and live with her  her situation began to be so generally suspected , that she was in danger of being wholly neglected .


She wrote to her in a strain of tenderness and duty , that revived all the ill-judging parent 's affection , who invited her to make her a visit in her little retreat , and promised her a favourable reception even from Sophia herself .


Sophia was indeed far from opposing this visit  she was rather desirous of drawing her sister thither frequently , with a hope that her example and her arguments , might one day influence her to change her conduct .


Harriot received this invitation with joy  for such was the depravity of her mind , that she exulted in having an opportunity of displaying the granduer of her dress , and equipage to her sister  to her who had made virtuous poverty her choice , and shewn that she despised riches , when they were to be purchased by guilt .
The pride of human nature ( says an eminent writer ) takes its rise from its corruption , as worms are produced by putrefaction .


 The wretched fallen Harriot was proud !
the diamonds that glittered in her hair , the gilt chariot , and the luxurious table  these monuments of her disgrace contributed to keep up the insolence of a woman , who by the loss of her honour was lower than the meanest of her servants , who could boast of an uncorrupted virtue .


Sophia was busily employed upon her embroidery , when Harriot , from her gay chariot , alighted at her door  she entered that humble abode of innocence and industry , in a kind of triumph , and accosted her sister with a haughty expression of superiority in her looks and air , as if she expected the splendor of her appearance should strike her with awe .


Sophia received her with the modest dignity of conscious virtue  and Harriot , tho ' incapable of much reflection , yet soon perceived the miserable figure she made , in the presence of such a character , and stood silent and abashed , while Sophia contemplated her finery with an eye of pity and of anguish .


Harriot , at length recovering herself , asked for her mother , who that moment entered the room .
The sight of her daughter 's equipage , had thrown her into an agreeable flutter of spirits , and she readily pardoned the fine lady , all the faults of the ungrateful child .


Harriot emboldened by so kind a reception , proposed to her to accompany her to town , promising to make her abode with her agreeable , by every instance of duty and affection .


 Mrs. Darnley blushed , and was silent .
Sophia fixed her eyes upon her mother , anxious and impatient for her answer  she cast a timed glance at Sophia : she read in her speaking eyes her sentiments of this proposal  and turning to Harriot , she told her faintly , that not being satisfied with her conduct , it would be very improper for her to countenance it , by residing with her .


Harriot burst into tears , and exclaimed against her sister 's malice , who , she said , acted like her most cruel enemy , and sought to ruin her character , by estranging herself from her company , and preventing her mother from taking notice of her .


Sophia , with great gentleness , proved to her , that the loss of her reputation , was the necessary consequence of her living in a manner unsuitable to her circumstances  that her mother and her , by complying with her request , could not preserve her from censure , but would incur it themselves .


` You call me cruel , Harriot , said she , for estranging myself from your company  but consider a little , whether it is not you that are both cruel and unjust .
Why would you deprive me of the only reward the world bestows on me , for a life of voluntary poverty  you have exchanged a good name for dress and equipage  and I , to preserve one , subject myself to labour and indigence : you enjoy your purchase  but I should lose mine , were I to have that complaisance for you which you require .
Leave me  my reputation then , since it is the sole recompence of those hardships to which I willingly submit  and if you wish to recover yours , be contented to be poor like me . '


Sophia , finding her sister listened to her , tho ' it was sullenly , and with down cast eyes , expatiated in a tender manner upon the errors of her conduct , and the fatal consequences that were likely to follow .


Harriot at length interrupted her , with a pert air , and said , ` She would not be taught her duty by her younger sister  ' then turning to her mother , ' I hope madam , said she , my sister will not have so much power with you , as to make you forbid my coming here . '


She put her handkerchief to her eyes , as she said this  to which Mrs. Darnley replied , with great vehemence , ` That no person on earth should ever prevail upon her to cast off her child . '


Sophia was silent , and observing that her presence seemed to lay them under some restraint , she rose up , to retire to her work , telling her sister , as she passed by her , ` That far from hindering her visits , she would rather encourage her to repeat them often , that she might be convinced it was possible , to be happy in a cottage . '


Harriot laughed , and muttered the words romantick and affectation , which Sophia took no notice of , but left her at liberty to converse freely with her mother .


Mrs. Darnley talked to her at first in a chiding strain , and affected to assume the authority of a parent  but , a slave to her appetites , she could not  resist any opportunity of gratifying them  and Harriot found it no difficult matter to force a present upon her , to supply those expences which her extravagance , and not her wants , made necessary .


Harriot now came often to the village , and gave it out , that she was upon the best terms imaginable with her mother and sister , not doubting but the world would cease to suspect her , since Sophia approved her conduct .


The frequency and the length of her visits made Sophia entertain hopes of her reformation , since the time she spent with her mother , was taken from that dangerous and immoral dissipation , which forms the circle of what is called a gay life .
For it is with our manners as with our health  the abatement of vice is a degree of virtue , the abatement of disease is a degree of health .


Mr. Herbert being perfectly recovered , filled Sophia with extreme joy , by the account he sent her of it , and of his resolutlon to come and live near her .


While she impatiently expected his arrival , and sent many a longing look towards the road , near which her little cottage was situated , she one day saw a gentleman ride by full speed , who in his person and air had a great resemblance to Sir Charles Stanley .
Her heart , by its throbbing emotion , seemed to acknowledge its conqueror  for poor Sophia was still in love : she loved , though she despaired of ever being happy  and by thus persisting in a hopeless passion , contradicted that maxim , that love like fire , can not subsist without  continual motion , and ceases to be as soon as it ceases to hope or fear .


Sophia , not able to remove her eyes from the place where she fancied she had seen Sir Charles , continued to look fixedly towards the road , and was beginning to believe she had been mistaken , when a servant in Sir Charles 's livery rode by also , and put it out of doubt that she had really seen the master .


This unexpected incident awakened a thousand tender melancholy ideas in her mind  and finding herself too much softened , she had recourse again to her work , to divert her imagination from an object , she had vainly endeavoured to forget .


[ To be concluded in our next . . ]
36 .
THE JUDGMENT of PARIS .
A POEM .
Sent to the Author of the Lady 's Museum , by a Friend .


 ` Nobis forma placet  sapientia , regna , valete . '
DAUGHTERS of Jove , immortal Nine , inspire This artless bosom with celestial fire : Graces that in the cheeks of Venus shine , Bloom in my numbers , and inform each line .
So may I challenge the contested bays , And charm the ear , when beauty claims the lays .
On a green turf reclin'd , lo !
Paris lies , And from his pipe melodious sounds arise : His music sweetly charms the hours away , While beauty 's pow ' r employs his tuneful lay .
He sung , when wounded by Alcmena 's eyes , How in a borrow'd form Jove gain'd the prize : And how , when rifling Leda 's charms , he press'd ( Conceal'd in snowy plumes ) her softer breast .
Of Heav 'n' s great Lord he sung each fam'd amour , Of god 's subdu'd by love 's superior pow ` r  The birds are mute , and listen to his song , Or in soft echo 's his sweet notes prolong .
 The wond ` ring sheep a while forget to feed , And stop attentive to his tuneful reed : The gods too hearken , and his song approve , But most he charm'd the almighty ear of Jove .
`` And now , he said , may all our discords cease , `` Nor female jars disturb celestial peace  `` See there the judge of beauty  now agree , `` Ye lovely rivals , to his just decree .
The heav ` nly beauties his command obey And , conscious of her charms , each wings her way .
The golden ball descends , the destin'd prize , And each alternate meets his wond ` ring eyes .
First Jove 's great queen , with proud commanding air Graceful , not beautious , draws majestic near .
Respect she gains , but ne'er the heart can move  All must admire , but none presume to love .
`` Do then , she cry'd , these beauties faintly shine ?
`` And can those childish charms contend with mine ?
`` To me , presumptous !
dare they rivals prove ?
`` To me ?
the sister and the wife of Jove !
`` If crowns , if pow ` r , if titles , honours , praise , `` The regal purple , or the hero 's bays , `` Have charms to move - Behold !
I give 'em all : `` All shall await thee for that golden ball .
`` And heav 'n' s great queen thy every step shall guard  `` Honours shall court thee , kingdoms shall reward .
`` Unskill'd you are from what a race you spring , `` That shepherd 's dress perhaps conceals a king . ''
'T is I must seat thee on thy injur'd throne , `` And make rebellious crouds their monarch own .
 `` I 'll make each vanquish'd tyrant tribute pay , `` And every nation stoop beneath thy sway .
`` But if these offers fail to move thee , dread `` An injur'd queen 's just vengeance on thy head  `` A sure resentment my repulse shall wait , `` My smile is heaven , but my frown is fate .
Thus Juno spoke  - see Pallas next appear : Pallas with decent steps drew slow ` ly near .
`` No study'd phrase , she said , my cause requires  `` Wisdom the truth , tho ' unadorn'd , admires  `` Nor shall I venture , like a treach ` rous guide , `` The dang ` rous turnings of my paths to hide  `` Nor tempt with honours , nor allure with joy  `` Honours will fail , and pleasure soon will cloy .
`` Virtue and wisdom , attributes of Heav ` n , `` Those sister-beauties , those to me are giv ` n : `` Virtue alone , true happiness can give , `` And wisdom only teach us how to live .
`` These are my gifts : I also join th ' fight , `` And guide th ' godlike hero 's blows aright .
`` I , crown'd with lawrels from successful war , `` Lead him triumphant in th ' gilded car .
`` Nor less my beauty , tho ' conceal'd with care  `` Nor , tho ' more manly than my sex , less fair .
`` Mine is each wining art , and ev'ry charm , `` That with soft passion can th ' bosom warm .
`` Behold these hands !
do they to Juno 's yield  `` One waves the weapon , and one grasps the shield .
`` And view this face , which gods in vain adore  `` This breast , which none have ever view'd before .
 `` A weighty breast-plate this soft bosom bears , `` This virgin brow a massy helmet wears .
`` Speak shepherd , be in this one suit my friend , `` Thee virtue , valour , wisdom shall attend .
`` Th ' admiring gods look down , well pleased to see `` The image of themselves appear in thee .
She spoke , the shepherd doubts  the dubious scales Hung wav ` ring , nor disclose who most prevails .
But when bright Venus drew aside her vail , The shepherd 's eyes , o'erpow'r'd with beauties fail .
As when Sol , late eclips'd , illumes the skies , His beams dart pow ` rful on the weaken'd eyes .
Our dazzled sight shrinks from the glitt ` ring ray , And droops beneath th ' o'erwhelming tide of day .
The powerful cestus negligently plac'd , With diamonds buckled round her slender waist .
Her sparkling eyes with killing lustre glow , And her fair cheeks unbidden beauties show .
Unstudy'd charms her winning motion grace , And modest nature purpled o'er her face .
Thus in soft music she allures his ear , `` Ah !
why that bashful blush , those signs of fear ? ''
( For now the shepherd felt the tender heat , And his fond heart irregularly beat  His quicker pulse , and trembling nerves , confess'd The rising tumults of his raptur'd breast . )
`` Can aught forbidding in these eyes appear ?
`` Or love inspire th ' ungentle passion , fear ?
`` Paris , then hear , and oh !
if ever love `` Had charms , that could thy tender bosom move ,  `` Grant me this suit , or henceforth may you find `` Th ' Idalian nymphs , to all your vows unkind .
`` Oh !
were I skill'd thy list'ningear to move , `` And sweetly form'd to bend the soul to love , `` Then smiles and winning words the prize might gain , `` Nor others triumph , while I sue in vain : `` Nor yet , if looks the secret soul confess , `` When Paris judges , need I fear success .
`` Thine are love 's triumphs , and the nymph who views `` That radiant form , but coldly can refuse .
`` Yet in thy breast , perhaps , love never reigns , `` Stranger to all its joys , and all its pains  `` The half-consenting blush , the glance betray'd , `` And the soft whisper of the yielding maid  `` The flame inspiring touch , the melting eyes , `` And the ten thousand tender niceties , `` That lovers only feel - to none is known `` The bliss of madness , but the mad alone .
`` But if some happy nymph has found the art To point her charms aright , and wound thy heart , `` Thy longing eyes shall not in vain adore , `` But she alike shall taste my mighty pow ` r. `` I am the queen of love , 't is I inspire `` The rising sigh , fond thought , and soft desire  `` In the fair cheek bid speaking blushes rise , `` And the kind languish grace the yielding eyes : `` Bid tender wishes warm the virgin 's soul , `` And the fair bosom grant without controul .
`` Had only Helen pow ' r thy heart to gain , `` E'en Helen 's self should joy to ease your pain .
 `` Helen !
the prize to which ambition soars  `` Helen !
whose charms each wishing heart adores , `` Jove 's beauteous daughter shall thy conquest be , `` And lose ev'n crowns and fame - the world for thee ! ''
The boy transported with a joyful pride Sprung up , and in a sudden rapture cried , `` O give me , Goddess , charms like thine to view , `` Fame , wisdom , valour , trifling toys , adieu ! ''
37 .
The following Life of VANDYCK is published from a Manuscript , communicated to the Author of the LADY 's MUSEUM by a Person of Distinction .
THE LIFE OF Sir ANTHONY VANDYCK .


 ANthony Vandyck was born in the city of Antwe [ ... ] p , in the year 1599  his father was a merchant of linen cloth  his mother employed herself in embroidery , which requiring some small knowledge in design , she taught her son in the best manner she could the first rudiments of drawing , in which he made so quick progress , that he soon became capable of giving instructions to his former tutor : his mother conceived so great hopes of his future advancement in the arts , that she persuaded his father to place him with Rubens , who was the most celebrated painter of that time .
Vandyck soon became a favourite of his master 's , not only for his good behaviour and ingenious disposition , but from the real advantage he was likely to find in having a scholar that would so soon be capable of assisting .
him .
The first thing Rubens set him about was to make a drawing after his picture of the battle of the Amazons ,  in which he succeeded so well , that , from that very drawing , the print which is so much admired was engraved : after this Rubens thought it time to instruct him in the art of colouring , that he might likewise be of assistance to him in painting .
He first employed him in copying his works , in which he acquitted himself so well , that his master after giving a few touches , sold them as his own performance .
He soon after made so great progress that he executed great works in colours from his master 's designs , and afterwards from his own invention , particularly the history of Achilles * , which was intended for a suit of tapestry .
It is reported that Rubens got no less then ten pounds a day by the labours of his ingenious disciple † .
Rubens began now to be not a little alarmed at the extraordinary talents he discovered in his disciple  and with good reason , fearing he might rival his renown , advised him ( after bestowing great commendations on some portraits Vandyck had just finished ) to apply himself entirely to the study of portrait-painting  and at the same time continually recommending to Vandyck those who applyed for their portraits to himself , he in a great measure stifled that true spirit and genius of painting which ought to have been exerted in the invention and composition of history .
Thus Titian ( but a little more barbarously ) banished Tintoret from his house  a  practice often used by the great masters , but as unsuccessful as malicious .
For strength of genius , like a spark of fire , will at last blaze up , and perhaps with greater force from its meeting with opposition .
The first picture Vandyck painted after he had withdrawn from the school of his master , was for the church of Dominick : the subject was that of our Saviour bearing the cross on his knees , accompanied by the two Marys , with soldiers conducting him to Mount Calvary : this work is much in the style of his master .


He now began to think it time to visit Italy , and accordingly set out for Venice , where he applied himself wholly to the study of the Venetian art of colouring , particularly the works of Titian and Paul Veronese , the same fountains that had before so liberally supplied his master .
He copied many historical pictures for his improvement , and painted portraits for his subsistence  but the former producing no money , and the latter not sufficient for his expences , he thought fit to remove to Geneva , where he found the greatest encouragement for his talent of portrait-painting .
Notwithstanding which , being determined to visit Rome , he undertook that journey , and at his arrival there is entertained in the court of cardinal Bentivoglio , a great favourer of the Flemish nation , having himself lived there a considerable time , and writ the history of that country .
In return for the civility he received , he drew his patron 's picture , whole length , which is now in the Palazzo Piti at Florence , and esteemed one of the best of Vandyck 's works : he drew also , for the same cardinal , Christ dying on the cross .


 Sir Robert Shirly arriving at Rome about this time , with the character of ambassador from Abba , king of Persia , to Gregory XV .
Vandyck drew his picture and his wife 's , both in the Persian habit , which bizar kind of dress gave a new lustre to the usual graces of his painting .


There was many of Vandyck 's countrymen at that time studying at Rome  and it was a custom amongst them , that a new-comer should always invite his countrymen and brother students to a supper , where in the midst of their mirth they used to give him a nick-name , by which he was ever after to be known .
This kind of revel Vandyck refused , which they took so ill at his hands , that since he would not submit to receive any other name , they were resolved to give him that of Ambitious , and they took all occasions to condemn in him his pride and his art together .


In reality , Vandyck had a certain stateliness and gravity in his air , which might easily be mistaken for pride : his manner of behaviour , the richness of his habits , with the number of his servants , seemed all too high for his employment .
This fault ( if it is one ) is very pardonable , having been used to such magnificence , in the school of his master Rubens , whilst he was there , conversing mostly with noblemen , and people of the higher fashion  and being himself of a temper somewhat elevated , he was naturally led to model himself on their behaviour .


The true reason of Vandyck 's journey to Rome , appears to be , not so much to study , as to shew  his excellence in his art  but meeting with too much hatred and ill-will from his countrymen , and not so much encouragement from others as he expected , he left Rome , and returned to Genoa , which he used to call his home , and there his reputation and profit were very considerable .
He drew most of the noblemen and senators of the place , particularly the family of the Raggi .


[ To be concluded in our next . ]
38 .
THE TALE of GENEURA .
From the Italian of LODOVICO ARIOSTO , in the Fifth Book of his ORLANDO FURIOSO .


 THE noble Rinaldo sailing to England , whither he was sent on an embassy by the emperor Charlemagne , a violent storm arose , which continuing two days and nights , drove him , at last , on the coast of Scotland : His fleet arriving safe , he ordered his retinue to meet him at Berwick , he himself , without any attendants , struck into the famous forest of Caledonia , not without a hope of meeting with some adventure worthy his courage and virtue .


While he was pleasing himself with this expectation , sometimes riding , and sometimes walking a slow pace leading his horse , night drew on , and he now began to think it necessary to go in quest of a lodging .
Perceiving an abbey at some distance , he remounted his horse and rode up to it .
The abbot and his monks , seeing a stranger of a noble appearance at their gate , came out , and with great civility invited him to pass the night there .


Rinaldo gratefully accepted their offer  and being conducted to a chamber , and an elegant repast served to the table , as soon as he had satisfied the  cravings of an appetite made eager by travel and long fasting , he enquired of the good fathers what noble exploits in arms had been lately performed in their neighbourhood , and whether a warrior might hope to find any occasions there of signalizing his valour ?


'T is certain , replied the abbot , that many great and wonderful adventures have been atchieved in this forest , but as the place , so are the actions obscure , and buried in oblivion : however , if honour be your pursuit , the present time affords you a fit opportunity to acquire it  the danger , indeed , is great , but if you succeed , eternal fame will be your reward .
The young and beautiful Geneura , the daughter of our king , is accused by a knight named Lurcanio , of having violated her chastity  and it is provided by our Scottish laws , that all damsels , of what rank soever , who are publickly charged with incontinence , shall suffer the punishment of fire , unless a champion be found who will undertake their defence , and fight with the accuser .


Geneura , in consequence of this law , has been adjudged to die , and only a month 's space allowed her to procure a defender of her life and honour .
The king , anxious for his daughter 's safety , but more for her reputation , has caused it to be proclaimed throughout his dominions , that by whatever person ( provided his birth be not absolutely base ) his daughter shall be delivered from the danger that threatens her , to him he will give the princess in marriage , with a portion suitable to her high rank and quality .


 This enterprize , noble stranger , is worthy your youth , your courage , and generosity : the law of arms requires all true knights to undertake the defence of injured and oppressed ladies  and , surely , a fairer than Geneura is not to be found from one extremity of the globe to the other  nor , if common opinion may be relied on , a chaster .


And is it possible , said Rinaldo after a little pause , that this fair princess is condemned to die for having generously rewarded the passion of a faithful lover ?
Cursed be the makers of so hard a law : more cursed they that are influenced by it .
For me it matters not whether Geneura be justly or unjustly accused  what has been imputed to her as a crime , were I her judge , she should be applauded for , had she taken care to have avoided discovery  but , as it is , I am resolved to defy her accuser to combat , and I trust shall be able to deliver her from the unjust and cruel punishment she has been doomed to .


The abbot and monks , overjoyed that they had procured a champion for their princess , bestowed a thousand praises on Rinaldo for his generous design  and he , full of impatience to begin the glorious enterprize , being furnished by his hosts with a guide , set out early the next morning for the Scottish court , leaving the good fathers charmed with his courage and gallantry , and offering up repeated prayers to heaven for his success .


As they were pursuing their journey through bye-roads , for the greater expedition , a cry , as of some person in distress , rouzed all their attention .
Instantly Rinaldo clapped spurs to his horse , and  galloping towards the place from whence the noise proceeded , he came to a deep valley , surrounded with trees , through the branches of which he perceived a young maid struggling to free herself from the hands of two russians , who were attempting to murder her .
Transported with rage at this sight , the generous Rinaldo flew to the relief of the distressed damsel  his appearance so terrified the intended murderers , that they left their prey , and fled with the utmost precipitation .


Mean time the maid recovered from her fright , thanked her deliverer with a transport of joy and gratitude , and was beginning to acquaint him with the story of her misfortunes , when he , who had not alighted , being eager to pursue his journey , commanded his guide to take her up behind him  and as they travelled , having at leisure observed her countenance and behaviour , he was so much struck with the beauty of the one , and the soft and gentle modesty of the other , that his curiosity was awakened , and he became solicitous to know by what means she had been brought into so cruel a situation .


His request being inforced with kind assurances of future protection , the damsel , with a low voice , and eyes cast down in a graceful confusion , began in this manner :


Since you , my generous deliverer , have commanded me to relate my misfortunes , prepare to hear a tale more full of horror , an act of greater villainy and baseness than Athens , Thebes , or Argos ever knew .
Ah !
't is no wonder that our barren clime is curst with a long winter 's ceaseless rage , Phoebus disdains to shine upon a land where  such inhuman crimes are perpetrated  deeds black as darkness , and fit to be covered with everlasting night  unhappy as I am , I bore but too great a share in those I am going to relate .


From my earliest youth I was brought up in the palace with the daughter of our king , honoured with a near attendance on her person , and happy in the possession of her affection and esteem .
Long might I have enjoyed this delightful situation  but love ( ah !
that ever so sweet a passion should prove the source of so much misery ) love interrupted my tranquility , subjected my whole soul , and gave me up to guilt , to shame , and unavailing penitence .


The duke of Alban was the object of my virgin wishes , my youth and person pleased him  skilled as he was in every deluding art by which the false and the designing part of his sex betray the unexperienced of ours , is it any wonder that I was deceived ?
Fond of believing what I wished , and judging of his passion by my own , I yielded to his desires , and vainly hoped this sacrifice of my honour would secure to me for ever the possession of his heart .


Our guilty commerce lasted some months , during which time I always received his visits in a summer apartment belonging to the princess my mistress , into which , as it was now the most rigid season of the year , she never entered  and being also in a part of the palace little frequented , and the windows opposite to some ruined houses , my lover could come thither unobserved , and by the help of  a silken cord which I let down to him , easily ascend the chamber .


All sense of virtue being now subdued , and my whole soul sunk in a dear lethargick dream of pleasure , I never once suspected that as my passion increased , that of my lover was decreasing .
Ah !
my too violent love favoured his deceit , or soon I might have perceived that he feigned much , and loved but little .


At length , notwithstanding my prepossession , his coldness became visible  I sigh'd , I wept , I reproach'd  alas !
how unavailing are all endeavours to revive a decaying passion , satiated by possession , and constant only to inconstancy .


Polynesso , so was my faithless lover named , languished in secret for the bright Geneura , my royal mistress  I know not if this passion commenced before my ruin was completed , or whether her more powerful charms was the cause of his infidelity  but certain it is , that relying on the fervent love I bore him , he made no scruple to confess his flame even to me , urging me by all the arguments his wicked mind could suggest , to move the heart of Geneura in his favour .


Ah my lord !
judge if this cruel man was dear to me , ever solicitous to procure his happiness , and soothed by his assurances that ambition was the prevailing motive of his address to the princess , in which , if he succeeded , he vowed to keep me still his , and that I should share with her his person and his heart , I consented to all he proposed  and following his instructions , took all opportunities of praising him to my mistress .


 The duke of Alban was the constant subject of my discourse  I extolled his valour , his generosity , his illustrious birth , the manly graces of his person , the mingled sweetness and dignity of his manners  the charming theme transported me out of myself .
With eager pleasure I ran over all his virtues , dwelt with delight on every imputed charm  scarce could my tongue keep pace with the overflowings of my love-sick fancy , fond of the dear indulgence of talking in a personated character of him I loved .


But when , in compliance with his injunctions , I ventured to insinuate his passion for her , then only did I speak with coldness and restraint  slowly the unwilling words found way , checked by my rising sighs , and prefaced by my blushes .
My emotions could not have been hid from an interested observation  but the princess was not only wholly indifferent to Polynesso , but indulged a secret passion for the all-accomplished Ariodant .


This young knight , an Italian by birth , came with his brother to the court of Scotland , either in pursuit of glory , or to transact some secret business with the king .
To the graces of his form , than which nature never made one more lovely , is added a mind fraught with whatever is most great and excellent in mankind  his valour never yet found an equal in our land  his is the prize at every tournement , his the foremost honours of the field : in peace the ornament of our court , in war the defender of our country .


The king , to whom he had indeared himself by a thousand services , loaded him with riches and honours , and gave him the first employments in  the kingdom  the hill of Sicily burns not with fiercer fires , nor glows Vesuvius with more ardent flames , than those which the bright eyes of our princess kindled in the heart of Ariodant .


I soon discovered that Geneura approved , encouraged and returned his passion  and being , as you may easily imagine , not greatly concerned at this obstacle to the desires of my faithless duke , I acquainted him with all I knew , and from the apparent impossibility of his ever succeeding in his attempt , drew arguments to induce him to give it over .


Polynesso , naturally haughty and vindictive , could not bear with patience , the thoughts of being rejected for a stranger , every way , as he conceived , his inferior  disdain , shame , rage , by turns , engrossed his soul , and banished thence every softer passion  his love for Geneura was now converted to the most obstinate hatred , and he resolved to accomplish her ruin by the blackest treason that ever was conceived in the heart of man .


His scheme of revenge concerted , in which I , alas !
tho ' ignorantly , was to act the chief part , he one day accosted me with an air more tender and affectionate than usual .


My dear ?
Dalinda , said he , generous and kind as you have been to me , well may you think yourself injured by my inconstancy , but as trees , you know , when cropt by the pruner 's hand , shoot out into fresh luxuriant branches , so on the root of my passion for Geneura , young buds of fondness rise , and all the ripening fruit is yours .


 Nor do I languish so much for the possession of Geneura 's beauties , as I disdain to be thus rejected and contemned  and , lest this grief should prey too forcibly on my heart , do thou , my fair , indulge my sick fancy with a kind deceit , and in the dress of that too haughty charmer , receive me to thy arms .


When the princess is retired to bed , put on her robes , adorn thee with her richest jewels , with her girdle bind thy swelling bosom , let her coronet glitter on thy beauteous brow , and beneath it let thy hair descend in graceful curls like hers  then , in her borrowed form , attend my coming at the well-known window  thus shall my pride be gratified , and my capricious fancy pleased .


Without reflecting on the insidious purport of this request , I promised to comply with it  and , for many succeessive nights , received him in the habit he prescribed .
Having thus wrought me to his wish , his wicked arts were next played off on Ariodant .


Before the duke had any knowledge of his passion for the princess , he had lived in strict friendship with this young knight , and thence took occasion to reproach him with the breach of it , by presuming to address the princess .


In you , said he , I little expected a rival as well on account of your attachment to me , as the improbability of your succeeding in your attempt  for you are not now to be told of the mutual passion that has long joined Geneura 's heart and mine , nor that I intend soon to ask the king 's consent to espouse her  why then do you fondly thrust yourself  between me and my almost certain happiness ?
how differently should I act were I in your place ?


Why this to me , my lord ?
replied Ariodant hastily  't is you who have betrayed our friendship , you have commenced my rival , not I yours .
I claim a prior right in fair Geneura , as having loved her first , and have been happy enough to inspire her with an equal flame  this you might have perceived , had you not been blinded by obstinacy  since then the laws of friendship demand one of us to yield , be yours the task , as having less right to persist , and less hope of succeeding than myself .
In riches indeed you are my superior  but the king 's favour is equally shared betwixt us , and in the heart of Geneura the advantage is wholly mine .


What errors does not love occasion ?
replied the duke  each thinks himself the happy object of her wishes , and yet 't is certain that only one is loved : thus then let us decide the contest  he who can give the most certain proofs of her affection shall be left by the other in the free and undisturbed possession of it : but first , let us bind ourselves by the most solemn oaths not to disclose each others secrets .


To this Ariodant , with trembling impatience agreed , and the artful duke went on in this manner :


'T is now almost five months since the beauteous Geneura rewarded my ardent love with the possession of her person  oft has the conscious queen of night lent me her shades to guide me to my charmer , and seen me happy in her arms .


 'T is false , by Heaven , interrupted Ariodant , transported with rage  not that cold queen , whose name thou hast profaned , is chaster than my Geneura .
Traitor , with my good sword I 'll prove thou lyest  take notice I defy thee to mortal combat , and will with thy dearest blood , wash away the slanders thou hast thrown upon my princess .


Moderate your rage , said the calm villain , I mean to give you proofs , convincing proofs , of what I have said  your own eyes shall be witnesses of the favours I enjoy .


The unhappy Ariodant , pale , trembling , and lost in speechless grief and horror at those fatal words , stood for some moments fixed in racking thought , like the sad statue of despair  then raising his eyes , overflowing with tears , to heaven , and passionately striking his groaning breast , And can it be , he cried , that my Geneura , that princess whom I loved , whom I adored with such pure reverence as mortals pay to Deities , should become the prey of loose desires , and give her faithful Ariodant to death ?
Oh !
't is impossible , though a God spoke it , I should say ` twere false .


Incredulous man , said Polynesso , have I not offered to give thee proofs that can not be denied ?
Thy eyes shall see the favours she bestows on me .


I take you at your word , resumed Ariodant impatiently , give me to behold her guilt and I am satisfied .


To-morrow night , said the duke , I have an appointment with her  I will conduct you to a place from whence , unperceived , you yourself shall behold me ascend her chamber window , and judge  by the reception she gives me , if I am happy in her favour .


To this the almost distracted Ariodant consented  and , at the appointed time , followed the duke to those ruined houses I mentioned before , and there stood concealed from view : being doubtful of Polynesso 's intentions , he had ordered his brother Lurcanio to arm and go with him , directing him to stay at a convenient distance , so as to be within call if any treachery was offered him , but not in sight of Geneura 's window  for he would have no witness of her guilt but himself .


The duke , having placed Ariodant most conveniently for his purpose , advanced and gave the usual sign  unhappy as I am I heard , and eagerly obeyed the welcome summons  adorned in Geneura 's richest robes , and covered with the veil that princesses only wear , I appeared at the window and threw the silken ladder over to my lover .


Lurcanio , either fearing for his brother 's safety , or desirous of prying into his secrets , quitted his appointed station , and unperceived by him , walked softly forward till he came within ten paces of Ariodant  and now my faithless duke was seen by both the brothers , ( though known only to Ariodant ) to ascend the ladder and gain the chamber window , at which I met him with a tender embrace , wandering over his lips and eyes with eager kisses .


This sight so enflamed the soul of Ariodant with rage and grief , that drawing out his sword , and fixing the pummel of it in the ground , he was going to rush with all his force upon the point , had  he not been prevented by Lurcanio , who perceiving his rash design , sprang to him in an instant , and having thrown aside the fatal instrument of death , received his sinking brother in his arms .


Ah miserable brother !
said Lurcanio , by what wild fury art thou possest , to fall thus meanly for a woman ?
Now cursed , for ever cursed be all the kind  may they all perish in one wide ruin , blown as they are , like clouds , with every blast of wind : and this fair mischief that has betrayed thee , let us devise some glorious vengeance for her : let not thy noble life be sacrificed to her falshood  her 's is the crime , be her 's the punishment  proclaim her guilt aloud , accuse her to the king  my eyes as well as thine have seen her infamy , and with my sword I 'll make good thy assertion .


Ariodant , whose soul was torn with various and conflicting passions , smiled gloomily at the mention of revenge  a-while he seemed to bury every thought of grief and of despair in that one hope of sacrificing the guilty princess to his wrongs  but alas !
the cureless wound remained behind  Geneura , base as she appeared , he loved with such unceasing fondness , that wholly unable to endure her loss , and dreading no hell like that within his bosom , once more he resolved to die .


To Lurcanio , however , he dissembled his design , and went home with him at his request  but early the next morning he departed , leaving no traces behind him from whence it might be gathered to what place he was gone .


Lurcanio dreading the fatal effects of his despair , was pierced to his inmost soul at the news of  his flight : the king and the whole court took part in his affliction  no methods were left untried to discover where he was  messengers were sent in search of him to the utmost extremities of the kingdom  but all returned without any success .


At length a peasant came to court , and at his request was introduced to the princess , who informed her , that as he was travelling to the city he met Ariodant  that this unhappy knight obliged him to follow him and be witness of a deed he was going to perform  that obeying his orders they journeyed on together till they came to a steep rock that hung pendant over the sea , fronting the Irish island .


Ariodant , said the peasant , ascending this rock , commanded me to observe well what he did , to give you an account of it , and tell you his last words  which were , that he had seen too much : then springing furiously from the top of the rock , he precipitated himself into the sea .
Terrified at the dreadful sight , I hastily turned back , and travelled hither to bring you the fatal news .


Geneura , overwhelmed with grief and amazement for the death of her lover , and the strange message he had sent her , abandoned herself to the most violent excesses of despair  she beat her beauteous bosom , tore her hair , and in the wildness of her woe , a thousand times invoked the dear loved name of Ariodant  repeated the mysterious words he uttered , and as often called on death to end her .


The news of his death , with the sad manner of it , spread grief and consternation through the whole  city  even the remotest parts of Scotland felt and lamented the loss of their valiant defender  the king and the whole court bewailed his loss with the sincerest sorrow : but Lurcanio , superior in grief , as more nearly interested in the dear deceased , mourned his unhappy brother with all the tenderness of fraternal love , and all the warmth of friendship .


Revolving in his mind the fatal adventure of the window , which had been the cause of his brother 's distraction  the desire and hope of revenge afforded some relief to the poignancy of his woe  and obstinately bent to sacrifice the princess to the manes of his Ariodant , he presented himself before the king and council , and accused her of incontinence , relating all that Ariodant and he had seen , and the fatal effects it had upon him : he then reminded the king of the Scottish laws against unchastity , and loudly demanded justice on the princess .


Horror and amazement seized the soul of the unhappy father !
Geneura , tho ' dearer to him than life , tho ' innocent in his opinion , he has not power to screen from the danger that threatens her  the laws indeed permit the accused to have a champion to fight in her defence  by whom , if the prosecutor ( who is obliged to maintain by force of arms the truth of his assertion ) is worsted , she is declared guiltless of the crimes laid to her charge .


To this only remedy the king has recourse , and causes it to be proclaimed throughout his dominions , that if any knight of noble birth will undertake the defence of his daughter , and by force of  arms shall vanquish her accuser , on him he will bestow the princess , with a dower suitable to her quality .


Notwithstanding this proclamation no knight has yet offered himself for the enterprize , deterred therefrom by the known valour of Lurcanio : the king , no less anxious for Geneura 's reputation than her life , caused all her maids to be brought to a trial , who with one voice declared they never were privy to any intrigue of their royal mistress .


Alarmed at these proceedings , and dreading the consequence of a further scrutiny , I urged the duke to take some measures for our common security : he , with dissembled kindness , praised my secrecy and affection , and sent two men to conduct me to a castle of his at a great distance from the court .


Wholly relying on his faith , I put myself under the protection of those two villains , whom the duke , desirous of removing for ever the only person who could discover his guilt , ordered when they came to a convenient place , to murder me : happily for me chance conducted you that way  you delivered me from my impending fate , and while it shall please heaven to preserve my unhappy life , it shall be spent in grateful acknowledgments to my protector .


This account of Geneura 's innocence was extremely welcome to Rinaldo  for though confiding in his own courage he was not without hopes of delivering her , guilty as she appeared  yet the certainty he was going to fight in a just cause , animated him with double fires , and gave him almost a confirmation of victory .


 Now clapping spurs to his horse , he rode on with such eager haste , that the noble town of St. Andrews soon appeared in view .
There the combat was to be performed  the guards had already surrounded the lists , the challenger 's trumpet had sounded , and the unhappy king , pale , trembling , and full of eager anxiety , listened with a beating heart , and fear-check'd wishes for an accepting answer .


Mean time Rinaldo , having left the frighted Dalinda at an inn , with repeated assurances of gaining her pardon , in case he vanquished the princess 's accuser , advanced towards the city-gate : here he was met by a young page , who informed him that an unknown knight , clad all in sable armour , was arrived  that he had demanded the combat with Lurcanio , and declared he would die , or free the princess from her ignominious sentence .


Rinaldo , impatient to unfold the mystery , thundered at the city-gates , which being opened , he rode eagerly to the lists  there beholding the combatants engaged , he forced his way through the press , and crying aloud that they should cease the fight , demanded an instant audience of the king .


The marshals of the field thereupon parted the two champions , and Rinaldo was immediately conducted to the king  to whom he related the whole story of Polynesso 's treachery , as he had received it from Dalinda  adding that he would prove the truth of it by force of arms , and begged that he might be allowed to defy the traitor duke to single combat .


The noble form of Rinaldo , but chiefly the pleasing purport of his speech , gained him absolute  credit with the king .
Scarce could the raptured parent restrain the wild exultings of his joy of this confirmation of his Geneura 's innocence  dearer than life or empire was she loved by him , and freely would he have sacrificed both to save her honour : he hesitated therefore not a moment in permitting the requested combat , but ordered duke Polynesso to be called .


He , by his office of high constable , having the ordering of the combat , was riding proudly about the field , exulting in his successful treason , and anticipating , in his own mind , the ruin of the fair and injured Geneura .
Ignorant though he was of the design of this summons , yet coward guilt suggesting the worst he had to fear , with a disordered air , and eyes expressive of the various apprehensions that struck his conscious soul , he met the reproachful look of his king , and the fierce glances of Rinaldo .


That noble warrior repeating in a few words the treasons he had been guilty of , challenged him to the field : Polynesso denied the accusation , but accepting the proferred combat , because he could not avoid it , retired to arm himself , while Rinaldo , fraught with the pious prayers and blessings of the king , entered the lists , and ordered his trumpet to sound .


At the third blast the duke appeared  pale terror and dismay were pictured in his face , his fainting heart throbbed with the conscious pangs of guilt , and horrors of impending fate : confused , distracted , not knowing what he did , he darted forward at the signal given to begin the fight  but his  weak lance , ill guided by his trembling hand , fell harmless to the ground .


Not so the great Rinaldo  he , with calm courage , and brave , yet unassuming confidence , meditated the wound , and rising all collected to the blow , threw his famed lance with such unerring skill and force , that it pierced quite through the armour of Polynesso , and hid its fatal point within his side .


The traitor fell , Rinaldo eagerly dismounted , and approaching him , unlaced his helmet .
With faint low voice he called for mercy , and thinking to deserve it , confessed unasked the wrong he had been guilty of to Geneura  then , as if life had been only lent him till he had cleared her innocence , scarce had he uttered another prayer for mercy , but death supprest the coward supplication , and he lay a breathless coarse at the feet of Rinaldo .


The people , transported with joy that their princess was not only delivered from death , but restored to her former sanctity of character , made the air resound with their acclamations .


Rinaldo being conducted to the king , untied the beaver of his helmet , and was immediately known to be that famous knight of Italy , whose noble exploits were noised over all the habitable world .


The king embraced him in a rapture of joy and gratitude  the nobles crouded round the deliverer of their princess , loaded him with blessings , and strove to exceed each other in praises of his invincible valour .


These congratulations over , all eyes were turned upon the unknown knight in black armour , who  had so generously undertaken the defence of Geneura against her accuser Lurcanio  pensive he stood during the fight between Polynesso and Rinaldo , his eyes fixed upon the combatants , with eager attention he had listened to the dying words of the treacherous duke , and while the multitude in loud shouts expressed their joy , and the king and court were paying honours to the glorious victor , he stood apart from the throng , absorbed in thought , and wholly insensible of the tumult around him .


The king caused him to be conducted to his presence , and acknowledging himself greatly obliged to his generous intention , pressed him to let him know in what manner he could repay the obligation .


The knight made no answer , but bowing low , and throwing off his helmet , the king and court , with the utmost astonishment , beheld the lovely face of Ariodant  wonder and joy kept them all silent for a while  at length the king recovering from his surprize , clasp'd the young warrior to his breast with a tender embrace :


Is it possible , said he , in a tone of voice expressive of the strongest transport , that I behold again my Ariodant , the gallant defender of my dominions , and the brave champion for my daughter 's honour ?
him whom I lamented as dead , whom my whole kingdom mourned for : tell me by what strange yet happy chance I now behold thee living , whose death was so confidently affirmed , and so universally believed .


 Ariodant knowing the king was acquainted with the whole story of his love , replied without reserve :


The peasant , my lord , whom I detained to be a witness of the sad effects of my despair , and to bring the news of it to the princess , informed her truly that I cast myself from the rock into the sea  but that natural repugnance we have all to death , when near , however we may despise its terrors at a distance , impelled me , involuntarily , to use measures to preserve a life which a moment before I had been so desirous of losing .


As soon as I rose again upon the surface of the waves , I applied myself to swimming , at which I was very expert , and soon reached the neighbouring shore , faint , weary , and almost breathless .
I threw myself down amidst the rushes , and was found in this condition by an ancient hermit , whose cell was at a small distance .


Thither he conducted me , and in a few days his charitable cares restored me to my strength  but , alas !
my mind was tortured still with various passions  love , hate , despair , and eager thirst of vengeance , by turns possessed me  in vain I sought to banish the idea of Geneura from my soul , it still returned with double force  nor could her infidelity , of which , mistaken wretch that I was , I thought I had such convincing proofs , weaken the power of her resistless charms .


Thus languishing , with a cureless wound , I heard the news of her accusation by my brother , and the danger to which her life and honour were exposed  at that moment , forgetting the injuries  I had suffered , insensible to all the ties of consanguinity and friendship , and only solicitous for her safety , I determined to fight with my brother in her defence , pleasing myself with the thought , that if I did not free her , I should at least have the satisfaction of dying in her cause , and thereby proving how much superior to Polynesso was my love , who though favoured as he was by her , he wanted courage to defend her .


Having provided myself with armour that might effectually conceal me , I came hither full of fury against my brother , whom I could not but consider as my worst enemy , since he was the accuser of the still adored Geneura .


The arrival of the brave Rinaldo happily prevented the continuance of a combat , which must have ended in the death of one brother , and eternal remorse to the other .


With joy I behold the princess delivered from the ignominious death with which she was threatened  but oh !
with far more rapture do I congratulate your majesty on this discovery of her innocence : Happy Rinaldo , to be at once the defender of her life , and restorer of her honour : As for me , I sought only to preserve her from death  and if that was denied me , to have the satisfaction , at least , of dying in her defence , by the hand of a friend and brother .


The king who loved him before for his virtues , was so charmed with this generous proof of his passion for his daughter , that he easily yielded to the solicitations of Rinaldo and the noblemen of his court , to bestow the princess on so faithful a  lover  and endowing her with the dutchy of Albania , which , on Polynesso 's decease , reverted to the crown , he gave her hand to Ariodant in the presence of the whole court , and the nuptials were soon after celebrated with the utmost magninificence .


Rinaldo having obtained Dalinda 's pardon , who retired into a monastry , took leave of the king and happy lovers , and pursued his voyage to England .


39 .
TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONTINUED .


 39.1 .
Of the use of History for Children .


CHILDREN are very fond of strange stories : it is common to see them in high delight , or in tears , at the recital of adventures : fail not to take advantage of this propensity  whenever you find them disposed to listen , tell them some short pretty fable , and let it be one relative to the animals , innocent and ingeniously composed : give them for what they are , fables  and explain the moral design of them .


As for the heathen stories , it will be happy for a girl to remain totally ignorant of them all her life-time  because they are impure , and abound with impious absurdities  but if you can not prevent an acquaintance with some , do your endeavour to inspire an abhorrence of them .


When you have told one story , stay till the child asks for another , leaving as it were a craving upon him to be further informed  at length when his curiosity becomes excited , then have some select  pieces of history to relate , in a compendious manner : let there be a connection between them , and tell a particular part one day , and another the next , that he may be held in suspence , and in impatience to hear the conclusion .


Animate your accounts with a lively tone of voice and expression  and make the personages speak : children of a lively imagination will fancy they both hear and see them : for example , recite the story of Joseph  make the brothers speak like brutish people  Jacob , like a fond afflicted father , Joseph , in his character , taking pleasure , when become the ruler over Egypt , in keeping himself from being known by his brethren , then putting them in dread of him , and at last discovering himself .


This natural representation , joined to the wonders of the history , will charm a child , provided he is not cloyed of such things , but left to ask for them , or be promised them under the notion of reward  and when he is grown wiser , and provided we never offer them by way of a task , nor oblige them to a repetition  for this is a force upon him , and what will destroy all the pleasure he takes in these historical pieces .


However , it is to be observed , that if he hath any degree of facility in speaking , he will be naturally prone to relate to those he loves , whatever stories have given him the greatest entertainment  but you are not to set him this for a rule : you may get some person that is free with him to pretend a desire to hear the story  the child will be quite delighted to tell it , and do not seem to mind him , nor take any notice of his mistakes  when he comes  to be better practised , then you may with gentleness observe to him what is the best manner of telling a tale , to make it short , plain , and natural , by the choice of such circumstances as best set forth things as they truly were .
If you have a number of children , use them by degrees to represent the several personages in the history they have learned : let one be Abraham , another Isaac , c. this personating will delight them beyond other plays , and give them a habit of thinking and speaking serious matters with pleasure , and fix the transactions indelibly in their memory ,


We ought to endeavour to give them a greater taste for sacred history than for any other  not by commending it as the finest , which perhaps they would not readily believe , but by bringing them to perceive it without a word said .
Point out to their observation of what importance it is  how singular , marvellous , replete with natural paintings and nobly spiritous  the articles of the creation , the fall of Adam , the deluge , the call of Abraham , the sacrifice of Isaac , the adventures of Joseph abovementioned , the birth and flight of Moses , are not only proper to awake the curiosity of children , but at the same time that they discover the origin of religion , they also lay the foundations of it in the young mind .


It would argue a profound ignorance of the essence of religon , not to see that it is entirely historical : for by a web of marvellous facts , do we find its establishment , its perpetuity , and all that ought to engage us to the belief and practice thereof .


 Let it not be imagined that we have any intention that people should dip into science when we propose these histories to them  for they are brief , various , and proper to please the most ordinary understandings .
God , who best knows the spirit of man whom he created , hath thrown religion among popular facts , which far from overcharging the simple , assist them rather to conceive and retain the sense of its mystery : for instance , tell a child , that in God three co-equal persons make but one single nature  by hearing and repeating these terms , he will remember them  but , I doubt , not conceive the sense of them .
Tell him then , how when Jesus Christ came out of the water of Jordan , the Father caused these words to be heard from heaven : ` This is my beloved son , in whom I am well pleased , hear ye him . '
Add , that the Holy Spirit descended upon our Saviour , in a bodily shape , like a dove , and you will make him sensibly perceive the Trinity in a passage which he will never forget : here are three persons whom he will ever distingush by their different actions  you have but to teach him , that all taken together constitute but one God .


This example suffices to show the use of history , which , though it seems to be a prolix method of instruction , is in reality the most compendious , and avoids the dry way of catechisms , wherein the mysteries are disjoined from the facts  and we may know , that in the antient times they taught by means of history .
The admirable method of teaching which St. Austin prescribes , was not of that father 's introduction  it was the universal practice  of the chuch : this consisted in demonstrating , by a series of historical facts , religion to be as old as the world , Jesus Christ expected in the old testament , Jesus Christ reigning in the new : this is the bottom of christian instruction .


This requires somewhat more time and application than the method of teaching to which some people confine themselves  however , by this series of history we are brought to a true knowledge of religion  whereas , when unacquainted with it , we have but confused notions of Jesus Christ , the gospel , the church , and of the foundation of those virtues with which the name of christian ought to inspire us .


The historical catechism printed a little while ago , a plain book , short , and much clearer than the common catechisms , includes all necessary to be known on that head , and of this no one will say that it requires a great deal of study .


To the passages I have beforementioned , let us add , the going thorough the Red Sea , the sojournment of the people in the desert , where they eat the bread which fell from heaven , and drank of the water which Moses , by the stroke of his rod , made to spring out of the rock .


Represent to them the miraculous conquest of the promised land , on which occasion the waters of Jordan turned back toward their source , and the walls of a city fell down of themselves in the view of the besiegers .
Paint in natural colours the conflicts of Saul , and of David  shew the last , while yet a stripling , without arms , and in his dress of a shepherd , the vanquisher of that  proud giant Goliah .
Let not be forgotten the glory and wisdom of Solomon , his decision of the dispute between the two women about the child  but then describe him fallen from that height of wisdom , dishonouring himself by ease and indulgence , the almost unavoidable consequence of extreme prosperity .


Make the prophets speak to the king , in the name of the Lord  let them read futurity as a volume  appear humble , of austere life , and suffering continual persecution for the truth 's sake .


Place in its due point of time the first destruction of Jerusalem  describe the temple burned , and the holy city ruined for the sins of the people : relate the captivity in Babylon , where the Jews bewailed their beloved Sion : before their return bring in the pleasing relations of what befel Tobit , Judith , Esther , and Daniel .


It would have its usefulness , if children were brought to declare their thoughts on the different characters of these Saints , to know which affected them most : one would prefer Esther , another Judith : this would create a little contention , and so more strongly impress the stories upon their minds , and help to form their judgment .


After this , bring the people up to Jerusalem , and let them repair the ruins thereof  then form a lovely picture of the peace and prosperity of the city  in a short time after , give the portrait of that cruel and impious Antiochus , who died in hypocritical penitence .


Describe the victories of the Maccabees , under the reign of that persecutor  likewise the martyrdom  of the seven brethren , of the same family .
Proceed to the miraculous birth of John the Baptist  then in course recount that of Jesus Christ  after which it will be proper to select out of the gospels all the most striking passages of his life , his preaching at the Temple at 12 years of age , his baptism , his retreat into the wilderness , and temptation , his calling his Apostles , the miracle of the loaves , the conversion of that woman sinner that anointed his feet with precious unguent , washed them with her tears , and dried them with her hair .


Tell how he taught the Samaritan woman , how cured the man born blind , raised Lazarus from the dead  shew Jesus Christ entering triumphant into Jerusalem , shew him upon the cross , and at length rising out of the Sepulchre .
- After this it should be remarked , with how much familiarity he consorted with his Disciples for forty days together , even till they beheld him ascend up into Heaven  - besides this , the descent of the Holy Ghost , the stoning of St. Stephen , the conversion of Paul , the calling of the centurion Cornelius , the travels of the apostles , and particularly of St. Paul , are exceedingly engaging : chuse out the most wonderful stories of the martyrs , and something in general of the heavenly life of the primitive Christians , interspersed with instances of the courage of young virgins , the astonishing austerities of the hermits , the conversion of the emperors and of the empire , the blindness of the Jews , and their terrible punishment , which lasteth to this day .


 These narrations will , in a delightful manner , impress on the tender and lively imagination of a child an entire series of religion from the creation of the world to our days  give them noble ideas of it , and such as will never be effaced  they will perceive likewise in that history the hand of God ever lifted up to deliver the righteous , and to confound the wicked .


They will be used to see God , the efficient cause , in all things , drawing interceptibly into his designs those of his creatures that seem most repugnant to them .


But as to this collection of extracts , let it consist of such as afford the pleasantest , the most magnificent images  for we should by all means so manage it , that children may find religion charming , lovely , venerable  whereas their common notion of it is as of something melancholy , flat , and doleful .


Besides the inestimable benefit of thus teaching them religion , all these delightful narrations , so early infused into their memories , awaken a curiosity to be informed of things in their nature serious , render them sensible to the pleasures of the understanding , and interest them in whatever parts of history happen to bear any relation to such as they have already learned .


Yet , I say again , great care must be taken never to lay it down for a rule , that they must attend to you , must remember all  much more , never to prescribe stated lessons : no , let pleasure effect every thing .


 Do not urge them , and you will bring it to bear : even for ordinary understandings , the point is not to overcharge them , but wait the gradual rise of their curiosity .


But it will be objected - to relate these several parts of history in a lively , concise , natural , and pleasing manner , where are the governesses capable of it ?
To which I answer , that , in proposing it , I mean that people should endeavour to procure for their children persons of good parts , and put them as much as possible into this method of teaching , and so every governess will perform according to her talent : but still , whatever her capacity is , matters will not go quite so wrong , when this natural and plain method is in practice .


To their narrations they may add the sight of prints or pictures , representing the sacred stories : prints will serve for general use .
But if there should be an opportunity of shewing the children good pictures , let it not be neglected  for the glow of colours , and size of figures as big as the life , strike the imagination with much greater force .


40 .
THE LADY 's GEOGRAPHY .


 40.1 .
DESCRIPTION of the Island of CEYLON .
[ Continued from Page 720 . ]


ALL the kinds of fruits which the Indies in general produce , are found in this island  it has however some peculiar to itself  among which one of the most particular is the Jacks , a fruit which is of very great service in food  it grows on a very high tree , is of a greenish colour , covered over with prickles , and is about the size of a loaf of eighteen pounds weight .
Its seeds , or what they call its eggs , are disposed in the inside of it , like the seeds of a gourd .
They eat the jacks as we eat cabbage , and its taste is not extremely unlike it .
When it is ripe it may be eaten raw , and one of them is sufficient for six or seven people .
The grain or eggs resemble chesnuts very much , both in colour and taste  they may be eaten either boiled , or roasted in ashes : one jacks produces two or three quarts of them , and the inhabitants always keep store of them by them .


The Jombs is another fruit which is peculiar to the island : it has the taste of an apple , is very full of juice , and is no less wholesome than agreeable .
Its colour is white , mixed with red , in a manner that appears to be the work of an elegant pencil .
There are also several wild fruits  which are to be met with in their woods , as , the Mucroes , which are round , of the size of a cherry , and of a very agreeable taste .
The Dongs , which resemble black cherries  the Ambellos , which may be compared to our gooseberries  the Carollas , Cabellas , Tookes , and Jollas , which may pass for so many sorts of very good plumbs , and the Paragiddes , which are not unlike our pears .


The island of Ceylon produces three trees , which , though their fruits are not indeed fit to eat , are no less remarkable for other conveniencies : the first , which is named Tallipot , is very strait , and in heighth and thickness nearly resembles the mast of a ship  its leaves are so large , that a single one will cover fifteen or twenty men , and shelter them from the rain .
They grow stronger as they dry , without becoming less pliable or manageable .
Nature could scarcely have bestowed any gift on the inhabitants more valueable than this  although the leaves are so very extensive when open , they can be folded up like a fan , and being then not thicker than one 's arm , weigh very little in the hand .
Their shape is round , but the Ceylonese cut them into triangular pieces , wherewith they cover themselves when they travel , taking care to place the pointed end before them , which therefore makes its way the easier through the shrubs .
The soldiers make tents of them .


These leaves grow at the top of the tree , like those of the cocoa  but , what is very extraordinary , it bears no fruit till the year of its death , at which time alone , it puts forth large branches ,  laden with very beautiful yellow flowers , but of a very strong and offensive smell , which changes into a round , hard fruit , of the size of our largest cherries , but which are good for nothing but to sow .
Thus the Tillipot bears but once , but then it is so loaded with fruit at that time , that one tree is sufficient for the sowing of a whole province .
Yet the smell of the flowers is so insufferable near houses , that they seldom fail to cut down the tree so soon as it begins to put forth buds , especially as at that time , if they are cut , there is found within them an exceeding good sap , which may be reduced to meal , and made up in cakes , that have the taste of white bread .
This is also another resource for the inhabitants when the rice harvest happens to turn out indifferently .


The second of these trees is the Kitula , which grows as strait as the cocoa , but not so tall , and by many degrees slenderer .
Its principal singularity consists in its yielding a kind of liquor which is called Tellegie , very sweet , wholesome , and agreeable , but without any strength .
The liquor they collect twice a-day , and from some of the best trees three times  the quantity of the whole frequently amounting to six quarts in a day .
They boil it up till it acquires the consistence and appearance of dark powder sugar  and this the inhabitants call Jaggory .
With very little more trouble they might render it as white as sugar , to which , in every other respect , it is no way inferior in goodness .
The manner of getting this liquor is as follows :


When the tree comes to its maturity it puts  forth , towards its extremities , a little button , which changes into a round fruit , and is , properly speaking , the seed .
This button they open , putting into it various ingredients , such as salt , pepper , citron , garlic , and various kinds of leaves , which prevent it from ripening so soon as it would otherwise do .
Every day , at certain times , they cut off a little piece towards the end of this , from which place the liquor flows out in abundance .
As this button ripens and withers , others grow lower and lower every year , till they at length reach the bottom of the branches  but when this comes to be the case , which is in about eight or ten years , the tree ceases to bear , and presently after dies .


Its leaves resemble those of the cocoa-palm , and are covered with a kind of bark extremely hard and full of filaments , which are employed in the making of ropes : they fall during the whole time that the tree is growing  but when it has arrived at its full dimensions , they remain on it for many years , and when they do fall , are never supplied by any others .


The wood , which is seldom above three inches thick , serves as a velopement to a very thick pith  it is extremely hard and heavy , but very apt to split of itself .
The colour of it is black , and looks as if it was composed of inlaid work .
The Ceylonese make pestles of it to beat the rice withal .


The third extraordinary tree , and indeed what renders this island so extremely valuable to the Dutch , is that which bears the cinnamon : it is  called in the language of the country Corundagouhah .
It grows in the woods indiscriminately with other trees , and , what is somewhat extraordinary , the Ceylonese set no extraordinary value upon it .
This tree is of a middling bulk , its bark is the cinnamon , which appears white when on the trunk , but which they take off , and dry it in the sun .
The islanders gather this only from the smaller trees , although the bark of the larger ones smell as sweet , and have as strong a taste .
The wood has no smell  it is white , and about the hardness of deal , and is used for all kinds of purposes .
Its leaf is not unlike that of the laurel , but when it first begins to put forth is of a bright scarlet , and rubbed between the hands has more the smell of a clove gillyflower than that of the cinnamon .
The fruit , which usually ripens about September , is like an acorn , but smaller , and has less both of smell and taste than the bark .
They boil them in water , in order to extract an oil from them , which swims at the top , and , when congealed , becomes as hard and as white as tallow , and of a very agreeable smell .
The inhabitants anoint their bodies with it , and also burn it in their lamps , but no candles are made of it , but for the King .


With respect to animals , the island of Ceylon produces a great variety  viz .
cows , buffaloes , swine , goats , deer , hares , dogs , jackalls , apes , tygers , bears , wild bears , elephants , lions , horses , and asses  but no sheep .
Amongst the fallow beasts they have one called the Memima , which is no bigger than a hare , but much resembles a  deer  its colour is grey , spotted with white , and its flesh is excellent .
The Ganvera is a kind of wild buck , which has a very sharp chine , its four feet white , and half the legs of the same colour .
Knox gives an account of his having seen one , which was kept in the king 's magazine , together with a black tyger , a white deer , and a spotted elephant .


The apes are not only in prodigious abundance in the woods , but also of many various kinds , whereof there are some very different from any that are to be found in other countries .
Some of them are as large as our spaniels , with grey hair and black faces , and long white beards , reaching from ear to ear , which give them greatly the appearance of old men .
There are others of the same size , but differing in colour , their bodies , faces , and beards , being all of a bright white .
But as this difference of colour does not seem to form any specific difference in the animal , they are both alike named Wanderous : they do but little mischief , keeping constantly in the woods , where they feed entirely on leaves and buds .


There is another sort , called Killowan , which are beardless , but have a white face , and long hair on their heads , which descend and divide like those of the human species : this kind are extremely mischievous , from the continual ravage they commit amongst the grain .
The Ceylonese are extremely fond of the flesh of all their kinds of apes , as well as of that of their squirrels , whereof they have also several different species .


The variety of ants in the island of Ceylon is  no less admirable than their abundance .
That which they call Coumbias , and Tale-Coumbias , are very much like ours in size , with this difference , that the first are reddish , and the others , which are black , are only to be found in rotten trees , and have a very disagreeable smell .


There is a third kind , called Dimbios , which are large and red , and make their nests on the branches of large trees , in leaves which they amass together , to the bulk of a man 's head .
Several nests are sometimes found on one tree , and the fear of a thousand dangerous things will then prevent any person from attempting to climb up it .


The Coura [ ... ] atches are a fourth kind of ants  they are large and black , live under ground , and form holes there , nearly of the shape of rabbit-burrows , and the fields are so full of these holes , that the cattle are in perpetual danger from them of breaking their legs .


A fifth sort are the Codd as : they are of a very fine black , much about the size of the former , and live also in the earth  but they frequently make excursions in very numerous parties , without any one knowing the peculiar period of their expedition .
They bite cruelly if hurt or put out of their way , but otherwise , if unmolested , they are very harmless and inoffensive .


But the most numerous , and at the same time the most extraordinary of all the kinds of ants is , that which they call the Vacos .
The ground is covered with them : they are of a middling size , have a white body , and red head , and devour every thing that comes in their way .
They eat  cloth , wood , the straw wherewith the houses are thatched , and , in short , every thing but iron and stone .
No one dares to leave any thing in an uninhabited house  they get up along the walls , making a rhind of earth as they go along , which they continue through the whole extent of their way , to what height soever they arrive .
If this arcade happens to break , they all immediately return back again , to repair their building , and continue their march assoon as they have completed the work .
The inhabitants easily perceive their approach by the sight of these little vaults , and are obliged to use continual precaution to destroy or drive them away .
In places which are without houses , they raise up little mountains of earth , of four , five , or six feet in height , and so strong , that it is not easy to destroy them , even with a spade .
These little huts , which are called Humbosses , are composed of vaults or arcades , and built of very fine earth , which the people make use of for the fabrication of their idols .


The Vacos multiply prodigiously , but they also die by myriads , for when they acquire their wings , they take their flight in such inconceivable numbers towards the west , that they almost obscure the sky , and rising to so great a height as to be quite lost to the view , they cease not their flight till they drop down dead , exhausted with fatigue  they then become a prey to birds of many kinds , and chickens in particular will feed on them more readily than on even the rice .


[ To be continued . ]
41 .
THE LADY 's MUSEUM .
The TRIFLER .
[ NUMBER XI . ]


 To the AUTHOR of the TRIFLER .


MADAM ,


MY brother , who is a great scholar , and writes A. M. after his name , desires me to acquaint you , that having with much labour and pains translated the enclosed dialogue from the Greek , he is willing to communicate it to the world in your paper , that the trifling part of your readers , which he supposes to be by far the greater number , may learn that there were trifling , that is idle people , in the time of Socrates , and may be corrected by the wise admonitions of that  great divine .
My brother is determined to keep himself concealed , that he may silently , and without envy , enjoy the reputation of this performance  and therefore recommends it to you to be particularly careful that no mistakes are made in the spelling and pointing .


I am your humble servant , UNKNOWN .


P. S. My brother says Socrates was not a divine , but a philosopher .


42 .
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN SOCRATES and ARISTARCHUS .


 SOCRATES one day observing Aristarchus to look thoughtful and melancholy , said to him , ` My friend , something seems to lie heavy upon your mind , you should share the burden with your friends  perhaps we may be able to assist you . '


To which Aristarchus replied , ` Indeed , Socrates , I am in great perplexity .
You know that on account of the war a great multitude have forsaken the open country , and fled into the Piraeum  and there are come to my house so many helpless sisters , nieces , and cousins , that I have not less than fourteen gentlewomen - Now from our landed estates we get nothing , for the enemy is master there  nor from rent of houses , inhabitants are so thin in the city  furniture no body will buy  and money there is none to be borrowed : one may as soon expect to find it in walking along the streets as to borrow any .
- It is grievous , Socrates , to stand and see our relations perish  it is impossible to  support such a number of them in such times . '


Socrates hearing all this , replied , ` And how comes it to pass that Reramo , who has a great family to maintain , not only finds means to provide himself and them with all necessaries , but likewise has so much to spare that he even grows rich by what he vends ? '


` Good reason , replied the other , because he keeps slaves , and I gentlefolks . '


` And of these two sorts of people which may you reckon the most valuable , his slaves or your gentlefolks ? '
said Socrates .


`` Surely mine , '' says Aristarchus .


` But then is it not a disgrace , says the philosopher , that while he is thriving by the means of a parcel of slaves , you should be driven to extremity with those that are so much their betters ? '


` Oh !
but , says the other , he feeds handicraftsmen , I people who have been genteelly brought up . '


' I suppose you mean by handicraftsmen , replied Socrates , those who are skilled in preparing the useful things of life . '


`` Yes , I do , '' said the other .


`` Is meal in that number ? ''


`` Undoubtedly . ''


`` And bread ? ''


`` Most surely . ''


` And cloaths for both sexes , coats , gowns , cloaks , linen ? '


' A [ ... ] questionless , these are all most useful [ ... ] '


 ` Probably , continued Socrates , your people are not at all skilled in making any of these things ? '


`` O yes , one or other in all or most of them ? ''


` Possibly then , said Socrates , you do n't know that by means of one single article Nausicydes , the mealman , not only maintains himself and several servants , but likewise a great number of hogs and cows  and hath so thriven as even to be named for serving the expensive offices of the state : and that Kerybus , by his business of a baker , supports a large family  nay lives in plenty : - then there 's Demeas , the taylor , and numbers of Megareans that get a fine livelihood by mercery ware . '


` Defend me !
says the other , these fellows are owners of many purchased slaves , whom they force to work , and by their labours they thrive  but I tell you , I have none but gentry and my relations . '


` Pray now , because they are gentry and your relations , says Socrates , do you think they have nothing to do but to eat and sleep ?
or among people of the like condition do you reckon those that live after that manner , to pass their time more happily than others that both know and practise the necessary employments of life ?
or do you apprehend sloth and idleness to be more conducive towards a man 's learning what he ought to understand , or remembering what he has learned , or to his health and strength of body , or , in fine , toward his attaining or preserving the requisites of life ?
while industry and care  are nothing worth .
You confess they have been taught to do some of these works - why - because they were things of no service , or such as they must never put their hands to  or rather on the contrary , as what they might one day labour in , and profit by - for which makes men the most virtuous - living in idleness , or being engaged in a useful business ?
- or honestest , the being employed , or lazily to be talking how they shall live ?
Yet more , it is my opinion , that neither you love them , nor they you - not them , for you really feel them very burthensome to you  they love not you , for they must see you are quite weary of them - from whence 't is a great chance but dislike and enmity will spring up more and more , while kindred and affection fades away .
Now could you contrive to make yourself their director and protector in some kind of profitable employment , you would then be fond of them , finding them useful to you , and they would love you , because they would perceive you had pleasure in what they did  and then , reflecting with satisfaction on all former benefits , the obligation to them would be enhanced , and you would grow friendlier and dearer to each other every day . '


` If any thing scandalous was proposed to be done , death is rather to be chosen  but now these women know to perform what is very laudable , very becoming their sex - and whatever we know how to do , that we do with  the greatest facility and pleasure .
Wherefore make no hesitation to press them to what will be of service to yourself and them  and it is my opinion they will with pleasure agree to the proposal . '


` By all the gods !
said Aristarchus , you give me such admirable advice , Socrates , that I , who lately dared not think of borrowing , being sure that when that money was gone I should never be able to discharge the debt , am now resolved to venture upon it to begin our undertaking . '


Accordingly , money was raised , a quantity of wool laid in , the women worked , even while they eat their dinner , they worked till supper time : sorrow was turned into joy  instead of sour glances they looked with chearfulness on each other  they loved him as their guardian , he them as a set of useful relations .


Some time after he came again to Socrates , and with pleasure in his face gave him an account of their proceedings , and added , ` They now accuse me as the only person that eats idle bread in the house . '


` Well , says Socrates , and do n't you tell them the fable of the dog ?
Upon a time when animals could speak , a sheep talked to her master in this manner , ` We are vastly surprised that to us , who afford you wool , and lamb , and cheese , you never allow any other food but merely what the earth produces : whereas your dog , by whom you get nothing , comes in for a snap of every sort of victuals you eat yourself . '
The dog overhearing this , cries , ` Aye , but 't is to me you owe your safety , that you are neither stole  by the rogues , nor devoured by the wolves : was not I to watch over you ye durst not go to pasture for your lives  ' this convinced the sheep of the dog 's merit .
Tell them , therefore , that you , like the dog , are their guardian and careful overseer , by whose means they live to follow their employments with pleasure and safety . '


43 .
THE HISTORY OF HARRIOT and SOPHIA CONCLUDED .


 SOPHIA was not deceived when she imagined she had seen Sir Charles , it was really he who had rode by her window , and it was her little abode he was in search of , though in his extreme eagerness he had overlooked it .


He had left England with a hope that change of scene , and a variety of new objects , would efface the idea of Sophia from his heart , and restore him to his former tranquility  but amidst all the delights of Paris he found himself opprest with languor : no amusements could entertain him , no conversation engage his attention  disgusted with every thing he saw and heard , peevish , discontented , and weary of the world , he avoided all company , and had recourse to books for relief  but Sophia was too much in his thoughts to render study either instructive or amusing .
He past whole days in solitude , feeding his melancholy with the reflection of a thousand past circumstances ,  which served to soften his mind , and make him feel his loss more sensibly .


When he reflected on her exalted virtues , her wit , her elegance , the attractive graces of her person , and the irresistable sweetness of her manners , he lamented his hard fate that had put such a treasure out of his reach  but when his conscience told him that it had once been in his power to have become possessor of this treasure , that he had trifled with that innocent affection till he had alienated it from himself to another object  his anguish became insupportable , and he sought to relieve it by rousing his indignation against her , for her preference of so unworthy a rival .


He called to mind her interview with this happy rival in the field , and concluded he was far more favoured by her than himself had ever been , since her discourse to him had produced so tender and passionate an expression of acknowledgment as that he had beheld .


These circumstances , which his imagination dwelt upon in order to lessen his regret , added to it all the stings of jealousy  so that , almost frantic with rage and grief , he was a hundred times upon the point of committing some desperate action .


A violent fever was the consequence of these transports , which , after confining him a long time to his bed , left his body in a weak and languishing condition , and his mind sunk in an habitual melancholy .


His physicians recommended to him the air of Montpelier , and he was preparing to set out for  that place when he happened to meet with a gentleman who made him alter his resolution .


This person had been his governor , and now attended Mr. Howard in the same quality .


Sir Charles , who had a slight acquaintance with Mrs. Howard , was prevailed upon , notwithstanding his aversion to company , to receive a visit from her son : he invited the young gentleman to dine with him , and he having not yet forgot the lovely Sophia , drank her health after dinner by the name of miss Darnley .


Sir Charles , who could not hear that name without a visible emotion , told him he knew two young ladies so called , and asked whether it was the eldest or the youngest sister that he meant ?


Mr. Howard replied , ` That he was ignorant till then that miss Darnley had a sister . '


` Yes , she has a sister , said his governor , who is much handsomer than herself , and for whom a youthful passion would be far more excusable . '


The young gentleman , who knew his governor talked in that contemptuous manner of Sophia in compliance with his mother 's humour , in revenge avowed his admiration of her in the most passionate terms , and , forgetting that Sir Charles had said he was acquainted with her , described her excellencies with all the enthusiasm of a lover .


Sir Charles listened in silence  and when the other had done speaking told him , with an air of forced gravity , that it was easy to see he was very much in love .


This , indeed , was his real opinion  nevertheless he felt no emotions of jealousy or resentment  against a rival whom he believed was as unhappy as himself : he asked him with a seeming carelessness if miss Sophia was not to be married to the son of a rich farmer in the village where she lived ?
and waited his answer with an agitation of mind which appeared so plainly in the frequent changes of his colour , that Mr. Howard must have observed it , had not the question given him almost as much concern .


After a short pause he replied , ` That he never heard she was going to be married  ' but , added he , sighing , ' I remember I have seen a very handsome young man at Mr. Lawson 's , who perhaps - '


` Aye , aye , interrupted his governor , smiling , he was the favoured lover no doubt , you have nothing to do but to forget her as soon as you can . '


The youth sat pensive and silent for some time , then suddenly rising , took leave of Sir Charles and went away  his governor prepared to follow him , but the baronet , anxious to hear more of Sophia , detained him to ask several questions concerning her acquaintance with Mr. Howard .


Sir Charles found his old friend had lost no part of his former candor and sincerity : though by the trust reposed in him he was obliged to discountenance as much as possible the passion of his pupil for a young woman so much his inferior in rank and fortune  yet having seen and conversed with Sophia , he did justice to her extraordinary merit , and acknowledged that Mrs. Howard had treated her harshly .


 He related to Sir Charles in what manner Mrs. Howard had invited her to her house , and the suspicions she entertained of Sophia 's encouraging her son 's passion , and design to ensnare him into a clandestine marriage .
` Suspicions , added he , which her subsequent behaviour entirely destroyed , for the youth was rash enough to avow his passion openly , and solicited her by frequent letters and messages to grant him an interview , which she absolutely refused , and this conduct did her honour and procured her great esteem  yet it is very likely that her affections are otherwise engaged , and that she has some difficulties to encounter , for she looks thoughtful and melancholy , and affects retirement more than persons of her age generally do . '


Sir Charles was thrown into so profound a reverie by this account of Sophia , that he heard not a word of what his friend afterwards said which had no relation to this interesting subject , and scarce perceived when he went away .


After reflecting a long time with mingled grief , resentment , and compassion , upon her melancholy , which he supposed was occasioned by some disappointment in the affair of her marriage with the young farmer , and which probably her want of fortune was the cause of , he suddenly formed the generous design of removing this obstacle to her union with the person whom she preferred to him , and , by making her happy , entitle himself to her esteem , since he had unfortunately lost her heart .


 The novelty of this resolution , and its extraordinary generosity , filled him with so many self-flattering ideas , as suspended for a while his jealousy and his grief .


Instead of going to Montpelier he set out immediately for England , and during his journey was continually applauding himself for the uncommon disinterestedness of his conduct .


Nothing is more certain , than that the motives even of our best actions will not always bear examination : we deceive ourselves first , and our vanity is too much interested in the deception , to make us wish to detect it .
Sir Charles either did not or would not perceive the latent hope that lurked within his bosom , and which , perhaps , suggested the designs he had formed .


How must such an instance of generous passion , thought he , affect a mind so delicately sensible as Sophia 's !
she who had once loved him , and what was more than probable , had not yet entirely forgot him .


He never asked himself , why his imagination dwelt upon these pleasing images ?
why he prosecuted his journey with such eager haste , as if the purport of it was to receive , not to resign for ever the woman he so passionately loved ?


When he arrived at his own house scarce would he allow himself a few minutes rest after his fatiguing journey : he hastened to Mr. Herbert 's lodgings , to prevail upon him to justify by his concurrence the designs he had formed in favour of Sophia .


 Mean time the secret and powerful impulse by which he was actuated , kept his mind in a continual tumult .
He hoped , he feared , he wished : he was all anxious expectation , all trembling doubt  he heard with grief that Mr. Herbert was at Bath  for now he knew not how to get access to Sophia , who being ignorant of his intentions , and offended by his behaviour , might possibly refuse to see him .


He went to the house where Mrs. Darnley lived when he left England  he was surprised to see it shut up .
This incident perplexed him more , and rendered him more impatient .


He returned to his house , ordered his horses to be saddled , and set out immediately for Mr. Lawson 's  where he arrived before he had resolved how to introduce himself , or who he should enquire for .


However , upon the appearance of a servant at the door , he asked for Mr. Herbert  which Mr. Lawson hearing , came out himself , and , though he did not know Sir Charles , politely requested him to alight , telling him , he had just received a letter from Mr. Herbert , which acquainted him that he was perfectly recovered , and that he was on the way to London .


Sir Charles accepted Mr. Lawson 's invitation , and alighting , followed him into a parlour , but in such perturbation of mind that he scarce knew what he did .
The good curate , surprised at the pensiveness and silence of his guest , was at a loss what to say to him , or how to entertain him : he gave him an account of Mr. Herbert 's illness ,  which seemed to engage his attention very little  but happening to mention Sophia in the course of his relation , the young baronet started as from a dream , and turned his eyes upon him with a look of eagerness and anxiety , but said not a word .


Mr. Lawson paused , as expecting he was going to ask him a question , which Sir Charles perceiving , said with some confusion , ' I beg your pardon , Sir , you mentioned miss Sophia , I have the honour to know her , pray how does me do ? '


' I hope she is well , Sir , replied Mr. Lawson , I have not seen her a long time . '


`` Then she does not board with you now , '' said Sir Charles , with a countenance as pale as death , dreading to hear something still more fatal .


As Mr. Lawson was going to answer him , William , not knowing his father-in-law had company , entered the room abruptly  but seeing the baronet , he bowed , apologized for his intrusion , and instantly retired .


The various emotions with which this sudden and unexpected sight of his rival filled the breast of Sir Charles , caused such a wildness in his looks , that Mr. Lawson , in great astonishment and perplexity , asked him if he was taken ill ?


Sir Charles , endeavouring to compose himself , replied , `` That he was very well , but in a faultering accent asked , who the young gentleman was that had just left the room .


Mr. Lawson told him he was his son-in-law .


 ` Your son-in-law !
cried Sir Charles , eagerly , what !
married to your daughter !
is it possible ? '


Mr. Lawson knew enough of Sophia 's story to make him comprehend now who this young gentleman was , who discovered so extraordinary a concern upon this occasion  and , charmed to have an opportunity of doing her service by removing those suspicions which he had been told had produced so fatal a reverse in her fortune , he gave the baronet a circumstantial account of his daughter 's marriage : sensible that he was too much interested in this detail to make him think it impertinent , he introduced it no otherways than by declaring himself under the greatest obligation to miss Sophia , who , having honoured his daughter with her friendship , had been the chief instrument of her present happiness .


While the good curate related all the circumstances of an affair which had had such melancholy consequences , the baronet listened to him with an attention still as the grave  his eyes were fixed upon his with a look of the most eager anxiety , and he scarce suffered himself to breathe for fear of losing any of his words .


In proportion as his doubts were removed , his countenance expressed more and more joy  and when , upon his reflecting on all that he had heard , it appeared plainly that the fatal meeting which had caused him so much anguish , was the effect of Sophia 's solicitude to serve her friend , and that the passionate action of the youth was an acknowledgment of gratitude , not an expression of love , he was not able to conceal the excess of his joy ,  but , rising up in a sudden transport , he took the curate 's hand , and pressing it eagerly , ` You know not , said he , Mr. Lawson , how happy you have made me  but where is miss Sophia , is she gone to Bath with her good friend Mr. Herbert ? '


` No , Sir , replied Mr. Lawson  she lives with her mother .
You know , I suppose , that Mrs. Darnley has lost her annuity by the death of the gentleman upon whom it was charged . '


' I never heard it till now , said the baronet , whose tenderness was alarmed for his Sophia  tell me I beg you what is her present situation . '


` Her eldest daughter has left her , said Mr. Lawson , and she has retired with miss Sophia to a village about five miles from hence , in the road to London , where that excellent young lady supports her mother and herself by the labour of her hands . '


`` Angelick creature ! ''
exclaimed Sir Charles , with his eyes swimming in tears .
Then , after a little pause , he desired a direction to the place where Mrs. Darnley lived , and took a kind leave of Mr. Lawson , telling him he hoped soon to visit him again .


Sir Charles , although he galloped as fast as it was possible , found his horse went too slow for his impatience  so eager was he to see Sophia , and gain her pardon for the unreasonable conduct which his jealousy and rage had made him guilty of .


The account Mr. Lawson had given him of the part she had taken in his daughter 's marriage with the youth whom he had considered as his rival , not  only removed the torturing pangs of jealousy , which he had so long felt , but made him view several circumstances in Sophia 's behaviour in a light favourable to his own ardent wishes .


He fondly fancied that the melancholy in which he had heard she was plunged , was occasioned by a tender remembrance of him  and that the hope of still being his , might have been the chief cause of her rejecting the addresses of Mr. Howard .


How different were these ideas from the gloomy ones which had hitherto perplexed his mind !
he seemed like a man waked from a frightful dream of despair and death , to a certainty of life and joy .


Amidst these transporting reveries he had passed by Sophia 's house , without perceiving it to be the same he had been directed to  and when he had reached the end of the village , he looked about for it in vain , and saw no one of whom he could enquire for it but an old woman , who was sitting under a tree near the road , making up a nosegay of some flowers , such as the late season produced .


He stopped his horse , and asked her if she knew where Mrs. Darnley lived ?
At the mention of that name she rose as hastily as her feebleness would permit her , and told him , she knew the house very well  and , if he pleased , would go and shew it him . '
I am making this nosegay for the sweet young gentlewoman her daughter , said the old woman  I carry her flowers every day  heaven bless her , she is my only support .
 There is a great many fine folks hereabouts , from whom I could never get any relief  but since she came hither I have wanted for nothing .
Pray let me shew you her house  old and weak as I am , I would walk ten miles to do her service . '


Sir Charles , alighting from his horse , ordered his servant to lead it to the nearest public house , and wait for him there  he told the old woman , he would accept of her offer , and walk along with her .
Then taking two guineas out of his pocket , he gave them to her , in reward , he said , for the gratitude she expressed for her young benefactress .


The good woman received his bounty with a transport of surprise and joy , and pleasingly repaid him by talking of his beloved Sophia  of whom she related many instances of tenderness and charity towards the poor of the village , and filled him with admiration of that true benevolence , which , even in the midst of indigence , could administer to the greater wants of her fellow-creatures .


When they came within sight of Sophia 's little cottage , the old woman , pointing to it , told him , Mrs. Darnley and her daughter lived there : upon which the baronet , dismissing her , walked up to it with disordered haste .
A row of wooden pales led to a small grass-plat before the door .


As he approached , he saw Sophia sitting at a window at work .
He stopped to gaze upon her  she appeared to him more lovely , more engaging than ever .
He wished , yet dreaded her looking up , lest her first thoughts upon seeing him being  unfavourable , she should resolve to refuse his visit .
He went forwards with a beating heart , and cautiously opening the little gate , reached the door of this humble habitation unheard and unseen by Sophia  the door flew open at his touch , poverty has no need of bolts and bars , and every good angel is the guard of innocence and virtue .


The noise he made in entering , and the sound of her name , pronounced in a tender accent , made Sophia hastily turn her head .
At sight of Sir Charles , she started from her chair , her work fell from her trembling hands , she looked at him in silent astonishment , unable , and perhaps unwilling to avoid him .


The baronet , whose heart laboured with the strongest emotions of tenderness , anxiety , hope , and fear , had not power to utter a word  and while her surprise kept her motionless , threw himself at her feet , and taking one of her hands , pressed it respectfully to his lips , tears at the same time falling from his eyes .


Sophia , whose gentle mind was sensibly affected with this action , and the paleness and langour which appeared in his countenance , found it impossible to treat him with that severity which his capricious conduct seemed to demand of her  nevertheless she drew away her hand , which he yielded with reluctant submission .


`` I hoped , '' said she , in an accent that expressed more softness and grief than anger or disdain , ` that I should be spared any farther insults of this sort from you  those I have already suffered  has sufficiently punished me for my weak credulity . '


Sir Charles , when she began to speak , rose up  but continued gazing on her with the most passionate tenderness , while every word she uttered seemed to pierce his heart .


' I will not , pursued Sophia , gathering firmness as she spoke , ask you , why you have intruded upon me thus unexpectedly ?
or why you assume a behaviour so little of a-piece with your past actions ?
I only beg you to believe , that I am not again to be deceived  and although I am persuaded my good opinion is of no consequence to you , yet I will tell you , that if it is possible to regain it , it will be by never more importuning me with visits , which my situation in life makes it very improper for me to admit of . '


Sophia , when she had said this , went out of the room , without casting a look back upon Sir Charles , who followed her in great disorder , conjuring her only to hear what he had to say .


As she was passing to her own chamber , she was met by her mother , who , seeing Sir Charles , was filled with surprize and joy  and perceiving that Sophia was avoiding him , said to her with an angry accent , ` Where are you going ?
what is the meaning of this rudeness ? '


Sophia , without answering her , retired to her own room , not without great perturbation of mind  for there was something in the baronet 's looks and words that seemed to merit a hearing at least  but she dreaded the weakness of her own heart ,  and was fully persuaded that any condescension on her side would give him too great an advantage over her .


Mrs. Darnley , finding her endeavours to retain her were fruitless , advanced towards Sir Charles with great obsequiousness , congratulated him upon his return , and thanked him for the honour he did her in visiting her in her poor little habitation .


Sir Charles saluted her respectfully , and took a seat .
` There is a sad alteration , Sir , said she , in my poor affairs since I saw you last .
I never thought to have received you in such a hovel .
You have heard , I suppose , of my misfortune . '


Sir Charles , who was in great confusion of thought , and had scarce heard a word she said , replied carelessly , ` Yes , madam , I am sorry for it . '


The coldness of this answer cast a damp upon those hopes which she had eagerly admitted upon seeing him again  and , impatient to be relieved from her tormenting anxiety on account of this unexpected visit , she asked him abruptly , whether she might wish him joy , for she heard , she said , that he was going to be married .


Sir Charles , rouzed by this question , replied hastily , ` Who could have told you any thing so unlikely ?
Married !
no , madam , there never was any foundation for such a report . '


`` Indeed I believe so , '' said Mrs. Darnley , almost breathless with joy to find him deny it  so earnestly .
` To be sure people are very envious and ill-natured , and those who told me , no doubt , designed to do you an ill office . '


` And they have succeeded , said Sir Charles , sighing , if they have been able to persuade miss Sophia , that after having aspired to the possession of her , I could descend to love any other woman .
I came to implore her pardon , madam , pursued he , for all the extravagancies of my past conduct , and for that unreasonable jealousy which was the source of them , could I have been so happy to have prevailed upon her to have heard me . '


`` What ! ''
interrupted Mrs. Darnley eagerly , ` and was my daughter so rude as to leave you without hearing what you had to say , I protest I am ashamed of her behaviour  but I hope you will be so good to excuse it , Sir  I will insist upon her coming in again . '


` No , madam , said Sir Charles , holding her , for she was hurrying away , miss Sophia must not be constrained : I can not bear that . '


Mrs. Darnley unwillingly resumed her seat , and inly fretting at her daughter 's obstinacy , trembled for the event of this visit .


Sir Charles , after a silence of some minutes , suddenly rose up , and took his leave .
Mrs. Darnley , in great anxiety , followed him to the door , and said , she hoped to see him again .
He answered only by a low bow , and walked away full of doubt and perplexity .


 Sophia 's steadiness in refusing to hear him , banished all those flattering ideas of her tenderness for him , which he had so eagerly admitted  for he concluded that if her heart had not been steeled by indifference , she would , notwithstanding her just reasons for resentment , have been rejoiced to give him an opportunity of justifying himself .


He had reached the house where his servant was attending with the horses , without having determined what to do .
To return to town without seeing Sophia again , and being assured of a reconciliation , was misery which he could not support  and he dreaded making a new attempt to see her , lest he should receive more proofs of her insensibility and disdain .


In this perplexity the sight of Mr. Herbert alighting from a stage-coach , was a relief as great as it was unexpected  and in the sudden joy he felt at meeting with a man whose interposition could be so useful to him , he forgot that his former behaviour must necessarily have given rise to strong prejudices against him , and ran up to embrace the good old man with extreme cordiality .


Mr. Herbert was surprised , and repaid his civilities with great coldness : upon which the young baronet , in some confusion , desired to have a few moments conversation with him .


They walked together down a meadow  and Sir Charles , having with a candor and sincerity becoming the rectitude of his intentions , related all those circumstances which had concurred to excite  his jealousy , and with that powerful eloquence which passion inspires , expatiated upon the motives of his conduct , a conduct which he acknowledged laid him open to the most unfavourable suspicions  Mr. Herbert , convinced of his sincerity , and full of compassion for the torments which his mistaken jealousy had caused him , undertook to make his peace with Sophia , and assured him he would very shortly wait upon him in town .


This would not satisfy the anxious lover  he declared he would not leave the place till he was assured of his pardon  and Mr. Herbert , who certainly was not displeased with his obstinacy , could with difficulty persuade him to wait only till the next day for an account of his success .


Sir Charles unwillingly took the road to London , and Mr. Herbert hastened to congratulate his beloved charge upon the agreeable prospect that was once more opening for her .


Mrs. Darnley had , during this interval , been employed in reproaching poor Sophia for her behaviour to Sir Charles .
In the vexation of her heart she exclaimed in the severest terms against her pride and obstinacy  she told her , she might be assured Sir Charles would never attempt to see her again  that it was plain he was disgusted with her bad temper .


She burst into a passion of tears while she enumerated the glorious advantages of that rank and fortune , which , she said , Sophia had thrown from her  and among many motives which she urged ought to have determined her to act otherwise ,  that of being able to out-shine her sister was one .


Sophia answered only by sighs : she herself was not absolutely satisfied with the unrelenting severity with which she had treated Sir Charles .
The more she reflected upon his behaviour , the more she condemned herself for not hearing what he had to offer in his own defence .
She had once thought it probable that he had been deceived by the report that was spread through Mrs. Gibbons 's folly of her encouraging the addresses of her nephew , and his extravagant conduct might be occasioned by jealousy : a fault which a woman is always disposed to pardon in a lover .
While she revolved these thoughts in her mind , Mrs. Darnley perceived her uneasiness , and added to it by new reproaches .


Mr. Herbert 's arrival put an end to this tormenting scene .
Sophia first heard his voice , and flew to receive him  Mrs. Darnley followed , and seeing her bathed in tears , while the good old man saluted her with the tenderness of a parent , she told him , with an air half serious , half gay , that her daughter loved him so well , she had no tenderness for any one else .
She then entered abrubtly upon the affair of Sir Charles , though she hardly expected Mr. Herbert would join with her in condemning Sophia .


He pleasingly surprised her by saying , that Sophia was to blame  and that he came prepared to chide her for her petulance and obstinacy .


 Mr. Herbert , who saw a sweet impatience in Sophia 's looks , explained himself immediately , and told her he had met Sir Charles  who had fully removed all the suspicions his strange conduct had occasioned , and convinced him , that he deserved more pity than censure .


` No doubt , pursued he , looking on Sophia with a smile , you will be surprised to hear , young lady , that Sir Charles was witness to the interview you had in the meadow behind Mr. Lawson 's house , with a certain handsome youth , whom he had heard was his rival , and a favoured rival too .
What were his thoughts , do you imagine , when he saw this handsome youth throw himself at your feet , and kiss your hand ? '


Mrs. Darnley now looked at her daughter in great astonishment  and Sophia , who yet did not recollect the circumstance of her meeting William , was so perplexed , she knew not what to say .


Mr. Herbert enjoyed her innocent confusion for a few moments , and then repeated all that Sir Charles had told him , of his jealousy and rage  his vain attempts to banish her from his remembrance  the resolution he had formed after his conversation with Mr. Howard concerning her  and how happily he had been undeceived at Mr. Lawson 's , where he found his supposed rival was the husband of her friend .


`` Well , '' interrupted Mrs. Darnley , with great vehemence , ' I hope you are satisfied now , Sophia : I hope you will treat Sir Charles with more civility if he comes again .
- Mr. Herbert ,  I beg you will exert your power over her upon this occasion - I think there is no doubt of Sir Charles 's honourable intentions . '


Thus she ran on , while Sophia , who had listened to Mr. Herbert 's relation with the softest emotions of pity , tenderness , and joy , continued silent with her eyes fixed upon the ground .


Mr. Herbert , willing to spare her delicacy , told Mrs. Darnley , that relying upon - Sophia 's good sense and prudence , he had ventured to assure Sir Charles of a more favourable reception , when her prejudices were removed .


` He will come to-morrow , my child , pursued he , to implore your pardon for all the errors of his past conduct , and to offer you his hand .
I am persuaded you will act properly upon this occasion  and in a marriage so far beyond your hopes and expectations , acknowledge the hand of Providence , which thinks fit to reward you , even in this world , for your steady adherence to virtue . '


Sophia bowed and blushed  her mother , in a rapture , embraced and wished her joy .


Mr. Herbert now endeavoured to change the conversation to subjects more indifferent  but Mrs. Darnley , ever thoughtless and unseasonable , could talk of nothing but Sir Charles , and the grandeur which awaited her daughter .
All night her fancy ran upon gilt equipages , rich jewels , magnificent houses , and a train of servants  and she was by much too happy to taste any repose : but Sophia enjoyed the change of her fortune with much more rational  delight , and among all the sentiments that arose in her mind upon this occasion , that of gratitude to heaven was the most frequent and most lively .


Mr. Herbert , who had accepted a lodging in Sophia 's cottage , went to Sir Charles the next day , according to his promise .
He found him waiting for him full of anxious impatience  and hearing from the good old man , that Sophia was disposed to receive him favourably , he embraced him in a transport of joy  and his chariot being already ordered , they drove immediately to the village .


Mrs. Darnley welcomed the baronet with a profusion of civilities .
Sophia 's behaviour was full of dignity and soft reserve .


Sir Charles , after a long conversation with her , obtained her leave to demand her of her mother , to whom he shewed the writings , which were already all drawn  and by which Sophia had a jointure and pin-money , equal to the settlements that had been made upon lady Stanley .


He now ventured to intreat that a short day might be fixed for their marriage .
It was with great difficulty , that Sophia was prevailed upon to consent  but her mother 's impetuosity carried all before it , and Mr. Herbert himself supported the young baronet 's request .


The ceremony was performed by Mr. Lawson in his own parish-church : after which he and his amiable family accompanied the new wedded pair to their country-seat , where they passed several days with them .


 Mr. Herbert having previously acquainted Sir Charles with Harriot 's situation , the baronet , tho ' he detested her character , and declared he never could pardon her for the miseries she had caused him  yet was desirous to have her decently settled , and promised to give a thousand pounds with her in marriage , if a reputable match could be found for her : he even put notes for that sum into Mr. Herbert 's hands , and earnestly recommended it to him , to take the affair under his management .


Harriot , during the time she lived with her mother , had been courted by a young tradesman in tolerable circumstances  and although she thought it great insolence for a person in business to pretend to her , yet , actuated by a true spirit of coquetry , while she despised the lover , she took pleasure in his addresses .


This young man still retained some tenderness for her , and , allured by the prospect of a fortune , was willing , notwithstanding any faults in her conduct , to make her his wife .


Mrs. Darnley proposed him to her , and Mr. Herbert enforced her advice with all the good sense he was matter of .
But Harriot received the proposal with the utmost disdain  insisted that she was married as well as her sister  that her rank in life was superior to hers  and added , by way of threat , that her appearance should be so likewise .


The extraordinary efforts she made to support this boast , engaged lord L. in expences that entirely alienated his affections from her , disgusted  as he long had been , with her insolence and folly .


His relations concluded a match for him with a young lady of suitable rank and fortune  and , after making a small settlement on Harriot , he took leave of her for ever .


The vexation she felt from this incident , threw her into a distemper very fatal to beauty .
The yellow jaundice made such ravage in her face , that scarce any of those charms on which she had valued herself so much , remained .
All her anxious hours were now employed in repairing her complexion , and in vain endeavours to restore lustre to those eyes , sunk in hollowness , and tinctured with the hue of her distemper .


Although thus altered , the report of the fortune she was likely to have made her be thought a prize worthy the ambition of a young officer , who had quitted the business of a peruke maker , in which he was bred , for an ensign 's commission , which made him a gentleman at once .


He offered himself to Harriot with that assurance of success , which the gaiety of his appearance , and his title of captain , gave him reason to expect , with a lady of her turn of mind .


Harriot , charmed with so important a conquest , soon consented to give him her hand  and Sir Charles Stanley , finding his character not exceptionable , gave her the fortune he had promised , to which Sophia generously added a thousand pounds more .
The baronet procured her husband a better commission  but designedly in one of the  colonies , whither he insisted upon his wife 's accompanying him .


Harriot , in despair at being obliged to quit the delights of London , soon began to hate her husband heartily  and he , entering into her disposition and character , lost all esteem and tenderness for her .
Her behaviour justified the rigid confinement he kept her in  and while she suffered all the restraint of jealousy , she was at the same time mortified with the knowledge that pride and not love was the source of it .


Mrs. Darnley lived not long after the departure of her favourite daughter  for so Harriot always continued to be .


Sophia attended her mother during her long illness with the most duteous care , and had the satisfaction to be assured by Mr. Lawson , who assisted her in her preparations for death , that her attachment to the world , which the affluent circumstances to which she was raised but too much increased , had at length given way to more pious sentiments  and she died with the resignation of a christian .


The ill conduct of her sister , and the death of her mother , proved at first some interruption to Sophia 's happiness  but these domestic storms blown over , she began to taste the good fortune which heaven had bestowed on her : her chief enjoyment of it was to share it with others  and Sir Charles , who adored her , put it amply in her power to indulge the benevolence of her disposition .


 He took upon himself the care of rewarding her friends  he presented Mr. Lawson to a very considerable living : he procured Dolly 's husband a genteel and lucrative employment  and married her younger sister to a relation of his own .


Mr. Herbert , who was above receiving any other gratification from Sir Charles than the entire friendship which he ever preserved for him , had the satisfaction to spend most of his time with his beloved daughter , as he used tenderly to call Sophia , and to behold her as happy as the condition of mortality admits of .


Sir Charles 's tenderness for her seemed to increase every day  and when Mr. Herbert once took occasion to compliment him upon the delicacy , the ardor , and the constancy of his affection , he replied with a smile , ` You attribute to me a virtue , which , in this case , I can not be said to possess  had my passion for my Sophia been founded only on the charms of her person , I might probably e'er now have become a mere fashionable husband  but her virtue and wit supply her with graces ever varied , and ever new .
Thus the steadiness of my affection for her is but a constant inconstancy , which attaches me successively to one or other of those shining qualities , of which her charming mind is an inexhaustible source . '


44 .
THE LIFE OF Sir ANTHONY VANDYCK CONCLUDED .


 HE drew the marquis Giulio Brignole , a famous poet , on horse-back : he drew also the picture of the marchioness his wife , in which he seemed to oblige nature itself  for by eternising that beauty , he gave an instance to all posterity of what she had been able to perform .


He drew the picture of the doge Palavicino , in his habit of ambassador to the pope , and George Paulo Balbi , on horse-back , which was a most exquisite picture  but because of his conspiracy his face was blotted out , being a traitor to his country  and that of Francisco Maria , of the same family , made in the place .
There is also in this person 's house , of the hand of Vandyck , the picture of an old man in white armour : his right hand holds a general 's staff , and his left the pommel of his sword  and is in picture as great a soldier as the marquis Spinola was in effect , and is generally supposed to be intended for him .


 The queen of Sweden has in Rome , also of the hand of Vandyck , the picture of a boy of the family of the Imperiali , which appears so much alive that no body would judge it but to be really so .


Besides these pictures of particular persons , he made some histories : amongst which there is a crucifix , with St. Francis , and our Saviour , together with the patron of the picture at prayers .
Vandyck had now a great mind to go into Sicily .
Prince Filibert of Savoy being viceroy he drew his picture : but the plague happening about this time , and the death of the prince , to whom cardinal Doria succeeded , Vandyck likewise having received some disaster in Palermo , retired in great haste to his home of Genoa , carrying with him the cloth for a picture for the oratory of the society of the rosary  in which he represented the Virgin encompassed with the glory of angels , that present her each with a crown .
At the bottom is St. Dominic , with the five virgin saints of Palermo , amongst which are St. Katherine and St. Rosary , and a child that holds his hand to his nose , because of the stench that comes from a dead head that lies upon the ground  by which he designs to express the plague from which the city was delivered by the intercession of those saints .


This picture being finished , and sent to Palermo , he betook himself again to the drawing of faces  by which having got a good sum of money , he returned to his own town of Antwerp , extolled by all , and welcomed by his friends , after  the absence of some years .
He employed himself here mostly in drawing faces  yet he likewise painted some history pieces , which are dispersed through all Flanders and many other places  of which we shall collect some few , there being already some that are made public by the engraver .
Amongst the first of them that was seen at Antwerp , was the marriage of St. Joseph in St. Michael 's church , where the saint kneels before the Virgin , whilst she gives him her right hand , which is proposed to him by an angel .
For the nuns of Begginage he drew a pietà , that is , our Saviour dead in the lap of his mother , and Magdalen kneeling kissing the wound of his hand , with a St. John .
For the Magdalen he drew his sister 's face , who was then a nun , to whom he made a present of the picture .
He drew also another pietà for St. Francis 's church , which is as much esteemed as any thing he did .
He drew our Saviour extended on a winding-sheet , with his head on his mother 's bosom , who , opening her arms , lifts up her eyes to heaven : behind stands St. John , that takes one of the arms of our Saviour , and shews the wound to two angels who are lamenting at his feet .


These three last figures are in half-shadow , which gives great force to the naked figure of our Saviour , upon whom he makes the principal light fall .
To the same sister , Susanna Vandyck , he dedicated the engraven design of another picture in St. Austin 's , which is very remarkable for liveliness of colour , and variety of invention .
The saint being in  an extacy , is sustained by two angels .
On one hand of him stands St. Monaca , and on the other a saint of his order , and to St. Austin in this rapture the divinity is revealed from above , one of the angels pointing up to our Saviour , whose arms are spread ready to embrace him  and at his feet several little angels with divers symbols , as , one of them holds a sceptre with the eye of Providence upon it : another a branch of olive , the symbol of peace  a third lifts up a snake with his tail in his mouth , the emblem of eternity  a fourth opposes himself to a flaming sword  a fifth looks the son of justice in the face  together with several other mysteries symbolically expressed  and above all a triangle to express the trinity , with the name written in Hebrew characters .


For the sisters of St. Dominic he painted a crucifix , the saint on one side , and St. Catherine of Siena on the other  and another crucifix in Ghent , with a Magdalen that embraces the cross and St. John .
Behind is a man armed on horseback , that gives orders to one of the crucifiers to reach the spunge to our Saviour , adored and lamented by the angels .
In Malines in St. Francis 's church are three other pieces of his hand : our Saviour upon the cross over the high altar , and over two other altars St. Bonaventure saying mass , and the miracle of St. Anthony of Padua , when the horse kneeled before the host .


As for drawing of faces , in which Vandyck seemed more especially to excel , whilst he continued in Brussels he drew almost all the nobility in  Flanders , having justly acquired greater reputation than any painter since the death of Titian .
Indeed he gave his pictures a certain air and grace in the posture : such perhaps as was admired in Apelles when he had drawn Alexander and Antigonus .


He drew the infanta at length , and Mary of Medici , the queen-mother , sitting , and the duke of Orleans , her son , at the time they fled into Flanders .
Of his hand are also the pictures of the cardinal infant  of prince Thomas of Savoy in armour on horseback , and many other great personages .


In the town-house of the same city he drew after the life the magistrates of that place sitting in judgment : and this is looked upon as one of his best pieces , being composed with great judgment , and accurately finished .
He drew for the prince of Orange a story out of Pastor Fido  who bought , also of his hand , the Virgin , with the child Jesus , before whom little angels are dancing * .
Many other of his pictures , both stories and faces , may be seen at Antwerp in Van Ham 's house , as also in that of Diego Vueerdt 's  who , amongst the rest , has also those of king Charles the first , and his queen , drawn at the time Vandyck presented himself to the court of England .


In this abundance of employment and fame , having , as it were , filled all Flanders with his renown ,  he resolved to make use of the king of England 's favour , who then called him for his service to London .
In this prince 's court Rubens had already been honourably entertained , the king being always a great lover of all sorts of ingenious arts  and so great a friend and rewarder of foreign ingenuity , that in all occurrences he not only countenanced , but preferred them .
'T was so that upon Rubens ' departure , Vandyck succeeded to his favour , which quickly augmented his wealth  and therefore , as it were , necessarily confirmed him in his wonted ostentation of behaviour and splendor of equipage .


He had , however , opportunity enough of reimbursing his great expences by frequent visits that were made him by the nobility , who , in that , followed the example of the king , who went often thither to see him paint , and took delight in his conversation .
Vandyck seemed to vie with the magnificence of Parrasin , by keeping of servants , coaches , horses , musicians , and buffoons , with which he entertained such persons as came daily to him to be drawn , who were also invited to his table , where he spent no less than eight or ten pounds a day .


Besides such as are already mentioned , he kept men and women for models to paint by  for his manner was , as soon as the face was done , to finish the rest by the help of these models , placed in this or that posture .


The king was pleased many times to be drawn by him  so that Cavaliere Bernini at Rome being  ordered to make a marble bust of his majesty , he was drawn on one cloth in three different views  the one with a whole face , the other two in profile and half profile * .


He drew the king and queen in half length , holding a sprig of myrtle between them , and another of them with the young princes .
He drew also the king on horseback , attended by a person that bears his helmet after him † .


He drew general Goring in a posture of haranguing  and the lord Newport , master of the ordnance , giving orders to his officers .
He drew the lord Arundel and his lady ( who being a great lover of painting , was the means of Vandyck 's being introduced to the king 's favour , and had been a great instrument of his coming into England ) , which piece he finished to such perfection , as if he was resolved to shew his art and gratitude together .
Of his hand also is that of the dutchess of Buckingham , with her daughters  who in token of the memory of her husband , holds his picture , in little , in her hand .


He drew the dutchess of Southampton like the goddess of Fortune , sitting upon the globe á  and Sir Kenelme Digby , with his wife , sitting in two chairs , with their children by them  who being a great virtuoso himself , Vandyck , as it were by a  certain mutual consent of genius , did more especially confide in him .
He drew him in several manners  sometimes in his armour , and sometimes in the habit of a philosopher .
In one of the latter there is represented a broken sphere , the motto out of Horace , Si fractus illabatur orbis intrepidum ferient ruinae  which picture is one of the hundred that makes up the book of famous men , published by Vandyck , and printed at Antwerp , the best of which are done by himself with aqua fortis : amongst which you find also his own picture .
The same Sir Kenelme had a fancy to have his lady drawn in the form of Prudence , sitting in a white robe , with a coloured veil , and belt of jewels .
One hand she reaches to two white doves , and the other holds a serpent : she sets her feet upon a cube , to which are chained as slaves Deceit with her two faces , anger , envy , with snakes about her head , and profane Love , blinded , his wings clipt , his bow broken , his arrows thrown away , and his torch extinguished , with other naked figures according to the life .
Above all this , is a glory of angels singing and playing upon instruments , three of them holding between them a palm and garland over the head of Prudence , in token of victory and triumph over those vices .
The motto is taken out of Juvenal , Nullum numen abest si sit Prudentia .


Vandyck was so pleased with this invention , that he copied it in little  but not finished .
Both the one and the other , during the troubles in England ,  land , were carried into France * .
For Sir Kenelme Digby he drew also our Saviour taken from the cross , with Joseph and Nicodemus , who were anointing him before they laid him in the sepulchre .
There is by them Magdalen and the Virgin falling in a swoon .
And with this several other pieces of devotion  as St. John Baptist in the wilderness  Magdalen transported , and in an extacy at the harmony of the Angels  Judith , with Holofernes 's head , in half figure  our Saviour upon the cross giving up the ghost , which Sir Kenelme made a present of to the princess of Guimenè , when he was at Paris .


He drew for him also the picture of a brown woman in the habit of Pallas armed , and a plume in her helmet  a most admirable head .
For the earl of Northumberland he drew our Saviour upon the cross , with five angels , that in golden chalices catch the blood as it falls from the wounds  and under the cross are placed the Virgin , St. John , and Mary Magdalen .


He drew also for the king , besides heads and many other pictures , the dance of the Muses , with Apollo in the middle of Parnassus  another Apollo flaying Marsias  a Bacchanal  and a dance of Amorets , that are sporting whilst Venus sleeps with Adonis .
And there being then in that court , amongst many other virtuosi , Nicholas Lanier , a painter as well as musician , he drew him in the form of David playing upon the harp before Saul .


 He drew also the dutchess of Richmond , daughter of the duke of Buckingham  which , by reason of her incomparable beauty , is occasion of a doubt whether art or nature is capable of greater perfection  being drawn in the form of a Venus , which is waited upon by her son duke Hamilton , naked , in the character of a Cupid , with his bow and arrow .
He drew also the countess of Portland , and the countess of Aubengey , in the habit of Nymphs .
He drew also a lady in the character of a Venus , standing by a black .


For the queen he drew the Virgin , with the child Jesus and St. Joseph , that are looking upon certain angels dancing upon the earth , whilst others play to them upon several instruments in the air  and this accompanied with a very pleasant landscape .
He drew also , in imitation of Tintorett , the crucifixion , with the crucifiers that are lifting up the cross  which is a work of great variety of figures .


The picture also of the Blessed Virgin is very excellent .
She is represented holding up the infant Jesus , between two angels that play upon instruments .
At his foot is the globe of the world .
Nor must we pass by the twelve apostles done by his hand , and Christ with the cross , all in half figure , and to be found amongst that great collection of Charles Bosch , bishop of Ghent , which are made public by the press .


He likewise painted a picture of Sampson breaking his bonds  which was given by Van Woonsel  to the archduke Leopold , governor of the Low Countries : a person that seems to have passed all his time in the study of antiquity , medals , and painting , as we may see by what is already printed of his study † .
Besides the ordinary rewards of the king 's munificence to Vandyck , his majesty conferred on him the honour of knighthood : but being now , because of his indispositions , which he had laboured under some years , desirous to withdraw himself from the drudgery of portrait painting to some great work , by which his name might be transmitted with honour to posterity , he took a journey to Paris , with an intent to procure to himself the painting of the gallery of the Louvre : but after having stayed there two months without any success , he returned to England , and proposed to the king , by means of Sir Kenelme Digby , to make designs for a suit of hangings for the Banqueting-house at Whitehall  the subjects of which were to be the ceremony of the crowning of the kings of England  the institution of the order of the garter by Edward the third  the procession of the knights in their robes , and other functions civil and military .
The king was extremely well pleased with this design  but thought his demand of eighty thousand pounds ß too extravagant :  though it was believed the price would have been adjusted , if Vandyck 's death , which happened at this time , had not put a stop to all farther proceeding .


Vandyck , notwithstanding the vast sums of money he received , left very little at his death , having consumed it all in that splendid manner of living , which was rather like a prince than a painter .
As to his person , he was of small stature , but well proportioned , and active  his features were regular , and his countenance agreeable .
His hair was inclinable to red , which is common to those of his country .


It is very extraordinary that his best pictures are those he painted when very young , when he not much exceeded twenty years .
He then used , according to the practice of the Venetians , a great body of colour , which he afterwards changed for a smoother , insipid , but more expeditious manner  using very little colour , which , after some time , flying off , left the light parts of the face too white , and the half shadows too grey .
This is the general fault of his portraits of women  and the portraits of the men are very often dry and flat , and , in the painter 's phrase , starved of colour .
To balance those faults , which are sometimes found in his work , he possessed other excellencies to the  highest degree of perfection : the exact drawing , and distinct manner of pronouncing the features , the easy and agreeable attitudes , at the same time marking the peculiar character of the person he drew , has deservedly given him the character of the greatest painter the world has ever yet produced .


45 .
TREATSE ON THE EDUCATION of DAUGHTERS CONCLUDED .


 45.1 .
The Vanity of Beauty and of Dress .


THERE is nothing we ought so much to guard against as vanity in young ladies .
They come into the world with a vehement desire to please : finding themselves excluded from those paths by which men arrive at authority and glory , they endeavour to balance that loss by all the captivating qualities of wit and person .
This gives rise to their soft and insinuating turn of conversation  thence it is that they so earnestly aspire after beauty and every external grace , and are so warmly interested in dress .
The fashion of a cap , the disposition of a ribbon , the form of a curl in this place or that , the choice of a colour , are to them matters of importance .
This excess is carried to a greater height among us than any other people  the changebleness of our fancy occasions a perpetual revolution of mode  so that to the love of dress , that of novelty is superadded : an article that has strange effects upon such minds .


 These two follies in confederacy overturn distinction of rank , and introduce licentiousness of manners .
Void as we are of any regulations in dress or in furniture , there is nothing effectual left with regard to difference of conditions  for as to the tables of particulars , that is what public authority can not easily give rules to : every one proceeds as he can afford  or rather , neglecting that consideration , as his ambition or his vanity prompts him .


It is this pride which often ruins whole families , and their ruin draws after it the corruption of manners .
On one side persons of mean birth are stimulated to raise a hasty fortune : a thing not to be compassed without sin , as the Holy Ghost hath assured us .
- On the other , persons of quality , bereft of all resources , stoop to the basest and most wretched methods of supporting their expence .
The consequence of which is , that , by insensible degrees , honour and honesty and natural affection become extinguished even among the nearest relations .
Whence is all this evil but from the power which certain vain women have acquired of regulating fashions ?
Whoever thinks of continuing in the gravity and simplicity of our ancient manners , are by these pointed out to be laughed at as so many antiques .


Apply yourself then to convince young women how much that reputation , which results from a just behaviour and true good sense , is more valuable than what can be attained from the pattern of a cap , or fancy of a furbelow .


 Beauty , you may say , deceives the owner still more than it doth its admirers : it disturbs , it intoxicates the soul .
The most passionate lover is not more an idolater of his mistress than she is of herself .
A small number of years takes away the distinction between a handsome woman and another , and reduces them both to an equality .
Beauty is sure to be pernicious unless it is instrumental to an advantageous match .
- But how can it be so , unless supported by merit , and by virtue ?
When , for want of discretion and modesty , she is no object for men of correct understandings and sensible of solid qualities , whom can she hope to attract but some young fool , who will make her unhappy ?


Those who found all their glory upon their beauty , in a short time become ridiculous  for , unperceived by themselves , they arrive to that time of life when its lustre decays : yet still are they charming in their own eyes , though the world is so far from being charmed with them , that they inspire nothing but disgust .


This absolute attachment to beauty alone , is just as unreasonable as to place all merit in bodily strength , as do the barbarians and uncivilized nations .


True gracefulness hath not the least dependance on a vain and affected mode of dress : yet it is not amiss to have some regard to propriety , proportion , and suitableness in our apparel , with which we necessarily cover ourselves .
- But then these materials , which we must put on , and which we  may render as commodious as we please , can never , under the name of ornaments , invest us with real beauty .


I would take the pains to shew young ladies the noble simplicity that appears in the statues and other figures remaining with us , of the Greek and Roman women .
There they will see , that the hair tied negligently in a knot behind , the drapery full and floating in long pleats , are at the same time agreeable and majestic .


It would be well if they were to hear the discourse of some painters , or any other person that has entered into the exquisite taste of the ancients .
Let their minds be elevated ever so little above the prejudion of fashion , and they will quickly hold in contempt those methods of torturing the hair into unnatural curls , in which there is neither grace nor elegance .


I am sensible we are not to propose they should copy the garb of antiquity : that would be an extravagant thing  but they may , without singularity , adopt the taste of simplicity in dress , so noble , so graceful , and so suitable to the decent manners of Christians  so that while they outwardly conform to the present custom , they might at least learn how to think of it : they would fall in with the fashion as a disagreeable obligation , and allow no more to it than they can not well avoid .
Teach them early and frequently to observe the vanity , the gidiness , whence the inconstancy of fashion arises .
That it is a matter very ill understood , appears plainly when we see  persons encumber their heads with a load of ornaments : true elegance follows nature , and never constrains her .


But fashion destroys itself  pretends to aim at perfection , and never hits it : at least it will not stop there .
Some reason there would be in changing , in order to change no more , after having once found what is perfectly commodious and genteel  but to go on changing without end , surely this is to pursue inconstancy and irregularity , not genuine politeness , nor good taste .


And so in general mere caprice predominates - 't is the women 's prerogative to decide in this matter .
Thus the lightest , the shallowest understanding , influences all others : they neither take up , nor quit any thing upon reason .
It has been the mode for a considerable time , though never so well invented , that 's enough to discard it  and another , though never so ridiculous , shall take its place , and be admired by its title to novelty .


After having laid this ground-work , we may go farther , and shew the regulations of Christian modesty : - and may say , we are taught by our religion , that man is conceived in sin  his body afflicted by a contagious illness , proves an inexhaustible source of temptation to his soul .
Jesus Christ teaches us to place all our virtue in fear , and in distrust of ourselves - would you be willing , one may ask , to hazard your own soul , or your neighbour 's , for the sake of a foolish vanity ?
Be terrified then at the thought of displaying the uncovered bosom ,  and every other immodesty .
- Though these faults were committed without design , still they are the result of vanity , and an unbridled desire of pleasing .
Can this be a justification before God or man for so rash a conduct  so scandalous , so contagious to others ?
This blind desire of pleasing doth it suit with the mind of a Christian , who ought to regard as a species of idolatry every thing that turns us away from the love of the Creator , and , in comparison with him , the contempt of the creatures ?


In seeking to please what mean we ?
Is it not to excite the passions of mankind ?
and have they so much power over them as shall restrain them from going to excess ?
Ought we not to impute to ourselves all the consequences ?
and do they not always run too high if once put in motion ?


It is you that prepare a subtle and mortal poison , pour it out upon the spectators , and believe yourself innocent .


Add to this argument , examples of persons whose modesty has been their commendation  and others whose immodesty has drawn upon them the severest censures .


Never suffer them to wear what is beyond their rank .
Check all their fancies - shew them the danger , the contempt they are exposed to from all persons of discretion , when they in this manner forget who they are .


Another article remains , with regard to girls of a fine genius , which is , to bring them into a right way of thinking  for if we do not take care ,  they , in their vivacity , are apt to intermeddle , to talk on most things , to give their opinion on subjects disproportioned to their capacity : at other times to affect a listlesness out of pure delicacy .


A young lady should not talk but as occasion requires , and then with an air of doubt and deference : nay , as to subjects out of the reach of women in general , she should not speak upon them at all , though well informed .
For what if her memory be never so good ?
what if she has vivacity , a pleasant turn of speech , a faculty of conversing with ease and gracefulness ?
all these qualities will be in common to her , and many others of her sex , far from being sensible women , and in themselves despicable .
Instead of this , let her endeavour after an exact and steady conduct , an uniform and correct state of mind : let her learn how to keep council , and carry on an affair of moment : this quality , so rare to be found , will sufficiently distinguish her .


As to delicacy , and the affectation of listlesness , these are to be repressed by demonstrating how true good taste consists in accommodating oneself to things according to their utility .


Good sense and virtue alone are worthy of estimation  and both these require of us to look upon dislike and listlesnesness not as a commendable delicacy , but as the infirmity of a sickly mind .


Seeing we must converse with gross understandings , and have a share in unentertaining businesses , it is the part of reason , which is the only  true delicacy , to be as unrefined as those we are to mingle with .


A spirit which hath all the taste for politeness , but which knows to rise above it upon a necessity to enter into more solid matters , is infinitely superior to those so delicate ones , and surcharged with their own disgust .


In the next place let us proceed to the consideration of those many articles with which a married woman ought to be acquainted : what are her duties ?
Upon her lies the education of her children  of the boys to a certain age , of the girls till they be married  the government of her domestics , their morals , their service  the disbursements of house-keeping , the method of living with oeconomy , and at the same time in figure  often even the letting of farms , and receiving rents .
Women 's knowledge , and that of men 's also , ought to be limited by their functions , and the difference of them ought to make the difference of their studies : by this rule then the subjects above-mentioned will be the bounds of female information  but at this rate , a woman of curiosity will be apt to think it put under great restraints .
She deceives herself , and all for want of perceiving the importance and extent of the things I propose for her to learn .


What degree of penetration is requisite for her to discern the temper , the genius of every particular child  to fall upon a method of conduct towards each that shall best discover their humour , their biass , and their talents  to check the passions on their first disclosure  to instil wholesome  maxims , and remedy every error .
How much prudence ought she to be mistress of , for gaining and maintaining an ascendency over them , without risquing the loss of friendship and confidence ?
Nay , is it not absolutely necessary for her to observe and thoroughly know the persons she places about her children ?
Most certainly .
A mother of a family ought to be fully instructed in religion , endowed with an understanding sound , steady , assiduous , and exercised in government .


Can any one doubt of these duties being incumbent on women , seeing they naturally fall to their share even in the life-time of their husbands , when otherwise employed or absent from home ?
and to a state of widowhood they are more immediately annexed .


Here I omit to enter into all the particulars a woman should be instructed in for the purpose of education  because this hint may serve to give them a notion in general of the extensive knowledge they ought to have .
Add to this , family oeconomy .
The generality of ladies look upon that as a mean employment , only fit for country people and farmers , or , at most , for a house-steward or woman housekeeper  and these more especially who are bred up in softness , plenty , and idleness , hold every branch of it in the utmost contempt .


These conceive very little difference between a life in the country and the life of the savages of Canada .
Talk to them of corn , of cultivation , of the nature of estates , or rents , or rights of  lordships , of the best way of letting land , or appointing receivers , they will believe you are for having them degrade themselves : - and yet this proceeds from pure ignorance .
The ancient Greeks and the Romans , those adroit and polished people , applied themselves diligently to this science of oeconomy .
The noblest among them wrote books ( which are still preserved to us ) upon their own experience , and descended even to the lowest articles of husbandry .


It is a known fact that their victorious generals disdained not to work with their own hands , and from the triumphal car returned to the plough .


This is so distant from our manner , that it would not be credited did history leave the least room to doubt .
Whereas what more natural reason is there for our defending or enlarging our territories than in order to cultivate them in peace ?
Of what service is victory but to gather the fruits of peace ?


After all , true solidity of understanding consists in a willingness to be exactly informed how all those things are managed , which are the substantials of human life  for upon these the very greatest affairs are grounded .


The power and the felicity of a state consists not in a multitude of provinces ill cultivated  but in the knowing to raise from its possessions a sufficency to maintain , without difficulty , a numerous people .


To attain a knowledge of every art applicable to oeconomy , to regulate the sum of all the affairs  of a family , which may be stiled a small republic , , requires , undoubtedly , much higher genius , and more extensive , than to understand play , or to descant on the fashions , or to exert all the minute gentilities of conversation .
It is but a despicable spirit that can do no more than discourse well .
Women there are in numbers whose talk abounds with solid maxims  but in whose conduct , for want of early application , nothing but the frivolous is to be found .


Nevertheless , we must be on our guard against the opposite fault  women run a risque of going into extremes .
It is good to use them from their childhood to have something under their care , to keep accounts , to know the method of buying , and how every thing ought to be made , to be useful  yet I say , take care lest oeconomy should degenerate into avarice  be particular in shewing the ridiculousness of that passion  tell them to be cautious , for avarice produces but little profit , and much dishonour .
A rational mind need carry a frugal and diligent scheme of life no farther than to avoid that shame and injustice which are ever annexed to a prodigal , ruinous conduct .
The true end of retrenching superfluous expence , is to be in a better capacity to answer all the calls of decency , friendship , and charity .


There are occasions when the parting with money is being a greater gainer .
Good order is the profitable thing , and not a few petty articles of sordid penuriousness - wherefore fail not to paint in strong colours that gross mistake of some ladies ,  who can please themselves with saving a taper , and let a steward wrong them in the bulk of their affairs .


Be no less a friend to neatness and order , than to oeconomy and housewifery : use young ladies not to permit any sluttishness , or misplacing of things about the house , or furniture  and bring them to observe that nothing contributes more to oeconomy and neatness than every thing being in its proper station : as minute as this maxim seems , it will have considerable effects if strictly kept to .
Is any thing wanted ?
no time 's wasted in looking for it  no trouble , dispute , or disturbance ensues : you take it from its place , make use of it , and replace it again .


Order is a principal branch of neatness  because a proper arrangement affects the eye forcibly  and besides , the place assigned to each being that which is most suitble to it , not only for pleasing the eye , but for the preservation of the thing , it is therefore less liable to decay , less liable to accidental damage , and even shews a propriety in its being there .


The same spirit of accuracy , which prompts to orderliness , prompts also to cleanliness .
To which advantage add , that such a habit prevents idleness and confusion in our domestics : and more than this , as it makes them ready in the discharge of their duties , so doth it keep us clear of the temptation to impatience at the delays which must happen , when the things we call for can hardly be found .
But at the same time  avoid running into an excess of elegance and nicety .
Nicety in moderation is a virtue  but when we carry our taste to too great a height , it becomes narrowness of mind  for good taste rejects extream delicacy : it treats little matters as they are , and will not be affected by them .
Therefore shew , in the children 's presence , your derision of those fopperies some women are so fond of , and by which they are insensibly drawn into useless expences .


Accustom them to a plain and practicable niceness .
You may inform them how every thing ought to be done  but still further , that they ought to be easy without it - for what a squeamish mind does it betray to grumble if a soop fails of being exactly seasoned , another thing ill pleated , a chair a little too high or too low ?
Undoubtedly it is an evidence of a much better understanding to be designedly indifferent , rather than delicate in matters so insignificant .


And this faulty delicacy , if not repressed in women of lively parts , has worse effects with regard to their conversation than other subjects  for to them the generality of company will seem so flat , and so tiresome , and the least slip in politeness so monstrous , they are always full of scorn and disgust .
Let these ladies know betimes , that nothing is so injudicious as to judge superficially of a person by his carriage , without sounding the depth of his understanding , his sentiments , or useful qualifications .
Demonstrate , by frequent instances , how much a country gentleman , with his coarse  manners , or , if you please , ridiculous teazing civility  but with a good heart , and steady head , is more worthy of esteem than the most accomplished courtier , who , under that behaviour , conceals a heart ungrateful , unjust , and capable of every sort of dissimulation and baseness : and that there is always a weakness adherent to those minds so given to be fatigued and disgusted - No kind of conversation is so poor that some good may not be extracted from it  and though we are in the right to chuse the best , when we have choice , yet one consolation is left us when distrest , that we may put people upon discoursing of what they know  and then good sense will draw information from the dullest company .


46 .
A POETICAL EPISTLE From BUSY , the Lap-dog , in London , to SNOWBALL , the Buck-hound , in Windsor Forest .


 June 27 , 1760 .


IF we , like men , could envy and malign , At Nature 's , or at Fortune 's gifts repine  When great be insolent , when little mean , When rich and fat disdain the poor and lean .
Then might I , puisny Busy , thy vast size Contemplate , mighty hound , with grieving eyes : Thy strength , thy nose sagacious , snow-white coat , And most the tuneful thunder of thy throat  Then might I , Busy , deck'd with em ` ralds , scorn The starv ` ling puppy gnawing a stag 's horn Beneath the hovel , red with ash of peat , And think the wretch as odious as his meat : But nor contempt nor envy shook my breast , Thee I admir'd , and Empress I carest , Tho ' in her nonage the poor simple whelp Kept no decorums , and scarce knew to yelp  Empress may prove the terror of the wood , For Empress , mighty Snowball 's of thy blood .
Say , did I not accept at romps a game With the black young cur ?
I forget his name .
His life in dirt and poverty begun , Yet he may rise the fav ` rite of the gun .
 And I 've heard it said where I have din'd , That true distinction amongst human kind Lies in the qualities , and in the mind .
O Snowball !
with what pleasure I confess Thy condescension to my littleness  When on the floor I dar'd approach thee near , And gaz'd on the fine lappet of thine ear , ( At thy fair temples then my sattin hue Seemed a black modish patch to distant view ) To lick thy chaps , to pinch thy spacious paws , Unfear'd the range of jav ` lins in thy jaws  Or on my hindlegs bolt upright , have tried To reach the curious flavour of thy hide , Thou did ` st not growl , thou did ` st not swing a tail Might snap my ribs as ears of corn the flail  Conscious what dignity from goodness springs , And much too great to spurn at tiny things .
All homage may your grandeur long receive From lap-dogs due , and long unrival'd live , Be stroak'd , be fed by that accomplish'd hand , Whose pen , my master says , adorns the land .
O happy Snowball !
happy Cranbourn wood !
Too happy rustics , did ye know your good !
Lo !
the tenth Muse illuminates your cot  Ah , wretched rustics , - ye perceive her not !
Eat , Snowball , legs of mutton , while small I Crack biscuit , gingerbread , and crust of pye  Or lap the remnants of the milky bowl , Which none on earth shall ever prove I stole .
Joy thou in Windsor 's verdant park and air , Pursue the chase , and in the daughter share  Live in the favour of that learned fair .
 If my dear mistress smiles and pats my head , If she vouchsafes a corner of her bed , Busy 's content , and to her latest gasp Will taste the happiness within her grasp .
T. W .


47 .
To ISMENE playing on a Lute .


WHEN fair Ismene to the grove retires , And joins her warbling accents to the lyre 's  How sweet th ' enchanting sounds !
the melting strains , With pleasing raptures fill our swelling veins .
The eager ear with ravishment attends , The song our soul in extacy suspends : Soft we approach , and awful silence keep , ( A silence more profound than that of sleep . )
We fear to move , nay e ` en to breathe we fear , Lest one soft accent should escape our ear : All things are hush'd  the silent trees recline Their rev ` rend heads , to hear the lays divine .
The streams , that ceas'd to purl , now creep along Unheard , charm'd with the music of her song : The list'ningbirds stoop on the bending wing , And hov ` ring stay to learn of her to sing .
Say , ye blest angels , whose harmonious lays Unwearied sing eternal hymns of praise , Can heav'n itself Ismene 's notes improve , When she 's translated to the choirs above ?
48 .
PHILOSOPHY FOR THE LADIES CONCLUDED .


 48.1 .
Some reflections and deductions drawn from the works of Nature in general .


AS we are now on the point of concluding the present design of this work , it is necessary that we should form some kind of conclusion to that part of it which has had a relation to the works of Nature , and the study of philosophy .
A conclusion , I say , with respect to our confined and narrow limits herein  for such is the immense scope and extent which those subjects would have afforded us , that could the prosecution of our plan have been pursued beyond the period of life alotted to ourselves or our children , nay , even to the farthest stretch of time , our researches into the wonders of Nature 's inexhaustible storehouse , would have been no other than the pursuance of an apparent horizon , the boundaries of which are ever flying before us , and although they every moment present us with a fresh variety of enchanting objects , yet are , with respect to ourselves , as absolutely distant at the last as at the first moment of our journey .
But to proceed .


From even the very small portion concerning which we have been enabled to enter into a detail ,  of the numberless amazing properties bestowed on mankind and on the other parts of the animal creation , what is the first , the most natural deduction that must occur to every one ?
What , when we perceive that every one of the organs of this grand machine , not only the larger and more apparently useful , but even the more minute , insignificant , and almost invisible ones , are furnished in the amplest manner , not barely with such parts , such limbs , such mechanism , as are needful for their mere existence , but still more particularly with such peculiar contrivances , such sagacity , such intellectual faculties , as must render that existence , with respect to the place , station , and allotment of each individual , absolutely and perfectly happy : - such properties as enable every one of those beings to preserve that existence , though surrounded by numberless dangers , and to procure the means of supporting it in the midst of apparent scarcity and want .
What , when we perceive these assistances bestowed on them with an endless variety , with such a peculiar propriety to every single animal , as if each was of itself the sole and peculiar care of Providence : - What , I say , must be the immediate result of these observations , but that the whole must be the work of infinite power , of infinite wisdom , of infinite goodness ?
Who can cast his eyes around him even with the slightest reflection on what he sees on every side , but must immediately cry out with the royal philosopher , ` How manifold are thy works , O Lord !
in wisdom hast thou made them all ! '
 Can any one perceive the work of amazing art , and maintain one moment 's doubt of the existence of the artist ?
- Must he not indeed be a fool who can say in his heart there is no God ?


If then this reflection is the first that must arise from this delightful study , and most undoubtedly it is so , can we possibly give scope thereto without proceeding still farther , and finding that due influence produced by it on our minds which must lead us to the warmest gratitude , and the most ardent zeal to do every thing that may lead towards the rendering our services acceptable in his sight ?
Can we look with unconcern on all these wondrous operations ?
Can we perceive these incomprehensible proofs of infinite perfection , in what are but the mechanical exertion , perhaps no more than the sport , if we may be allowed the expression , of his wisdom and power , without conceiving an idea infinitely more exalted of the almighty mind ?
Can we be blind to the proofs that these present us with , of his being equally the origin of all purity , and the possessor of all ability ?
Can we avoid being convinced that


He must delight in virtue , And that which he delights in must be happy ?
How strong an incitement this to the practice of that virtue which , at the same time , delights that Being whose minutest pleasure ought to be our supremest joy , and ensures our own happiness in the very act itself !
How eminent then the advantage to ourselves , and the good to society in general , which might be derived from a proper  application of this study !
and from how evident a parity of reasoning will every thinking man be convinced , whilst he sees every part of the creation in general formed with such a connection , such a necessary dependance on every other part , as well as on the great whole , how strongly , I say , will he be convinced of the duty incumbent on himself to promote as much as possible this grand design , and render his every action conducive to it , in the peculiar circle which heaven has assigned to him to fill ?
In how smooth , how tranquil a path might all the transactions of this world proceed , would every man but carry the reflection from natural to moral connections  and , persuaded , that his own happiness must proportionably depend on that of every individual around him , labour to accelerate the movement of these admirably contrived wheels , instead of clogging them with the intricate machinery of self-interest , or dragging them back with the weight of vice and folly .


But now let us consider Nature 's works in a second point of view , let us consider man , and every other animated part of the creation as a separate and detached being , and placed in his peculiar sphere without connection or relationship with any other : even in this light how admirable , how incomprehensible is the extent of omnipotent care in this formation of each !
How amazingly is each animal provided by the all-wise Fountain of good with every means for his preservation !
how admirably are dangers and necessities spread  around him , as if they were designed to shew the unlimited wisdom of the Creator in the variety of means pointed out to him for avoiding the one , and relieving the other  at the same time that both are rendered the instruments of his happiness , from that consciousness of relief which heightens the enjoyment of every blessing by a sensibility of the misery attached to its opposite situation .


In this view how much has man in particular to felicitate himself upon !
how many grateful reflections ought his mind to overflow with when he considers his situation as more exposed , more helpless in its original and apparent state than that of any other animal  yet in the course of life , in the period of his existence more thoroughly protected , more perfectly supplied with conveniencies than that of his fellow-creatures would be , even if the various resources of them all could be united for the service of each individual .
With what an eye of admiration ought he to look up to the Being , who , by a peculiar distinction , has so highly and almost partially favoured him , as to bestow on him alone that single spark from heaven , that emanation from himself , which in itself answers every purpose that any thing beneath immortality ought to wish for the power of executing .


Again , let us permit this last reflection to produce another very proper effect on our minds , and at the same time that it inspires us with the most exalted degree of acknowledgment to the just giver of all things , suffer it to strike us with  a conscious humility , and curb that indecent , that dangerous pride which frequently puffs up the mind of man , and is the occasion , that , conceiving himself the lord of the universe ,


Being placed so high , He ` sdains subjection , and thinks one step higher Would set him high ` st. But let this lord of nature , this sovereign of the universe , call his eyes around and see all other beings emerging into life almost in a state of perfection  let him look on the poor servile dog , and the domestic kitten , within two months of their appearance in the world able to quit the tender parent 's care , and seek their prey , endowed with all the faculties to find and to destroy it .
Let him observe the little duckling bursting from the egg , and rushing instantly into an unruly , a destructive element , to pick up food , and taste the joys of living .
Let him go farther still , and mark the light , the tender , the seemingly insignificant ephemeron , with a life destined but for some hours continuance , burst from its embrio state in one element , and almost imperceptibly become the inhabitant of another , enabled to rove unlimited , and taste of every pleasure his being will admit of .
After even this slight review , let him but turn his eyes back on his own infant state , and see himself `` mewling and puking in the nurse 's arms , '' unable for a time to find a use even for his very limbs  for a yet longer period of time deprived of the advantages of language , and still much longer under the necessity of aid , and of instruction  to form his reasoning faculties , and render him capable of self assistance .


Again , when brought to his maturity and fulness of perfection as to his natural state , how still deficient in every particular both of attack , defence , and sustenance !
First , for attack , the lion has his teeth , the bull his horns , the eagle his talons , and the hawk his beak , either to combat with their foes or to destroy their prey : - but what has man ?
None of all these .
Consider him unassisted , he could not stab the sheep , knock down the ox , or combat with the hog , did either know his weakness or their own power to resist him .
With what propriety then do we pray to the Bestower and Disposer of all life to give us our daily Bread !


Next for defence , the horse has his heels , the fox his holes , the calamary can spread a cloud of ink around him , and the torpedo strike with numbness and insensibility the creature which shall dare to touch him .
The cat can swell her form to twice its size , and even a little bird * distort her figure into such shapes of terror , as shall deter even animals of bulk and power from coming near her nest .
- But which of these advantages does man possess ?
His speed the heavy elephant will overtake  he can not dig into the earth to hide him from his foe  nor with his firmest frown or fiercest attitude drive back the hungry wolf or half starved tyger .


 Then for his sustenance , the crocodile can change his form , and the camelion his colour , the spider spread a web , and the polypus expand a net , to allure and to entrap their prey : but man , unaided by the means of art , and of a thousand substances not any way appertaining to himself , might starve in the midst of plenty , and daily suffer the fabled fate of Tantalus , to see perpetually before him the greatest delicacies without being able to procure or to enjoy them .


What deductions then may be drawn from these observations ?
Evidently the two following , with which we shall terminate this discourse : viz .
First , that whatever we may imagine of ourselves , and of our self-applied superiority , it must , if it has existence at all , be owing to the favour of that omnipotent Being , who was equally the creator of all other creatures as of ourselves  and that therefore , instead of harbouring an unbecoming pride on the possession of the peculiar gift of reason , which supplies , in one single property , all the deficiencies I have been just mentioning , we ought assuredly to be inspired with the utmost humility united to gratitude , when we consider ourselves as selected out to enjoy that blessing from amidst such an infinite variety of his other works , every one of which appears to have an equal , and many of them even a higher claim to that most desirable preference : - and secondly , that since in natural advantages many even of the lowest and most insignificant beings seem greatly  to excel us , there certainly must be some other part of us , some more intellectual and immaterial part belonging to us , in which our superiority must necessarily consist  to which therefore we ought to pay a more particular attention  and on the cultivation and improvement of which must wholly depend every essential view of happiness both in our present state and that which is to come .


49 .
THE LADY 'S GEOGRAPHY .


 49.1 .
DESCRIPTION of the Island of CEYLON .
CONCLUDED .


THERE are in this island a very particular kind of blackish leaches , which lurk under the grass , and are extremely troublesome to foot travellers .
They are at first not thicker than a horse hair  but grow to be of the bulk of a goose 's quill , and two or three inches in length .
They are only to be seen in the rainy seasons , at which times crawling up the legs of those who walk barefoot , as is the custom of that country , they sting them , and suck their blood with so much quickness , that it is impossible to get rid of them before they have effected their purpose .
This might seem incredible , were it not for the prodigious multitudes in which they make their attacks , which consequently renders a considerable time necessary to oblige them to quit their hold .


As the island is very full of woods and lakes , it is natural to imagine that it must also be very amply stored with birds and fishes .
Among the former are great plenty of green perroquets  but of a kind that can not be taught to speak .
They have two other sorts of birds , however , which learn very easily  they are about the size of a black-bird , and are called by the natives by the names of mal-couda and cau-couda : the first is black , and the other of a bright gold colour .


 As to fish , their lakes and rivers are extremely full of them , particularly of salmon  but the inhabitants seem to set no great value on them .


Serpents of many kinds , both venemous and inoffensive , are found in this island : amongst which the most remarkable are , 1st .
the pimberah , which is as thick as a man 's body , feeds mostly on deer , and other animals of a like kind  and it is said , will swallow a kid whole , whose horns will sometimes pierce through his belly , and kill him .
2d .
the polonga , which is about five or six feet long , and extremely venemous .
And 3d .
the noya , which is a greyish snake , not above four feet long , and is marked on its head with the appearance of a pair of spectacles .
He is a mortal enemy to the polonga , and whenever they meet the battle constantly terminates in the death of one or the other of them .
He is , however , very harmless , on which account the Indians call him noya rodgerah , or the royal snake .


There is a kind of venemous lizard in this country which they name hiekanella , and which harbours in the eves and thatchings of the houses , but will not attack a man unless provoked .
But the most formidable creature belonging to this island is a prodigious large black hairy spider , which they call democulo .
Its body is as large as one 's fist , and its legs proportionable .
Nothing can be more mocking than its bite , which is not immediately mortal , but affects the senses , and occasions madness .
As to the men , they find assistance in this case from certain herbs and barks ,  when applied to in time  but the cattle are frequently bit or stung by these monstrous creatures , and die without any remedy having been yet discovered to preserve them .


As to the mineral kingdom , this country produces many kinds of gems , and in great quantity , particularly sapphires , rubies , and cat 's eyes  but these are all secured for the king 's use .
They have besides both iron and lead mines  but these , as well as many other valuable productions of the island , are considered of little worth compared to the cinnamon and wild honey  which , are , properly speaking , the peculiar traffick of the country , and of which the Dutch have made an amazing advantage since their conquest of it .


Having thus got through the description of the island of Ceylon , and mentioned the most extraordinary particulars of curiosity in it , we shall now take leave of our readers , recommending to their perusal the farther accounts given by the travellers who have visited it , and who seem all to unite in opinion as to its being one of the finest , most amply stored , and most amazingly diversified spot throughout the whole extent of the East Indies .


FINIS .
CONTENTS .


 INtroduction to the Trifler Page 1 The Trifler , No .
I. Page 2 Studies proper for women Page 9 The history of Harriot and Sophia Page 17 A song Page 45 On reading a poem written by a lady of quality Page 46 An ode Page 47 To death , an irregular ode Page 48 The history of the dutchess of Beaufort Page 49 The Trifler , No .
II .
Page 81 Conclusion of the history of the dutchess of Beaufort Page 84 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 99 An account of the vestal virgins Page 115 The history of the count de Comminge Page 122 Introduction to the philosophy for the ladies Page 129 Of the universe , under a general view Page 134 The lady 's geography Page 145 Description of Amboyna Page 146 Natural history of Amboyna Page 150 The Trifler , No .
III .
Page 162 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 165 A letter to the author of the Lady 's Museum Page 182 The history of the count de Comminge continued Page 190 An essay on the original inhabitants of Great-Britain Page 193 The trial of the maid of Orleans Page 212 Of the metamorphoses of animals , and the several changes observable in animal life Page 229 A letter to the author of the Trifler from Maria Page 242 A letter from Perdita Page 244 The History of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 246 A letter to the author of the Lady 's Museum , giving an account of the trial of Earl Ferrers Page 261  A letter from the same , concerning the execution of Earl Ferrers Page 269 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great-Britain continued Page 273 A letter from Agnes Woodbine Page 289 Of the importance of the education of daughters , written by the archbishop of Cambray Page 294 History of the count de Comminge continued Page 298 Of the metamorphoses of animals continued Page 306 The natural history of the formica leo , or lion pismire Page 309 The Trifler , No .
V. Page 321 A letter from Perdita Page 323 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 327 A letter from Offaria Cellina Page 344 The history of Bianca Capello Page 345 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great Britain continued Page 353 Of the inconveniencies of the common methods of education Page 368 What are the first grounds of education Page 371 The history of the count de Comminge continued Page 379 Of the methods Nature has furnished various animals with to elude the attacks , and prevent the pursuits of their enemies Page 388 Of the manners and customs of the inhabitants of Amboyna Page 398 A letter to the author of the Trifler from Perdita Page 403 A letter from C. D. on a passage in Macbeth Page 409 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 414 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great Britain continued Page 433 The history of the count de Comminge continued Page 449 Cautions concerning education Page 465 The natural history of the swallow-tailed butterfly Page 467 The manners and customs of the inhahitants of Amboyna concluded Page 474 Description of the island of Ceylon Page 479 A letter from E. T. with the history of Castruccio Castracani Page 481 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 491 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great-Britain continued Page 513 The history of Bianca Capello concluded Page 520 The history of the count de Comminge continued Page 538  On the education of daughters continued Page 552 A letter to the Trifler from Anoeta Page 561 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 569 Lord Dorset to his lady , a poem Page 592 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great-Britain continued Page 593 The history of the count Comminge continued Page 609 Treatise on the education of daughters continued Page 627 The natural history of the ephemeron , or day-fly Page 633 A letter to the Trifler from Parthenissa Page 643 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 645 On reading Hutchinson on the passions , a poem Page 667 Shallum to Hilpa , an antediluvian love letter , a poem Page 668 Hilpa 's answer Page 669 The Morning , a poem Page 670 An ode Page 671 The history of the count de Comminge concluded Page 673 On the education of daughters continued Page 686 Essay on the original inhabitants of Great-Britain concluded Page 695 The history of the princess Padmani Page 697 Description of the island of Ceylon continued Page 710 A letter to the Trifler from Grace Pythoness Page 721 The history of Harriot and Sophia continued Page 724 The judgment of Paris , a poem Page 742 The life of Sir Anthony Vandyck Page 748 The tale of Geneura Page 753 Of the use of history for children Page 776 Description of the island of Ceylon continued Page 785 A letter to the Trifler , with a dialogue between Socrates and Aristarchus Page 794 The history of Harriot and Sophia concluded Page 801 The life of Sir Anthony Vandyck concluded Page 827 Treatise on the education of daughters concluded Page 840 A poetical epistle from Busy to Snowball Page 854 To Ismene playing on a lute Page 856 Philosophy for the ladies concluded Page 857 Lady 's geography concluded Page 866 Notes * .
Buchanan , Book VII .
the reign of Malcolm III .
the eighty-sixth king of Scotland .
* .
Constantinus , Constantius , and Constans .
† .
All our historical authors mention the Attacotti , but none can tell exactly who these people were .
Dr. Gale thinks them a barbarous sort of Britons living in the north of Scotland about Attarith .
* .
Theodosius the father was put to death by the emperor Valens , because Theod were the first letters of his name .
A prophet had foretold , that a man whose name began with those letters should be emperor .
Valens cut off the prophet 's head , and murdered all those whose names began with Theod .
* .
Flavius Magnus Clemens Maximus .
* .
Alaric was rather general than king of the Goths .
He was one of the most formidable enemies of the Roman empire .
He sack'd Rome itself A. D. 4O9 .
* .
The inhabitants of Kent .
* .
By disobedient I presume is meant the atheists , deists , methodists , and nonconformists of those days .
* .
These were the Eubates , or lowest order of Druids .
† .
Successor of Trajan .
* .
Guthrie , vol .
i. p. 81 .
† .
In all probability , about the middle of the fifth century .
According to Nennius , A. D. 447 .
* .
Where some years ago was found a stone chest , with the corpse of a very tall man enclosed , says Mr. Carte .
† .
Bretaigne , a province of France .
* .
Hampshire .
† .
Cadair Arthur .
* .
Fcclesiasticus , Chap .
xxx .
ver .
9 .
* .
In the year 642 , in the thirty-eighth year of his age .
† .
Bernicia and Deira were the two parts in which Northumberland was divided .
* .
Strabo , as also Diodorus and Pliny , supposes , that Scythia Europrea extended to the utmost bounds of the north , and includes , among the Scythians , the antient inhabitants of Norway , Sweden , Denmark , the Daci Getae , c. INNES 'S Essays , page 67 .
† .
Tyrrhel , page 5 and 6 .
* .
The Plate referred to will be given in our Next .
* .
Those pictures were in Dr. Mead 's possession , and sold at his sale .
† .
This was a very considerable sum in those days .
* .
This picture is at present in the possession of Lord O [ ... ] | ford at Horton .
* .
This picture is still in the possession of the family of Bernini at Rome .
† .
In the gallery at Kensington .
á .
In the possession of lord Royston .
* .
The large one is now in the palace at Windsor .
† .
Published by Teniers , and commonly called Teniers 's Gallery .
ß .
In all the accounts that are written of Vandyck , this extraordinary sum is said to be demanded , which , considering the different value of money , would be equal to what two hundred and thirty thousand pounds is at this time , it may be concluded that there is some mistake : a cypher , perhaps , added too much .
* .
The Wryneck .
Contact and Feedback | Accessibility | OUCS | © University of Oxford .

