
THE TRIUMVIRATE : OR , THE Authentic Memoirs OF A. B. and C .


In quibus fuit propositi , semper à nugis Ad bona transire seria .
Undè Nescio .
IN TWO VOLUMES .
VOLUME I .


LONDON : Printed for W. JOHNSTON , in Ludgate-street .
MDCCLXIV .


TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Bedford .


 MY LORD ,


I TAKE the liberty of laying these Volumes at your feet , as it was owing to your GRACE 'S generous and voluntary Patronage , that I have enjoyed either spirits or leisure sufficient  for undertaking , or executing a work of this nature .


YOUR GRACE will , I hope , find amusement , at least , in these Writings , and I intreat the Honour of your kind Acceptance of this small Tribute of his Duty , the Services of whose Life , were he capable of performing any which might ever deserve that name , ought in justice , and gratitude , to be dedicated to your GRACE .


I am , MY LORD , With the highest Respect , Your GRACE 'S much obliged And most obedient Servant , The AUTHOR .


THE PREFACE .


 NOTHING has surprised me more than to find that novels and romances still maintain their ground , in the libraries of the Fair .
Mistakes and prejudices are wearing daily away in other things , to the great improvement and enlightening of mankind  but with regard to female education , some customs have  been abrogated , which had better have remained , as they were on the safe side , even supposing them to have been errors , while this , among others , stands still unrepealed , though the slightest sense or reflection might have exploded it long ago  nay , should have stifled the chimaera in its very birth .


What has been urged in favour of these kind of writings , is , that the extraordinariness of the adventures , and the variety of the incidents , are fitted to induce young ladies into an habit of reading , at first , which may afterwards be directed to more profitable studies : that the personages in romances , are of the most exalted ranks , and their characters of the most perfect kinds  and that therefore the conduct and sentiments of such examples , might be proper to imbue young minds with refined precedents , and elevated notions .
That novels serve to afford them a general knowledge of life , without the hazard of their own experience  which may teach them a prudent diffidence in their own strength , and a safe caution against the arts and intrigue of the world .


 Against this plausibility , I argue , That history supplies us with as extraordinary events , and as entertaining incidents , as any which can possibly be met with in fiction  that the characters in the latter , being but ideal , lose the full influence of example , and that the sentiments consequently , become deficient in the authority of precept .
That in the former , there are many real characters , as brave , as noble , and as perfect , as any to be met with in romance  and the sentiments , maxims , and reflections , of persons who did really exist , upon occasions which did actually occur , have infinitely more spirit , beauty and moral , in them , than all the imaginary ones that ever have been framed by the sterile labour , and puerile genius of novelists or romancers .
And with regard to the knowledge said to be gained from the study of novels , I can not imagine what benefit young women may be likely to draw from repeated memoirs of eloping daughters , frail mistresses , or faithless wives .


 Nay , if polite readers would have something still more interesting than novels or romances , than even any history or biography already extant , modern writers may well supply themselves with cotemporary materials for such a work , from public annals , and private anecdotes .
As far as Orondates is exceeded by Scanderbeg , does not Frederic excel him again , in every quality which marks the king , the soldier , the scholar , and the philosopher ?
The present age has presented us with an heroe who gives the appearance of veracity to antient fable , and will convey the air of fiction to future history .
Are not the tales of Boccace put out of countenance by the Lives of the Empresses ?
and these exceeded again by the modern memoirs - not yet published - of lady - and lady - ?
I forget their titles .


It was upon such reflections as these , that I have undertaken , on the credit of an historiographer , to publish the following memoirs  every particular of which , except the names of persons and places , can be  authenticated by living testimonies  insomuch that as each separate fact may be in course recorded , one man shall say openly , I bear evidence to this  another , I can answer for that  while some ladies shall tacitly cry , I could vouch this , that , or t ` other - if I durst .
And so of the rest .
And yet , to the great good fortune of those who delight in fiction , the whole will nevertheless , bear the air of a novel  not from any manner of address in the publisher , but from the incidental circumstances , and extraordinary contingencies of the real story .


But should it be still objected , by any of your over-scrupulous lovers of truth , that many of the characters herein represented , carry somewhat the appearance of composition , let them but only reflect a little , upon real life , and they must certainly recollect to have frequently met with genuine peculiarities , contradictions , foibles , and absurdities , among mankind , more outrées , or extravagant , than any of the caracatura 's of the Dramatis Personae , even though the stage ,  like a gallery , is allowed to exhibit figures larger than the life .


How I happened to become possessed of these memoirs , is not at all material to the Public  however , I have really so much complacency for so respectable a body , that I would satisfy their curiosity , even in this trifling article , if I could limit the discovery to that particular only  but it is surrounded and connected with so many , and such various well-known circumstances , that it would be impossible for me to reveal it , without making , at the same time , too full a discovery of myself  which might lay me extremely open to the just censure of the republic of letters , that a person of my deep erudition , extensive thought , and comprehensive judgment , should throw away his genius and learning , so idly and unprofitably , in digesting a parcel of insignificant events , and obsolete morals , into a consistent series or digest , while any hearsay of the Cabala remains unexpounded  or that the points of Hebrew vowels , continue still to be a point in question .


 As to the inaccuracies which perhaps some minute critics may observe upon in the following pages , I do not think them worth amending , in a work of this kind .
I write always without book , and just as if I was speaking to you .
Suppose now , for instance , that you and I were occasionally conversing together , upon some literary topic , or other  would it not be extremely pedantic in me to interrupt the discourse till I went into my study to settle the olympiad of an historic fact ?
Or would any body now , give a farthing difference , whether it was Augustus Caesar , or Asinius Pollio , that reprehended the Patavinité of Titus Livius * ?


Writing and correcting , like saying and doing , are very different things  and the latter I take to be by much the more tedious and laborious .
Now I think that either of them is even full trouble enough for one person  therefore I really never do more myself , than write , and leave the world to  correct : they have more dull time on their hands , it relieves their idleness , and gratifies their malice  for some readers would loose half their pleasure , if they did not meet something to find fault with .
It sets them , in some sort , above the writer , and I yield them their advantage freely .


Most of these volumes have been wrote at inns , or in the midst of business , or company  and indeed the best way , in my opinion , as well as the easiest too , is never to form any plan for writing , at all  for it gives a constraint and stiffness to the work , which betrays the lamp too much .
The great beauty of the antient authors , may be owing , perhaps , to their having wrote intirely without rules  while the modelling moderns endeavour to cramp even what little genius they have left .
In the first , you perceive the free stroke of the pencil  in the latter , is discovered the restraint of the compass .
Or compare , if you please , the confined mincings of a go-cart , with the unspancelled strides of manhood .


 However this formal age may possibly find fault with me for the mixed matters , the tragi-comic manner of writing , in these volumes .
They urge that all works should be consistent , or of a piece  either serious , or comical  learned , or unlearned  pious , or prophane .
But Sir Richard Steele says , ` It is the misfortune of our time , that people think it as easy to be critics , as politicians . '
Here he spoke ironically , for they are both equally difficult .
There are Arcana Literae , as well as Imperii , which , if a person is not let into the mistery of , he may frequently find fault in the wrong place , in both instances .


In a work like this , designed for the Public at large , there must be something , in allusion to dramatic writings , to entertain the three different classes of auditors  pit , box , and gallery .
The stage of Athens , from whence your learned , but ignorant critics , frame their drama , was chaster than ours , because their audience was all of a piece .
Insomuch , that Plato  being asked by Dionysius , ( now I am not certain whether it was Plato or Dionysius ) whom he would recommend as a preceptor for his son , replied , Send to Athens , and take the first man you meet with in the streets .
But modern readers and audiences are in an unhealthful state , and must sometimes be indulged in unwholesome seasonings , to help them to digest proper food .


This then , may seem to have been the design of that anomalous , heteroclite genius , the author of Tristram Shandy , whose principal end , I hope and believe , was to inculcate that great Magna Charta of mankind , humanity and benevolence .


`` A tale may catch him who a sermon flies . ''


'T is true indeed , that he has given us , according to the vulgar phrase , rather more sauce than pig , and this not sufficiently seasoned with Attic salt , neither .
But he seems to have wrote more for the present age than the future ones  judging like  Aurelius , though in a far different sense , that surviving fame is but oblivion .
What is posthumous fame ?
Meat blown up in a shamble - A dead body puffed up with the breath of the living .
Modern writers seem perfectly indifferent how soon their works die , provided they themselves can live  and may be compared to butchers , who thrive the better , the more they slaughter .


His third part is better , that is , not so bad as his second .
There is a good deal of laughable impertinence in it .
He has repeated the same empty humour there , of an unlettered * page , and has given us a carteblanche , in this last † .
Whatever is neither quite sense , nor absolute nonsense , is true Shandeic .
However , through the whole , there is some entertainment for a splenetic person , though none at all for a rational one .


` Qui Tristram non odit , amet rhapsodias Rablais . '
 But there are some things in that work , which ought to be more severely reprehended  though it is folly , rather than vice , that tempts people to speak in a gross manner  while others relish it , in general , more for want of taste , than virtue .
It requires genius to be witty , without being wicked at the same time  but the most vulgar parts may serve for obscenity .
'T is easier to make one laugh , than smile  and when dullness would be witty , it lets fly bawdry , as it does something else , satisfied to raise a laugh , though it does a stink also .
Loose expressions , in a woman , are a double vice , as they offend against decency , as well as virtue  but in a clergyman , they are treble  because they hurt religion also .


But to his graver works - His sermons * are written professedly , upon the divine principle of philanthropy  and there are two apostrophe 's in them , which are both striking and affecting .
In the midst of  a most moving description of a complicated family distress , he suddenly interrupts himself with this humane exclamation : Look down , O God , upon their afflictions !
and then proceeds with his narrative * .
Again , he is telling the story of the good Samaritan , and after these words , by chance there came by a certain priest , he cries out , Merciful God !
that a teacher of thy religion should ever want humanity † !
For my part , were I a bishop , I would not indeed prefer him to a Cure , ( though I am glad that he does not want one ) because of his Tristram , but I would certainly make him my Vicar-general , on account of his Yoric .


As to those few free passages , which the reader may find interspersed throughout these writings of mine , if rightly apprehended , in context with the whole , they may be compared to the anamorphosis in painting  which is an innocent art of drawing a picture so equivocally , that , according  to the light it is viewed in , may present you either with a satyr , or a saint  or like Minerva 's ring , which could render Ulysses handsome or ugly , just as he found it expedient to carry on his purpose .


` Vita verecunda est , musa jocosa mihi .
Ov . '
Or ,


Dixero si quid forté jocosius , hoc mihi Juris , Cum veni , dabis - Hor .
Or , ` Sit lasciva licet pagina , vita proba est. .
Mart . '
All which apologies I do here most cordially invite Mr. Sterne to take share of with me  for by all accounts , his private character deserves it .


And really , if I did not interlope , now and then , to the great relief of my readers , what would these two volumes be good for ?
would they defray the printing ?
No - Would they lie on the toilet as untoiled as the Bible ?
Yes - What a preciseness of moral !
a decorum of manners !
a purity of  sentiment !
Stuff !
mere old-fashioned stuff !
truly .
One might imagine to himself a parcel of antique portraits suddenly inspired with a faculty of speech , and conversing together through their oval frames  or a set of hewn-stone stoics declaiming from their niches .


Some few , perhaps , who prefer old books to new , might buy this - But after all , prithee tell me who are even those few ?
Why possibly the king might read it - I mean king George the Third - for as he has neither idle , nor ignoble avocations , he can afford leisure from his great public duties , to indulge his taste and virtue in literary and moral amusements .
I think too , that the king of Prussia would relish it , ( if Voltaire , doctus utriusque linguae , would translate it into French ) after his brave and rebounding spirit , having restrained the vain ambition of universal monarchy , within the prescribed bounds of ballanced empire , shall have left him at liberty to exalt the heroe , permutatio foelix !
to the philosopher .
Perhaps  Mr. Pitt also , might dip into it , after he has resolutely fought out a peace , and given himself leisure to refine politics into morals * .


Here indeed are a Triumvirate !
whose glory dims the lustre of that antient title .
Under such a patronage would that my A. B. C. were placed !
But then , in the mean time , prithee what would pay the printer , if it was not for honest Triglyph , who steps in among ye , now and then , with a slap dash , that sets fools a staring , tickles the small wits , quickens the sale , and quits all scores , at once ?


I am , GENTLEMEN , Your obedient Servant , And LADIES , Your most devoted Slave , Biographer Triglyph .


PROLOGOMENA TO THE SUBSCRIBERS .


 AS I had never published any book before , I had not attained the least knowledge in the arts of puffing off a work  and as I had seldom conversed , except among the learned and good , I had consequently but few acquaintances : I was therefore alarmed at the certain expence of an impression , at my own suit , on the precarious hazard of a  sale .
Upon which I determined with myself , to have a subscription solicited , in order to defray the charges of printing .


The trouble of this business I left intirely on the hands of my booksellor  upon whose counter also , I laid the manuscript , to be dipt into , here and there , by the subscribers , in order to afford them some specimen of the work .
And while this scheme was going on , it has amused me often , to sit unnoticed in some obscure corner of the shop , attending to the questions and observations which the customers used to throw out , when the proposals happened to be put into their hands .


` The Triumvirate - Very well - Pray Mr. Folio , is this the Triumvirate of Caesar * , Anthony , and Lepidus ?
or ' - Neither , Sir .
` No , no , I see now it could not be that , for though A. and C. may very well stand for Anthony and Caesar , we can not possibly squeeze Lepidus out of B. Nay , nor can it mean the former Triumvirate neither , for stronger reasons still , of the same kind .
† ` Why really ,  Sir , replied Mr. Folio , I do not think that there is the least mention of any one of those antiquated gentlemen , from one end to t ` other of these writings .
The persons here intended , may be walking about the streets every day , for aught I know  and 't is odds but you might know one or other of them yourself , if Mr. Triglyph would but suffer me to publish their names  for those of A. B. and C. you must understand , Sir , are but their incog-nomens - I think that this was the expression Mr. Triglyph made use of .


When people have taken up the manuscript , it has often entertained me to hear the several remarks which have been made , upon looking into it .
Some have cried out , Zounds , what a world of moral stuff is here !
By the Lord , a man may as well sit down and read the Bible - Every whit , indeed Sir , replied sober Folio .
What the devil have we got here ?
says another , opening in a different place .
O , by Mars , Bacchus , Apollo , and virorum too , this scene licks Shandy all to nothing - Nay , now d - n  my eyes , Tristram , but this thrusts your nose out of joint , worse than the forceps .


Another critic , upon looking into the several parts of the book , pronounced with a precise and dogmatic tone , that it wanted the true simplex duntaxat , et unum , and that there was such a variety of characters , subjects , stiles , sentiments , and manners , mixed together in this multifarious work , it could never be one man 's money , that 's pos - and therefore the impression would certainly never bring a sale .


Upon this hint I carried home the manuscript , and drew out specimens of the different species of writing , subjects , characters , c. and gave them to Mr. Folio , to select one or other of them , according to his particular knowledge of the respective genius of each subscriber  who taking it for granted , that the intire work would be carried on in the same strain , might the more readily enter into a subscription .


This device produced a most sudden and lucky effect , and my friend Folio very soon received cash sufficient to put these sheets  into the press  to which I think proper to prefix a list of the subscribers , in the very manner I copied it out from his books , when I was settling accounts with him , upon this article .
In which catalogue you are to observe , that where he has put down the names , as in the first column , it was of such persons only , who without knowing any thing in particular of the work , subscribed merely at the request of a friend , or to incourage the freedom of the press  to fill up a gap on their shelves , or for the pleasure of seeing their names , or titles , in print : that where the subscribers were too modest to have their names mentioned , or too numerous to be inserted , they are classed under character , as in the second column .
The specimens , which ingaged their respective patronage , are entered down in the third  and the fourth contains the numbers of the subscribers .


 Table 1 .
As for Example .
Names .
Characters .
Parts subscribed to .
Numbers This column must remain a blank , till the fifteenth edition , for reasons that will perfectly satisfy the then Public .
All who have faith in the veracity of Burnet 's History of his Own Times .
To The Preface 15 The dependents on the little Great .
The Appendix 20,000 All the primitive bishops , priests , deacons , and presbyters , in England , Ireland , and Scotland .
Mr. Carewe 's confession of faith .
10 Every man of true love and honour in these kingdoms .
The story of Mr. Andrews 20 All the witty rakes in ditto .
The character of the condisciple .
15 Every moral rake in ditto .
The story of Mr. Carewe .
5 The admirers of Mrs. Slipslop .
The description of Mrs. Benson , the Cornish squire , c. 5,000 All the women in the world , who would banish an amiable lover from their presence , and remain with a disagreeable husband in a bleak castle , on the Cornish coast .
The story of Anadyomene .
00000 All the old maids in England , c..
The chapter on the Forlorn Hope .
20,000 All the old virgins in ditto Ditto .
0 Some of the noble families of Europe .
The chapter on private relations .
400 The admirers of Tristram Shandy .
Some of the chapters where Triglyph speaks in his own character .
20,000 Total Subscribers 65,465 ERRATA .


 Vol .
I .


Preface .


PAGE xii .
line 4 .
read lose .
P. xiii .
l. 12 .
r. literarum .
P. xviii .
l. last but 2 .
r. unsoiled .
r. Prolegomenon .


Memoirs .


P. 7 .
l. 3 .
r. virtutum , and next line , last word , r. il - P. 46 .
l. last , 1st word , prefix an s. P. 58 .
last line but 8 , r. successfully .
P. 125 .
l. 3 .
3d word , r. his .
P. 138 , l. last but 1 .
after in .
r. an .
P. 177 .
l. last but 1 .
r. employ .
P. 178 .
l. 1 .
r. port .
P. 192 .
l. 11 .
r. women , and l. 18 .
change the period to a semicolon  P. 198 .
l. 15 .
r. vein .
P. 211 .
l. 14 , r. Genies .


Appendix .


Dele 1st page , and commence the paging on the back of that leaf , and so go on , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 .


Vol .
II .


P. 7 .
l. last but one , dele the 2d and .
P. 12 .
l. last but 2 .
for buthe , r. but the .
P. 13 .
l. 14 .
after letters , change the comma to a colon .
P. 20 .
l. 9 .
for to .
r. the .
P. 21 .
l. 10 .
for her , r. hur .
P. 30 .
l. 1 .
dele Kate .
P. 58 .
l. 20 .
before was , r. she .
P. 102 .
l. 21 .
dele the 2d comma .
P. 105 .
l. last but 2 , put a comma after galants .
P. 119 .
l. 19 .
dele of .
P. 122 .
line 3 .
r. the , before resolve .
P. 198 .
l. 9 .
r. person .
P. 214 .
l. 8 .
for and , r. for .
P. 245 .
l. 6 .
dele me .
P. 263 .
l. 37 ?
for compleat , r. compose .


 THE TRIUMVIRATE : OR , THE AUTHENTIC MEMOIRS OF Andrews , Beville , and Carewe The initials of A. B. and C. were objected to in the manuscript , as being too abstracted , and fitter for geometry than novel  that they did not distinguish the persons sufficiently , in the memory , nor impress the ideas of them strong enough on the mind .
In compliance therefore with this indolence of attention in my gentle readers , I have embodied thought , and thickened shadow into substance for them , by supplying the above names throughout the remainder of this work .
- Giving to airy nothing A local habitation , and a name . .


- Et in medias res , Non secus ac notus .
- HOR .
1 .
CHAPTER I .


HIS horse grew tired before he had earned half his hire  so that it was late at night before Mr. Carewe had reached the inn at Scarborough .
The reader must have been a lucky traveller , if he does not know that the beast , whether through sympathy , electricity , contactity , or any other word , quod exit in y , communicates its own fatigue to the rider , as if , marriage  or Centaur-like , they were but one flesh .
And , indeed , in many other instances in life , the tedious urging of a Person to an unwilling act , is often more tiresome than the doing twice as much oneself .
Mr. Carewe eat a poached egg , drank a pint of negus , and retired to bed .


The next morning he went down early into the kitchen , to order his breakfast , where he met with several persons , on the same errand , and the landlord among them .
He enquired of this latter , where or how near the town one Mr. Andrews lived , who he was informed had lately come to reside in that country .
The host replied , that he was settled , as well as he can be settled , on the northern road , about a mile from the town  that he was but little known in the Country , for that all his neighbours looked upon him to be mad , as he lived intirely at home , and spent all his time in reading of books .


 A gentleman who stood by , and had endeavoured to interrupt this declamation , addressing himself at last to Mr. Carewe , said , You are not to take the character of that gentleman , Sir , from the description of our host here , for he may be one of the many who are incapable of distinguishing between a common and a peculiar character  and fools , said he , are apt to impute every thing to frenzy , which rises above the ordinary level of dullness .


Mr. Beville then proposed to Mr. Carewe , that they should breakfast together , as he should be extremely pleased to cultivate an acquaintance with any person who might have the least social connection with his amiable friend Mr. Andrews .
Mr. Carewe bowed with that ease and complacency that was natural to him , and stretching forth his hand toward the door , said , in effect , Sir , I am ready to attend you .


During breakfast they conversed familiarly together , upon general topics of politics and letters , and did not , like attorneys , proceed immediately to the purpose of their meeting .
There is in ingenuous minds , under the advantages of a liberal education , a certain native freedom , and a well-bred ease , which , at first sight , render perfect strangers as familiar , as if they had been old and intimate acquaintance .


 At length Mr. Beville said , that he had come that morning from Mr. Andrews 's house , as he usually did every day , to drink the waters , and bathe in the the sea , for a disorder which he had been for some time subject to , namely , the scurvy  which insulars are generally afflicted with , and is the root whence all the rotten branches of distempers , peculiar to nations surrounded by the ocean , usually spring .
He then asked Mr. Carewe where , and how long he had been acquainted with Mr. Andrews .


He told his name , and was proceeding to give him a particular account of his acquaintance and attachment to Mr. Andrews , when he was interrupted by an exclamation , O , Sir , I have you all by heart , already  I have frequently heard our friend mention you with the highest fondness and esteem  lament , of late , his not knowing where to direct a line to you , and often wish , after his warm manner , that some fortuitous concourse might happily throw us three together , in some retired scene , where we might mutually know , approve , and rejoice in each other .
This fortunate crisis , added he , has at length arrived , and I am impatient to make the welcome present to my friend .


Mr. Carewe bowed , they embraced , discharged their bill , and walked away together to the  farm , as it was stiled , where they found Mr. Andrews reading in an Arbour in his garden , having just retired from the heat of the day , after pointing out some works to his labourers .


2 .
CHAP .
II .


I Would here describe the meeting of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe , but for the following reasons .
You have seen two friends meet , therefore to you it would be superfluous .
Or , more probably , you might never have seen two friends together , any way , in your oldest life  so that to you it might appear improbable .
For it was not like two merchants meeting upon Change  it was not like two justices saluting at a sessions  nor even like two neighbours shaking each other 's arms out of the sockets , at a fair .
In short , it was not like any thing you may have ever seen , except you have had the extraordinary chance of being present on the meeting of two friends * .


 But then you are to observe , that , by this expression , I do not mean such connections as the moderns , by way of composition with morals , are reduced to ascribe that high title to  but such friends as may be quoted from among the antients , ' `` In this dull age scarce understood . ''
* ' between whom , and the present race , there is as much difference , as between the man that Diogenes was searching for , at Athens , and those who , ignorant of the reproof , laughed at his extravagance † .
David Simple tooá , who sought through the two great cities of London and Westminster , in quest of a friend , proceeded exactly upon the same errand with the philosopher .
For a true man is a real friend .
But the qualities which are requisite to constitute this  character , have been so long lost in the world , that Cicero cries out , even in his time , Haec genera virtutem non solum in moribus nostris , sed vix jam in libris reperiuntur : Chartae quoque , quae ilam pristinam severitatem continebant , obsoleverunt .


Epicurus , in his morals , prefers friendship before any other virtue .
St. Evremond says , that ` justice is only a moral , established for the convenience of human society  it is the work of man  whereas friendship is the work of nature . '
One might imagine that the Saint had Love rather , in contemplation , in this definition .
I carry the subject higher , and deem friendship to be an angelic virtue .
Nay , higher still .
For friendship proceeds farther than the having care over us .
It will induce us to sacrifice even ourselves for its sake , and therefore approaches nearer to the excellence of a God - A God who died for us !


And here I confess , that I feel so strong an impulse upon me , to acquaint my readers with my own situation in life , with regard to this particular , that I can not refrain from letting them know , one and all of them , which I hope , in other words , will be every one who can read English , that I have sufficient reason , from a long experience of my own , joined to the accounts I have occasionally received from others ,  to affirm , that I have been all my life placed under the patronage of all the real and disinterested friends in these kingdoms .


And as a just sense of my obligations , upon this account , calls on me here , for proper acknowledgements , the thread of my story pressing me , at the same time , not to discontinue its weft , I shall beg leave to refer the curious reader to my appendix to this volume , pages first and second , for a full and true account of this matter  and in the third and fourth pages , ditto appendix , he will find a catalogue of the many and great benefits which I have myself received , and which others may also derive , from such advantageous clientcies .


3 .
CHAP .
III .


AFTER the usual questions and unusual transports were over , Mr. Carewe desired Mr. Andrews to shew him his demesne , his husbandry and improvements , which he replied he would do , without stirring out of the spot  and taking out a pocket-book , he opened a map , of forty perch to the inch , in which he shewed him the whole farm , neatly laid down , divided and  denominated , as the wheatfield , the meadow , the pigeon-park , c..


After Mr. Andrews had fully instructed him in the topography of the draught , you may be surprised perhaps , said he , at this concise and figurative manner of answering your request  but , in general , people propose this question , more out of complaisance than curiosity , while others accord it out of ostentation , rather than good-will .
And , as vanity is ever more active than civility , I have sometimes known an old gouty fellow fatigue his grandson , in leading him round an improvement of his own making .
And yet , after all his sweat and toil , think you , added he , that he would know so much of the matter , or be able to describe the place so well to others , as he might from such a diagram as this , without moving any thing more than a finger or an eye .


But with regard to the plan now before you , continued he , I must observe one thing to you , which otherwise might require your going to the several closes , to inform yourself of .
You would naturally imagine , from the different denominations , that the pigeon-park had a dovehouse in it  that the meadow supplied my stables with hay  the wheatfield supported my family with bread  and so of the rest .


 But not one syllable of all this , I assure you , Sir .
These divisions indeed , I suppose had been originally named from respective merits of the kind  and , like other titles , these are still retained , though the qualifications which formerly gave rise to them have long since surceased .
And in truth , added he , I have generally considered all the parade of heraldry , in the same light  for , respecting qualities , not quality , I am apt to stile some peers of the realm , in allusion to my own demesne , by the cognomens of pigeon-park , meadow , wheatfield , c. who , as Sir Richard Steele says of a Grubstreet paper , can produce no merit beyond the title .
Titles which distinguish not merit , are but nick names  as a deformed man or woman are in derision stiled my lord or my lady .


4 .
CHAP .
IV .


THE house was situated exactly as the learned Dr. Cheyne recommends , in his Essay on Health and Long Life .
Fronting the east , to receive the full benefit of the first sun : on the side of a gravelly hill , that the foundation may be dry : over a running water , to give a  motion to the air  and unincumbered with trees , which are apt to confine the damps , and keep them hovering about the mansion .


The house was what was stiled a Batchelor 's Lodge , but so well contrived , that , if Mr. Andrews should ever double his condition , he might , at the same time , double his house too , without having occasion to alter any part of the building  for his was not a small house , but rather half a large one .
*


A neglect of this sort of oeconomy , is too generally seen in most of the villa 's of young men of fortune  who are apt seldom to frame any purpose beyond the present expediency  which subjects them frequently , as future contingencies may happen , to the aukwardness of disproportioned additions , the inconvenience of returns , or traps for whirling eddies , the expence of altering what has been already built , or of rasing the whole , to begin again anew .
In oeconomy , as well as morals , the frolic of the season , should never be inconsistent with the scheme for life .


 The furniture was perfectly simplex munditiis , and , according to the precept of Marcus Varro , in his Essay on Entertainment , rather neat than fine , elegant than rich .
The bedsteads , chairs , and tables were all of oak or walnut , because of our own growth  and the curtains , seats , and hangings , of stamped linnen  because , said Mr. Andrews , it is our own manufacture , looks handsome at first , and , that the being obliged to have it washed sometimes , renews its freshness , and gives employment to the poor .


Such was Mr. Andrews 's expression , and quite in his manner , who constantly took advantage of every opportunity of inculcating the god-like virtue , and soul-saving moral , of charity and benevolence .
Here now , had I been inclined to have swelled my volume by notes , I might have introduced the word philanthropy , in this place , instead of benevolence , which would have afforded me the opportunity of informing the generality of my polite readers , that philanthropy is a plaguy hard Greek word , which in downright plain English means nothing more than a love of mankind .


But in the first place , the writer of these memoirs , is far above such bibliopolist arts  and , in the next , the word philanthropy would not have sufficiently comprehended the full scope of  Mr. Andrews 's benevolence  for his was not confined to human nature alone , but extended itself throughout the whole animal creation , from the Leviathan of the deep , to the emmet of the field .
And , in order to awaken such sentiments among his domestics , along with other devices for the same purpose , he had placed this text over his stable door , A righteous man regardeth the life of a beast .


5 .
CHAP .
V .


WHEN they came into the parlour , they found dinner served  which was a true monastic meal  only one joint of mutton , and a sallad .
But they were all in health , eat heartily , and conversed chearfully together .
Mr. Andrews observed upon the frugality of his board , but assured his friends , that this oeconomy proceeded more from Epicurism , than parsimony  for that he had always perceived an higher relish to one dish , than to many  and that various meats were apt to perplex the choice , and weaken the appetite , by dividing its taste .


 Mr. Beville took occasion , from this hint , to philosophize upon this subject , by remarking that single objects are better observed by the eye , than plural ones  that variety in prospect , like many angles in architecture , distracts the vision , instead of filling the sight  and that the sea engages the attention of the mind , as much from its uniformity , as its vastness .
In fine , that variety in general rather diverts , than satisfies the eye .


Mr. Carewe wrought the subject still higher , by running the analogy into a moral , saying , that in love , as well as food , a craving for variety was the certain sign of a sickly appetite  that temperance and constancy were the best preservatives of health and vigour  and that , as providence pursues its several purposes by uniform means , it might not be unreasonable to conclude , that a fondness for change was more consonant to a state of depravation , than of nature .


After this manner did they coverse together , in the spirit of antient symposiac 's , during their meal , a bottle of wine , and a pot of coffee .
After which Mr. Andrews asked Mr. Carewe , whether he chose to play cards  to which he replied , that he had no particular inclination to any amusements of that kind , but was always ready to comply with the disposition of his company   and desired Mr. Andrews , as master of the revels , to appoint the entertainment for his guests .
No , Sir , interrupted Mr. Andrews , I do not understand the punctilio in that sense  for I consider a man in his own house , to be a master to his domestics only , but to his friends a vassal .
However , as you say , Sir , added Mr. Beville , that you are ready to comply with the humour of the company , I shall make so free as to acquaint you , that neither Mr. Andrews , nor I , chuse play of any kind .


Agreed , replied Mr. Carewe , for my part , 't is compliance , and not choice , that ever induces me to sit down at a card-table .
There are three things requisite to a gamester  a love of play , a knowledge in its mysteries , and a fortune to support it - or better , no fortune to lose .
In every one of which , I am myself deficient .
Nay , I must always play at a disadvantage , even upon equal terms , for the winning of fifty guineas could not make me happy , and the losing of them might render me uneasy .
I have portioned out my income in a certain even proportion , and think that it would be extremely indiscreet in me to stake any part of it upon a hazard , which might injure my oeconomy , without improving my fortune : for fifty guineas are more  than I want , and are , at the same time , more than I can spare .


6 .
CHAP .
VI .


UPON which they retired to the library , where , after some general conversation , which the scene both hinted and inspired , Mr. Carewe repeated to Mr. Andrews the discourse which had passed in the morning , at Scarborough , between the host and him .
Mr. Andrews smiled , and replied , that most of his present neighbours , as well as some former acquaintances in life , had conceived the same notion of him , because he had generally sequestered himself from the world , and mixed not in their sports or entertainments , their races , cock-fightings , hunting-matches , or play .


In all things of an indifferent nature , said he , one should certainly conform to the manners of the world , in order to avoid the unsociable and affected character of singularity  but in reality , added he , these things are by no means indifferent to me , and I am so far from having any manner of taste or passion for such amusements , that I rather feel a disrelish to some of  them , and an absolute aversion , even to horror , to others .


I have , continued he , made experiments upon every article in life , which bears the name of pleasure  and the first thing that disgusted me was a crowd .
I ran headlong into all manner of public places , with that giddy eagerness of youth , which is natural , before one has given themselves leisure to enquire either into the ends or motives of their actions .
But , after having sustained much squeezing , sweating , and jostling , at balls , feasts , shews , and masquerades , for many years , I began to find out the true definition of a crowd , to be , a certain combination of an indifinite number of persons , to render each other mutually uneasy .
*


And besides , with regard to the boisterous and unmeaning mirth one is generally stunned with , in large companies , which may be stiled , not the conversations , but the convulsions of society , I have always looked upon laughing , without sentiment , to be merely histerical , and needed the aid of assa foetida .
I have sometimes imagined , that , in the days of antient philosophy , when men used to give rational rebukes , but after an  absurd manner , as in the instance of Diogenes and his torch , mentioned just now , and many others , one of the Sages would have brought a wet mop into such a merry-making assembly , and have twirled it in their faces , as supposing them to be falling into fits .
Risibility has been made a character of rationality  the conclusion then must be fairly this , that none should laugh without a reason  otherwise , looking asquint might be as distinguishing a mark , as some philosophers have made it .


With regard to horse-racing , besides the crowd and noise which attend it , there is something much more abominable in it .
For , not to insist merely upon the cruelty of straining a beautiful and useful creature beyond the extent of its powers , and running the poor animal with whip and spur for many miles , in blood , which is the jockey 's expression , is it not an encouragement to the idleness of the lower classes of people , who are the riches of a nation ?
are not the bettors generally either dupes or sharpers ?
and is not the immorality of such proceedings freed , by custom , even from the restraint of shame ?
For , are not the most flagrant impositions qualified by the title of a jocky stroke , and justified by the laws of the turf ?
c..


 Cock-fighting too , makes a barbarous sport of courage , wounds , and death !
Does the generous animal win an hard fought battle , at the expence of blood , or limb  what is his reward ?
To have his head wrung off , after his bravery has rendered him unfit for fighting any more But the tryal , or cutting down of cocks , is too shocking for humanity to describe !


As for hunting , I have always thought that the only rational creature that pursues this sport , is the hound  for he follows his instinct : I excuse the huntsman , because he is acting in his profession : I pity the horse , as he is pressed into the service  but I despise the ` Squire , having neither compulsion , vocation , or natural impulse to plead .
The only plausible apology I ever heard given , in defence of this diversion , is , that it conduces to health , by inducing to exercise .
But is not this rather worse than giving up the argument intirely ?
Is it not , in effect , to say , that a man can not do a rational thing , without having an irrational motive for it ?


Gaming I need not expatiate upon  many writers , of sense and morals , have already done so , and without effect .
Even in its most simple state , it can not be said to be innocent , but merely idle .
It is a misapplication of accountable time , pereunt ,  imputantur  and apt to awaken passions ,  which had much better remain asleep .
Herodotus tells us , that play was invented first in Lydia , at the time of a great famine , by way of diverting the pressing calls of hunger : And hath it not , long since , returned back again to its primitive institution , by supporting an infinite number of persons , who have no other trade , merit , profession , or visible fortune to keep themselves from starving , without the relief of such handicraft , or moyens de vivre ?


The conversation here took another turn , and was carried on for the remainder of the evening upon various topics , till they were called in to supper , where the same frugality appeared as at dinner .
A roasted fowl , and a bottle of whitewine , which they diluted with Spa-water , compleated the repast .
They parted at eleven , and retired to bed .


7 .
CHAP .
VII .


THE next morning Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe met at breakfast  but Mr. Beville had gone off , as usual , to drink the waters at Scarborough .
After they had taken a few turns in the Garden , and returned into the study ,  Mr. Carewe put Mr. Andrews in mind of a promise he had formerly made him , on their parting at Islington , of relating to him the history of his life , if ever they might happen to meet again .


Mr. Andrews acknowledged the debt , and said that he would take the lucky opportunity of Mr. Beville 's absence , to discharge it , as it would supply him with an occasion of introducing his friend 's most excellent character , and also of mentioning some circumstances which would revive his grief , as they will necessarily do my own , added he , with a sigh !
his tears flowing fast at the same time .
He remained for some minutes unable to compose himself , and then , after having made Mr. Carewe acknowledge that the obligation was mutual between them , in this particular , he proceeded thus :


' The story of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Beville .


WHEN I was at school , said he , I had conceived a particular attachment toward one of my condisciples , for an odd reason indeed , but it is such a one as makes mothers often fond of sickly or ungracious children , merely for the trouble they give them .
He happened ,  however , to be my chum , which first accidentally led me to distinguish him from the rest .
He was arch , lively , and idle  but , as his humour had a peculiar charm for my gravity , I used frequently to make his exercises for him , furnish his themes , and assist him in the construction of his lessons .


As he was quick of resentment , and well-spirited , he had frequent boxing bouts upon his hands , and seldom waited to consider the odds against him  but , whenever I saw him overpowered , I used to enter the lists in his defence  and , as I was by much the biggest and strongest boy in the school , none of the rest would venture to cope with me , but used to cry out , Class , class , upon such occasions , and then a whole form would rush down pell-mell against me .


You 'll pardon me , Sir , said Mr. Andrews , for this puerile detail  but one has naturally a fondness for dwelling upon those early scenes of life , and renewing their youth , as it were , by the recollection of past aera 's .
Haec olim meminisse .
But I shall now pass on to our riper years , after having made this philosophic reflection  that it must certainly be nature , and not habit , which has given men a greater bravery than women , for boys universally decide their quarrels by boxing , even before education can have pointed  out their distinguishing characteristic  and girls shew their resentments by frumps , or scoldings , only .


' 8 .
CHAP .
VIII .


THE intimacy , between this friend and me , continued after we had quitted school .
I still retained the same fondness and attachment toward him , though without any manner of esteem .
He was a character , he had wit and humour , but was dissolute and capricious .
He had chearfulness and good-nature , but was passionate and ill-tempered .
He would sacrifice his fortune for you to day , and to-morrow refuse you a guinea .
In fine , he was a good companion , but a bad friend  and one of those whom one is generally pleased at meeting with , but never regret the parting from .


Our different manners of life , not less than our separate vocations , would frequently divide us from each other , sometimes for many months together  but whenever his frolic or extravagance , as was often the case , happened to involve him in any difficulty , his first resort was to my counsel and assistance .
I have bailed him out of  goals , released him from the watch , and redeemed him out of bagnio 's .
I have been his second in some encounters , and his marshal of honour in others .


In fine , his giddiness and debaucheries drew upon me so much trouble , hazard , and scandal , that I have frequently resolved to withdraw myself intirely from any manner of connection with him , and should certainly have done so , but that I knew he had no other friend , either willing , or sober enough , to guard him from scrapes , or to relieve him out of them  his other associates being at least as idle and thoughtless as himself , and some of them even more so : And yet , he generally kept what the world is too apt to stile the best company .


He was placed by his guardians at a college in Cambridge , where he loitered away his time for about three years , and used to make frequent elopements to London , where I resided at that time , with my father .
While he remained at the university , he used to write often to me , and , as there was some wit , spirit , and whim in his letters , I have kept most of them by me , which I shall entertain you with , some other time , added he , looking out at the window , for I now perceive our friend Mr. Beville returning from Scarborough , and we 'll go out and  meet him , if you please , and inquire what news he may have pickt up in that gay , idle scene of dissipated life .


These three friends passed the remainder of that day in the same kind of liberal converse as before , and the next morning , after Mr. Beville had walked away to town , in course , and , as soon as breakfast was over , Mr. Andrews reassumed as follows :


9 .
CHAP .
IX .


WE were interrupted yesterday , said he , just as I was going to shew you some of my condisciple 's letters , which I here present you with , in an heap together , without regard to dates , as of no manner of consequence in writings of this kind .
So saying , he put a parcel of papers into Mr. Carewe 's hands , and the first he took out to read was the following .


LETTER I .


Dear Andrews ,


Cambridge .
THE grace they repeat here , is about five minutes long .
How much must the gross ideas of beef and pudding impure the hungry  student 's devotion , during that interval ?
I have often thought the marriage ritual too tedious , for the same pious reason .
But , to make a ceremony of a thing , which in itself is the farthest from ceremony of any thing in the world , is most catholic nonsense , surely !


Long prayers , vigils , fasts , and penances , are certainly most dangerous institutions .
If the devotee be a cool person , they abate his zeal to lukewarm  and , if one of strong passions , he is inflamed to enthusiasm  which are either above or below the proper temper of true devotion .
Religion is love  and all its acts should be short and exstatic . .


I was hurried into this expression , my dear Andrews , and would have corrected it for your prudery , but that I happened to recollect doctor Taylor , in his severe treatise on holy living and dying , speaking on the imperfection of all human pleasures , introduces , among his instances , the married virgin led by her paranymphs to uneasy joy .
*


A certain reverend dean also , in his christian philosophy , keeping up to the same strain of arch piety , in order to fix our affection , I suppose , upon things above , and not upon things below ,  says , that the highest of mortal pleasures is attended with a sort of fainting .


But , indeed , were you to read St. Austin , St. Ambrose , St. Bernard , and others of the saintly fathers , you would find them somewhat more than arch  for , in truth , they often speak not only like fathers , but like mothers too .
You must not however think me so stupidly learned as this last paragraph seems to hint me  for all I know of these rums , is from the several curious passages selected out of their works , by lord Bolingbroke , in his philosophic writings .
That 's a charming book !
I think I am now a match for a parson at least .


Adieu .


I perceive from this letter , said Mr. Carewe , the briskness of your correspondent 's character .
He enters upon the subject without preface , and quits it again as abruptly .
Is he not in the right of it ?
The limits of a letter afford no room for exordium , or peroration .
One may compare most modern epistles to a frozen flask of wine - cold at both ends , and all the spirit in the middle .
I love the con spirito in wit , as well as music .
I thank you for these letters , I like his writing , and am sure the remainder will entertain me .
Let us see the next to hand .


10 .
CHAP .
X. LETTER II .


 Cambridge .


I AM impatient to acquaint my dear Mentor , how well I have extricated myself out of a difficulty , for the first time , without his assistance .
You may remember the Cambridge lass I used to toast to you when I was last in London , and prefer to all your belles on the Mall .
Since my return , my love , my constancy , have been amply rewarded .
I called her Amaryllis , she stiled me Celadon .
I vowed , and she believed .


Our amour remained not long a secret .
Between unguarded innocence on one side , and giddy youth on the other , we suffered some indiscretions to escape us , ` leading to the door of truth , ' which alarmed her father , an huge hulking fellow , who dwelt on Gogmagog Hills , with a sour beetle in his brows , a stoop in his shoulders , a stride in his gait , and a damnable swing in his arms .


Methought , when he rushed into my chambers , he appeared as tremendous as my own  Quinbus * , when he used to pour down in my defence at school .
However , this was too difficult a point of honour to suffer me to cry out class upon  so I listened with most Christian resignation and patienee , to his charge , but wishing ardently , all the while , that you were standing by my side .
Though , to what purpose ?
You would not lye for me .
- No , damn it , and I scorn to lye for myself , either - But for a simple equivocation , in defence of passive innocence , where is it forbidden ?


Thus fortified in my moral , I immediately made the father this reply .
If the account yon are come to call me to , Sir , be of satisfaction , my sword shall answer your waked wrath  but if of justification , my oath is at your service .
Dear Sir , answered old Six foot high , taking advantage of my own distinction , if you justify her honour , you perfectly satisfy mine .
Right , Sir , cried I out , and taking him by the hand , you seem to have the true moral sense of this matter , and I here tender you my oath , that your daughter is a very vestal for me .


My equivoque lay here - There was a temple at Athens , dedicated to the goddess Vesta , where the fire was preserved by widows alone   virgins being excluded from administering the fuel , as they did in the one at Rome , erected to the same divinity .
Is not this same learning a fine thing ?
He accepted my terms - they satisfied him - but , I do n't know how , the whole of this business , not indeed any part of it , does not quite satisfy myself .
It vexes me sometimes , to find that I can neither be perfectly good , nor perfectly bad .
From which imperfection , I can be neither compleatly happy in this world , nor the next  but feel , in my present Hell-militant warfare , as if I was serving the devil upon half-pay .
A plague on your musty morals , which has raised this struggle in my nature .


Farewel , however , my worthy philosopher .


11 .
CHAP .
XI .


LETTER III .


Cambridge .


YOU know how ill I left London , with a nephretic cholic .
I reached my first stage with difficulty , in writhing pain .
I detest drams , they are dangerous anodynes  they are apt to  captivate , and their effect is so sudden , that one has not leisure to make a compromise with their senses .
Wine gives sufficient warning - This proceds by sap , the other by storm .
Drinking is only simple fornication , but dramming is - the devil -


However , having soon got a surfeit of martyrdom , I was prevailed on by mine hostess , to swallow a large glass of geneva , as she told me she did herself every now and then , whenever she found herself choleric .
Well !
't is an ill wind , c. as the proverb says , for this cordial very soon afforded me ease enough to mount my horse , carrying on its carminative and diuretie operations all the way , till I reached college .


I think it might be an excellent expedient to carry a provision of this liquor to sea , in case of our being at any time becalmed  and the fable of Ulysses having got the winds tied up in a bladder , may be literally understood of a borachio filled up with your right , good , Aeolic , Holland gin .


` Una Eurusque notusque ruunt .
- ' Now , between you and me , Monsieur Rollin , this interpretation of that story is not one bit more strained than yours , where you say , in your life of Hannibal , that the article of his  having cut a passage through the Alps , with the help of vinegar , is to be figuratively understood to mean only , that he recruited the strength and spirits of his army , during that cold and difficult march , by frequently priming his soldiers with drams of vinegar .
*


Farewel .


Mr. Carewe was extremely entertained with the spirit and humour of these letters , and spent the rest of this morning in perusing the remainder of the collection , while Mr. Andrews walked about his grounds  but I shall not insert any more of them here , because I would not interrupt Mr. Andrews 's story any longer , and that I design soon to publish the rest of them , in a distinct volume from this work , if I shall find that my readers give me sufficient encouragement , by their relish of the foregoing specimens .


 Just as Mr. Carewe had finished the reading of these letters , Mr. Beville walked into the room .
The remainder of the day was passed in family incidents not of sufficient consequence to relate , or in conversations which the generality of readers , preferring narrative to sentiment , would excuse the recital of , that I may be the more at liberty to file the thread of my story , without any further interruption .
Therefore , I shall just dine them , sup them , and put them to bed , and to-morrow morning , after I have sent off Mr. Beville to Scarborough , messieurs Andrews and Carewe shall retire to the library , of which I have myself a master key , and will suffer the reader to slip in after them , incog .
and overhear their whole conversation 


For be it unto all Men known , I keep no secrets - but my own .
12 .
CHAP .
XII .


ABOUT a year before my friend became of age , continued Mr. Andrews , he quitted college , and came up to London , to consult the physicians about his health , which appeared , at  that time , to be in a dangerous state , inclining to a decay .
While he remained in town , he lived intirely with me , at my Father 's  and restrained himself within a very regular and abstemious course , which I complimented him upon , as his then invalid condition had been brought upon him by free living and riot .
To which he replied , after his lively manner , that there was a moral in excess , as it induced sobriety , more than a folio upon temperance .


When he began to recruit a little in London , the physicians ordered him down to Windsor , for the air .
Here his health was established in about six months , most of which time I spent with him there , administering his medicines with my own hands , and restraining him within the bounds of his regimen  which was no easy matter , after his strength began to be restored again .


I took the advantage of this interval , to inculcate some sober reflections , with a due sense of religion , into his heart and mind  and my lectures seemed to produce their proper effect , so far as they could support themselves upon philosophic principles .
But whenever I happened to touch upon faith , or system , he would cut me short , by crying out , more of your argument , good Mr. orthodox , and less of your doctrine .


 In vain I used to urge , that faith was necessary to religion , as well as works , and that system was framed upon articles of belief .
Not at all , would he reply , after his quick manner , faith is merely constitutional , and a man can no more believe , than lift a weight beyond his natural strength .
And what are your systems after all , added he , but the visionary fabricks of metaphysical dreams ?
Divines take a text , as Dido did a hide , and , by quibbling , slicing , and straining , force it to inclose an area large enough to build a city upon .
But delenda est carthago is my motto , as well as Cato 's .


The occult qualities in physics , are laughed at , he would run on  in metaphysics the entities and quiddities are exploded also  the heart is placed right in anatomy , and all science has been purged by the reasonings of the latter philosophy .
'T is in religion alone , that prejudice still keeps its ground , which makes it in danger of losing its own  and , that error is sanctified , even to blasphemy .
Addison says , very justly , ` that an ignorant devotee affronts the Divinity more than an atheist  for 't is better to disbelieve a deity intirely , than to form any notions of him unworthy of the infinite perfection of his nature . '


 In fine , concluded he , there can be no merit in ignorance , nor any virtue in error  and whatever contradicts the common principles of sense or science , can never be any part of a divine revelation .
For philosophy , like Jacob 's ladder , mounts us up , step by step , into the very presence of the Deity  but metaphysics resemble the Laputan method of building a house , from the top to the bottom .


Here Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe entered into a disquisition upon these subjects , Carewe taking part with the condisciple , and Andrews arguing in support of system  but , as their conversation on such topics would not much edify or entertain the reader , I shall here leave Mr. Andrews at leisure to continue his memoirs , without any further interruption .


13 .
CHAP .
XIII .


SOON after we had gone to reside at Windsor , pursued he , we happened to become acquainted with a young lady who lived in the town  of a good family and character , but of no fortune .
Her father had an employment at  the palace , of about three hundred pounds a year  had a wife , this daughter , and a son , who is our worthy friend here , Mr. Beville .
I passed most of the evenings at their house , that I could spare from my invalid , and , when he was able to go abroad , he used to come along with me , and frequently accompanied us upon little parties about the country .


Miss Beville 's stature was rather below the middle size , but she was finely made , and well fashioned  she had a clear brown complexion , fine hair and teeth , a lively eye , with a great air of sensibility through her whole countenance .
She had read most of the polite English and French writers , and was perfectly accomplished in music and dancing : Her sense was of the right feminine kind , for it consisted rather in a quickness of apprehension , and a delicate taste , than a strong judgment .


She had a great ease and freedom in her manners  but at the same time such a nicety and decorum in all her behaviour , that our invalid , upon receiving a rebuke from her one day , for some liberties he had attempted , upon his returning health , stiled her a rake-trap , and , with his usual briskness , asked her , ` How the devil shall a man know how to conduct himself toward such a woman as you are , who , like a  cunning gamester , leads one in by suffering a trick or two of no consequence , to pass , and , when he thinks the stake his own , pops the ten-ace upon him ? '
Good breeding , Sir , replied Miss Beville , should conduct you - whoever has arrived at that polite character , will need no formal rules  and , without it , the whole academy of compliments will not be sufficient to instruct you .


They had frequent squabbles of the same kind together , while I continued always to behave toward her , both in speech and action , with that propriety and respect , which modest women of all ranks have a right to challenge , from the prince to the peasant .
Which conduct apparently gained me the preference in her regards and esteem , before my friend , though he was younger , handsomer , more lively , and had a very considerable fortune .


As soon as he perceived himself restored to health , he retired down to his estate in Cornwall  and from that time several years elapsed , before I heard any thing more of him  he residing all the while at his seat in the country , without making the least overture toward a renewal of our former correspondence  having , it seems , less leisure to spare from his sports , than he had from his studies .
But , though he had a  lively warmth and earnestness in his manners , he had a certain coldness and indifference in his nature , which rendered him insensible to fond or friendly attachments  chance , caprice , or convenience , forming and dissolving all his connections .


14 .
CHAP .
XIV .


WHEN we were parting , continued Mr. Andrews , he to go take possession of his estate , and I to return to London , our fair friend gave me some slight commissions to execute for her , among which I received a letter to deliver to her brother , who was then in town , and in whom I had before met with all that I had ever wished in man : A sobriety of manners , a refinement of moral , a liberal mind , a spirited heart , and an universal benevolence of affections .
Besides which , a perfect agreement in all our general notions , of philosophy , politics , or religion , united and stampt us friends for life .
The approbation and esteem which I had marked toward his sister , rendered our union still more tender .
I loved him yet more , because he was her brother , and he became  fonder of me for the polite regards I had always paid to her .


When I had executed Miss Beville 's commissions , I took the liberty of giving her an account of them , by letter .
I wrote to her with gaiety and galantry , but kept quite clear of the least hint or expression tending toward passion .
In the first place , my affections had not arrived to such an height as might have excused a freedom of that kind  and next , my fortunes depended too much upon the caprice of another person , to suffer me hastily to form attachments on my own sentiments .


In this letter , however , I endeavoured to court her into a correspondence , merely to exchange the news of town and country , with each other .
But this she declined .
She answered my civilities in a letter to her brother , and paid some compliments to my character , and manner of writing  adding , that she would be both pleased and flattered with a continuance of my epistles  but that , as there ought never to be any kind of mystery between us to which Mr. Beville need be a stranger , she hoped that I would always accept of her acknowledgments , in paragraphs of her letters to him .


I was pleased at her delicacy upon this point , and continued the correspondence , on her own  terms , while Mr. Beville remained in London  and , when he returned to Windsor , she was prevailed upon so far , at his instance , as sometimes to write paragraphs to me herself , in his letters .


15 .
CHAP .
XV .


WE both of us found this amusement extremely pleasant , for a time , and exerted , upon those occasions , the highest spirit and address we were capable of , on each side , but without any other view than what we might have had on playing in concert together , to preserve time and harmony , and mutually exchange compliments upon each other 's performance .


But I would never advise any person to enter into such an intercourse with the other sex , before some farther consequences shall have been fully weighed and considered of .
The having one object constantly in contemplation , is even more dangerous , than the having it always in view .
We are not apt to keep such a strict guard over our reflections , as we do upon our actions  and , when the mind once surrenders itself up to the fond persuasion of a separate  pleasure , the heart soon begins to grow jealous  and if it should happen to be a fit object for its occupation , steals slily in for its share .


I made frequent excursions to Windsor , and perceived that each time I returned from it with more and more regret .
My passion commenced unknown to me , and increased by such insensible degrees , that its empire was established in my breast , before I even suspected its invasion .
Nay , such is our blindness , or our vanity , that I actually began to perceive her regards arise , before I discovered my own .
And when her marked preferences , her petits soins , her manners free to others constrained towards me , had first alarmed my honour , I forthwith determined to withdraw myself from an intercourse which might perhaps end fatally to one or other of us , possibly to both .


I formed this resolution on the instant , one morning at Windsor , and returned to London with that precipitation with which one is apt to execute an irksome purpose  hurrying away , to have it over  and it was on this retreat , and not before , that I first perceived my affections to have been a long time prae-engaged .
However , frequent reflections upon the expediency of the measure I had resolved upon , helped to support me through the difficulty of it .


 I considered that I had no fortune independent , nor any profession to render myself so  and that all my prospects in life were founded on the will of a severe father , who having made his own establishment by a lucky marriage , might be the more apt to resent an indiscretion , with regard to this particular , than in any thing else .
Especially , as he was wont frequently , in some of his elevated moods , to vaunt himself highly , upon his own success  and hint often before me , that a man of spirit and address might meet with many opportunities of pushing his fortune more easily and expeditiously by marriage , than by the slow means , and dull labour of any trade , art or profession whatsoever .
I therefore opposed prudence to passion , and ballanced duty against romance .


16 .
CHAP .
XVI .


WHEN I arrived in London , I told my father that I was weary of spending an idle dissipated kind of life , and begged he would purchase some commission for me in the army .
He replied , that since he found I was inclined to  that profession , he was in hopes , as fresh troops were then levying every day , of being able to obtain me one by the interest of his friends , without the expence of buying .


I appeared satisfied with this answer , at the time , not so much from any sanguine expectations I had conceived , either from the good-will , or exertion of any of his friends , but it afforded me an occasion , which I thought it became me to lay hold of , for taking leave in form , of the too dear miss Beville , whom I thought it extremely ungalant to withdraw myself from so abruptly and intirely , without any apparent reason , or necessity .
Accordingly , I wrote her a letter , conceived in cool , but civil terms , acquainting her with my present destination  representing it in a more forward situation than it was likely soon to be , by saying , that I expected , every day , to be commanded over to Germany  and so concluded my letter with taking leave , perhaps for life , which was my expression .


About this time , a friend of mine , who had been my schoolfellow , came into the possession of a large fortune , by the death of his father , and had also a considerable interest in a certain county , which gave him a weight with some persons in the ministry .
I soon after paid my compliments to him , upon his accessions , and  was received with great politeness and friendship by him .
He asked me some questions with regard to myself , and I let him into my present scheme of life , without or hope or design .


In a few days after , I received a letter from this gentleman , acquainting me that he had obtained a cornetry for me , from his friend the minister , wishing me success , and assuring me of every future service in his power .
I was much elated , at first , and still continued to be so , but from a more generous motive .
I considered that I had two younger brothers , who , having never received any manner of education , were but in an hazardous situation in life .
Their helpless and unprovided state lay heavy on my mind , as well as my own , and apprehending that I might have better advantages than they , to push my fortune , I determined to cede the commission to the eldest of them , I waited on my patron accordingly , the next day , expressed my gratitude , and urged my sentiments upon this subject .
He appeared much surprised , at first , but afterwards he applauded my motives , and had my brother immediately nominated in my stead .


About half a year after this event , my good friend called upon me one morning , and told me that he had been just appointed to a considerable  patent-employ , in which he had the power of naming a deputy , with a salary of one hundred pounds a year , and had been so struck with the generosity , as he was pleased to term it , of my former motion , that he was resolved to ease my mind of the second incumbrance also  which was accordingly done .


17 .
CHAP .
XVII .


MY friend , Mr. Beville , continued Mr. Andrews , had taken a farm in Hertfordshire , soon after I had quitted Windsor  and was so wholly occupied about it , that all intercourse of letters , as well as visits , had dropt between him and me , for about eight months .
During which time I had not the least opportunity of hearing any manner of account about his dear , still dearer sister , which afforded me full exercise for my usual resorts in every difficulty , or uneasiness of the mind - books and philosophy .


After this interval , I happened , one morning , accidentally to meet a neighbour of Mr. Beville 's , in London , whom I had often seen at his house in Windsor , and asking him , in a seeming careless way , about that Family , I was  told that miss Beville 's manners and behaviour had been remarkably alter'd of late , that from gay and chearful , she had grown grave and retired  that she never stirred abroad , except to church , where she attended indeed , rather more stictly than usual , and spent her time mostly in reading , shut up in her chamber  which account he concluded , in a laughing way , by telling me a reflection about her , that was made by the curate , that either love , or learning , he was afraid , had turned poor miss 's head .


These particulars rendered me extremely uneasy , I began to apprehend that what I had imagined in her to have been only the slight tokens of a commencing passion , might have been rather the certain proofs of a confirmed one .
May not my charming Fanny , said I to myself , have been unwarily led into the same error in this particular , that I had fallen into myself ?
might she not have perceived my passion , before she had suspected her own  and thus have ennobled her affections , by the generous principles of gratitude and compassion ?


I then began to blame the indiscretion of my own dalliance , lamenting the effects of it in her breast , as well as in mine .
My philosophy had bravely withstood my own passion , but was overborne by hers .
All considerations of father , fortune , or expediency , dwindled into  mere words , upon this just sentiment , that though prudence should restrain our affections , it ought never to controul our honour .
After these reflections , I repaired immediately to Windsor , in order to satisfy my scruples , upon this truly interesting occasion .


It was at this interval , continued he , while I was struggling both with my heart and fortune , that I had the happiness of becoming acquainted with you , my dear Carewe .
I tried , approved , and admired you .
There was something besides , in your whole air and manner , which resembled the person of my favourite condisciple , but with a nobler moral , and a more liberal soul .
Mr. Carewe bowed , and blushed at this encomium , and was just going to return the compliment , when Mr. Beville happened to come into the room , and gave a new turn to the conversation .


18 .
CHAP .
XVIII .


AS Mr. Andrews most certainly will not divert his narrative , in this place , by repeating to Mr. Carewe , particulars which he had been acquainted with before , and that the reader may possibly , by this time , begin to feel himself somewhat interested in any material circumstance  relating to these gentlemen , and that this little anecdote will also furnish out a very pretty episode in the context of their lives  I shall undertake to relate this extraordinary story myself  but this in so succinct a manner , that I will engage to have it quite finished , by the time that Mr. Andrews , who is just taking horse in London , shall have alighted at Windsor  which I hope will be a sufficient apology to you , Ladies , who always keep such a fidgetting , upon being interrupted in any part of a love adventure .


18.1 .
The Episode of Andrews and Carewe .


ONE evening , as Mr. Andrews was returning home to his father 's house , in London , he observed , at some distance , as he was passing through Ludgate-hill , a gentleman defending himself with his sword , against four mean , ill-looking fellows , who drove furiously at him with staves and cudgels .
Mr. Andrews 's spirit and humanity made him instantly take part on the weaker side , and running up quick to his assistance , drew his sword , and entered immediately into the lists .
He sustained several strokes , and returned some passes at the assailants , till they fled , upon seeing an indignant crowd come rushing  down the hill , to the support of the gentlemen .
They put up their swords , and Mr. Andrews led off the stranger as fast as they could walk together , directly to his father 's house .


As soon as they had got into the parlour , Mr. Carewe embraced his gallant second , and thanked him for the generous aid he had afforded him  adding , that he had even more than life to thank him for , as his liberty , which he prized dearer , had been then at stake , in the hands of those ruffian bailiffs , who were attempting to arrest him upon a debt of five hundred pounds  which alone , indeed , continued he , would not have long confined me  but the consequences of it , in bringing some other demands , more pressingly upon me at the same time , might perhaps have rendered me tenant for life to the Marshalsia .
But , added he , as soon as it is dark , I shall quit this asylum and London together , this night , and retire into the country , till some better oeconomy , or other lucky incident of fortune , may hereafter place my present involved affairs in a proper state of defence .


Mr. Andrews called for a bottle of wine , which they drank chearfully together , without any interruption .
Mr. Carewe then desired a chair to be sent for , which was directed round to a back door , leading into an unfrequented lane ,  and he retired , after acquainting Mr. Andrews with his name , and assuring him that the first instant he should be at liberty of returning to London , with safety , his brave volunteer , as he stiled him , should be the first person he would pay his bounden duty to .


19 .
CHAP .
XIX .


MR. Andrews was a good deal pleased with this adventure , at first , both on account of the service he had rendered , even to a stranger in distress  and that there was something in this gentleman 's person , manners , and appearance , which had attracted his simpathy , at first fight , and prepossessed him with a desire of being further acquainted with him .


He was a young man , of about twenty-three years of age , tall , genteel , and well proportioned  his features were remarkably handsome , and he had a sensible countenance , quickened with spirit and vivacity .
He was richly dressed , and had , altogether , the air , address , and mien of a person of quality , and fashion .


In his conversation he shewed a lively wit , a readiness of conception , and a quickness of reply   in his expression , there appeared the ease , stile , and correctness of a liberal education  and on the few topics which the short interval of their tête · tête had afforded them the occasion of introducing , his judgment and sentiments denoted a competent knowledge of men , manners , and things .


But , after he had leisure for his own reflections , his nice moral began soon to render him uneasy , at having wrested a person out of the hands of the law , and defrauding , perhaps , a fair creditor , of a just demand .
He deliberated upon this scruple for some time , and then determined it within himself , that this debt had , in justice , now become his own , as truly as if he had originally contracted it  and upon this punctilio resolved , without the least regard to consequences , to tender himself as collateral security , to the creditor , as soon as he should be able to inform himself of the person .


Accordingly next morning he repaired to one of the sheriffs of the city , with whom he happened to be intimately acquainted , and inquired from him who the plaintiff was , in the writ lately issued against Mr. Carewe .
The sheriff carried him to the office , and , upon examining the books , found him to be an eminent banker in the city .


 Upon this information Mr. Andrews immediately waited upon the banker , at his house , told him who he was , acquainted him with the adventure of the evening before , declared his scruples upon it , and , at the same time , offered to pass a counter-security to him , to make that debt his own , if Mr. Carewe should not discharge it within a year .
Old Cent .
per cent .
stared at him , for some time , with astonishment  the thing perhaps might have been a new case , and might possibly not have fallen within the ordinary course of his dealings .
But throwing off the surprise , as quick as he could , he replied , Why , really , Sir , you act but the fair and honest part , it is just what I should have done myself , or indeed what any body else would do , in like circumstances .
No , no , Sir , there is no trifling with money matters  a very serious thing are your money matters , Mr. Andrews .
Therefore , Sir , pray , good Sir , walk into my office till I write a note to my attorney , who must certainly be well acquainted with precedents of this sort , and he will forthwith attend and draw up the proper article between us , Sir .


20 .
CHAP .
XX .


 THE attorney appeared soon after , and , taking his place at a table opposite to Mr. Andrews , addressed him thus : ` Your Christian-name , pray good Sir ? '
Henry - but pray do n't you require my Sir-name also ?
` O !
that I suppose is Carewe - Are you not a brother of Mr. Carewe 's , Sir ? '
No , Sir , I am not , nor any manner of relation to him at all , that I know of .
` The money though , I presume , must have been for your use ? '
Not one penny of it , I assure you , Sir , nor did I ever see Mr. Carewe before , or know any thing , in the least , about this matter , till after the incident which happened yesterday evening on Ludgate-hill .


Here the attorney laid down his pen , and was beginning to elevate his eyebrows , when the banker , growing alarmed at this conversation , winked at him , and begged he would proceed with the instrument , without any further loss of time , which , after asking Mr. Andrews his Sirname , he drew up immediately , and it was perfected accordingly .


After the tremendous sound of sign , seal , and deliver , was pronounced , Mr. Andrews rose up ,  made his bow , and retired , the banker and attorney attending him to the door  where , on a hem from the latter , he was laid hold of by four ruffians in arms , arresting him for the riot , as they termed it , on the night before , in which they said that one of the bailiffs , as worthy a citizen as ever broke the world 's bread , had been wounded by his complish , one Carewe , a mere stape-grace of a fellow , and that his life was despaired of .


Mr. Andrews , according to that philosophic complexion which added a lustre and a dignity to all his actions , submitted himself without the least resistance , or even a murmur , to the arrest , only just turning his eyes , for a moment , on the attorney , to see whether he still retained an human form , and directing a chair to be called , in order to be conducted unseen to prison .
In the interim , the man of money expostulated thus , with the man of law , that such a proceeding might possibly be very injurious to him  for , if the gentleman should happen to be hanged , said he , which very probably may be the case , must I not certainly lose part of my security , for the five hundred pounds ?
and this , if you 'll but weigh it well , Sir , you must allow to be a very unlucky circumstance for me .


 I can not help that matter , replied the attorney , for these honest gentlemen the bailiffs , are my clients , as well as you are , Sir  nay , the king himself , who is higher than ye all put together , is my client also , in this suit , as plaintiff against the prisoner , and currat lex is the rule of my life , Sir , as you may see it is the motto of my coach too , said he , pointing to an equipage which stood at the door  and stepping into it at the same time , drove away , after having concluded his moral with this expression , That , according to his way of thinking , a man who was fool enough to go bound for another 's debt , deserved to be hanged for another 's crime .
The chair arrived , Mr. Andrews went into it , attended by the bailiffs , and the banker returned into his house again .


21 .
CHAP .
XXI .


AS soon as Mr. Andrews had been lodged in confinement , he sent a message to his friend the Sheriff , to come unto him , which he immediately obeyed .
He acquainted him with the unhappy consequences of his romantic honour , and inquired in what condition of danger  the wounded bailiff was , at that time .
He replied , that the Surgeon had just then made a report at his office , on that morning 's dressing , that the wound , though dangerous , was not mortal  and therefore , added he , you may yet be admitted to bail , which I would advise you to procure immediately , before this hazardous affair may take a more unlucky turn , or afford the surgeon cause to pronounce less favourably , about his patient .


Mr. Andrews then dispatched a messenger to the banker , to inquire who Mr. Carewe was , where he had lodged in London , and what town or county of England , an express might have the best chance of finding him in ?
To which he was answered , that all he knew of that gentleman , was his having become bound for the five hundred pounds then in suit , along with a certain merchant , who had since become bankrupt  and absconded  and that he was a lodger at the widow Benson 's , a milliner , in Dukestreet , Grosvenor 's Square , at the time of his arrest .


Mr. Andrews , upon this information , sent off an intelligent person to this lodging , to make a particular inquiry about him , but received as little satisfaction from that quarter , also .
The landlady said , that Squire Carewe had lodged  under her roof , for about the last six months , past , and had discharged her the very night before , on the sudden , without the least manner of previous warning , before hand , except only the sending a person to her with the rent , who whispered Mr. Carewe 's servant where to follow his master , with his trunks  which makes me timorous , said she , that all is not right with the poor gentleman .
Adding , that she knew not where his fortune lay , of what family he was , or what connections he had , either in city or country , having never seen any person come anear him , from whom she could have picked up any sort of intelligence , of this kind .


She concluded her account of him , with saying , that to be sure and certain he was a dear gay soul of a lad , but a little rake-hellish , or so , she believed , like the best of them  for that he sometimes kept late hours , and would at other times stay abroad whole nights together , successively , one after another .
But that , without all manner of gainsay , or peradventure , she never beheld with her eyes , a more good-humourder affability gentleman  for that he would frequently joke and romp with her daughter Cicely , just for all the world like one of ourselves  and sometimes in good truth , that a body would scarce hear their own ears , for their noise .


 But indeed , added she , the good naturesome cretur left off his gamiorum a little , for the last three or four weeks before he went away , being timbersome of hurting the poor girl , who has been for some time apprehended to be falling into a dropsy , and the poticary tells me lately , continued she , in a whining tone , that he is much afraid my dear child has got an impostor , in her belly .
But to be sure it was the Lord 's will that it should come there , and who can help sickness , I say ?


After this scrap of religion and philosophy , she recovered her voice again , and putting a bundle of papers into the person 's hands , said , Here Sir , I give you some malescripts that I found scattered about Mr. Carewe 's closet this morning , which I suppose are no signifies , by their being left behind .
But perhaps you , Sir , continued she , may be able to find out some hints or antidotes among them , which may serve to direct your search after Mr. Carewe  and , dear Sir , added she , if ever you should happen to get the least tidings of my worthy guest , I prithee acquaint me with it  for poor Cicely there within , is breaking her heart after him , just like a child that had lost its play-thing , because of his good-humouredness and comicality .
And in truth , Sir , concluded she , even myself thinks the house itself  begins to appear but pure and lonesome after him , all this morning .


22 .
CHAP .
XXII .


WHEN Mr. Andrews had got these papers into his hands , he looked eagerly through them , to see if he could receive any manner of information about his dear bought friend , but was disappointed .
They were only a collection of reflexions and observations , upon life , pleasure , and virtue , as they were intitled on the back , thrown together after the manner of Paschal 's thoughts , without order or digestion .


However , the admirable turn of moral which appeared throughout these notes , afforded poor Mr. Andrews some hope in Mr. Carewe 's honour , that he would redeem him , as far as the laws might admit , from the twofold difficulties he had been involved in upon his account .
But then , how to come at him , or acquaint him of them ?


But it at last occurred , that though he did not know where to convey a private notice to him , a public hint might reach him , in any part of  the kingdom .
Upon which thought he immediately directed a paragraph to be inserted in all the news-papers , setting forth , ` that a person , who had accidentally rescued a gentleman from an assault on Ludgate-hill , on such an evening , had been , the next day , involved in a severe misfortune , upon that account  and that if his unknown friend should be inclined to afford any assistance , toward relieving him out of his present difficulties , he might send a line to Mr. H. A. at the Woodstreet Compter . '


He then sat himself down to recollect all those persons in London , who had ever received obligations from himself , or his family , or who had ever declared particular friendships for him , through life  and , after he had formed a list of about three or four and twenty names within such connections , he dispatched a letter to the first upon his paper , setting forth his situation  not in the least doubting his ready assistance , as he was a young gentleman of considerable fortune , to whom Mr. Andrews 's father had been guardian , and acquitted himself of the trust , to the perfect satisfaction of all his friends , with regard both to his health , education , and estate  and with whom he had himself lived in a fond  and free manner , even from their earliest years to that time .


The answer he received to this letter , was , that as a person of his fortune in life , must necessarily have a large number of friends , he thought it would be an imprudent step in him to afford a precedent for so many others to call upon his good-nature , in like circumstances  he therefore begged to be excused .
He acknowledged indeed some few obligations to his father , but concluded , at the same time , with saying , Prithee what , after all , has he done for me , more than the law would have exacted from him ?


If the sins of the father 's be visited upon the children , why not their merits also ?
But it seems that , do all we can , we shall be deemed still but unprofitable servants , here , as well as hereafter .
This , too truly , is no uncommon reasoning , among men  and nothing for nothing , is this world 's motto .


23 .
CHAP .
XXIII .


 THIS disappointment shocked poor Mr. Andrews , but did not discourage him .
He sat down again , and wrote a letter directly , to the second upon his list  who was a gentleman every way qualified to serve him , at this crisis , both from affluence , credit , and interest in the city .
He had these reasons to expect it too , that they had been schoolfellows together , that an intimate friendship had ever since subsisted between them , and that he had lately , at the hazard of his life , rendered him a most signal piece of service .
The story was this :


They had supped together , at a tavern , one night , with several other persons , when an absurd , ill-tempered fellow in company , took it into his head to fasten ( I think that is the phrase ) upon this gentleman , without any manner of provocation , but solely to indulge his own spleen  and , finding him to be too slow of resentment , proceeded to bear him down , in the most bullying manner .


Mr. Andrews felt compassion for his friend , and taking advantage of his looking toward him , though with a most timorous countenance , rose  up , saying , ` Yes , Sir , I understand you , but I can by no means suffer this matter to become personal .
That gentleman 's behaviour is an equal insult to the whole company , and , as all tavern reckonings are paid by club , I expect that every man here will join me in obliging this disturber of the peace to ask pardon of the whole room , or in treating him as a person whose manners have placed him below the character of a gentleman . '


Reader , do n't you think that this would be the proper method of dealing with your bucks , or bears  to make a general rising against them , at once ?
For , surely , it is an hard case that one man must venture his life , merely because another does not value his .


The whole company , one and all , some through spirit , and others through shame , rose up in arms , at the word , poor sneaker now as forward as the best  and insisted on his making a general submission , or leaping out of the window .
The easier conditions were accepted of , and all was peace and harmony for the rest of the night .


It is now full time to acquaint you with the answer which Mr. Andrews received to his second embassy , which in few words was this : ` That he would be extremely glad to oblige  his dear friend , in any other way he could require , but that he had made it an invariable rule to himself , upon his first entrance into life , never to become a bondsman for any person whatsoever . '
- Concluding his letter with this passage out of Proverbs , He that hateth surety , shall be sure .


Cowardice betrays a narrowness of soul  and a man can no more be generous , than brave , under such mean circumstances of heart and mind .


24 .
CHAP .
XXIV .


I Have now , said Mr. Andrews to himself , had repeated ill luck , by proceeding in a regular course , and taking my friends one after another , as I had noted them down in the roll .
Perhaps I may meet with some success , by selecting them here and there , according to the rank they hold in my opinion of their virtue , or the degree which I think myself intitled to , in their regards .


Upon this reflection he moved his eye slowly and considerately , over the list , and at last fixed upon a person whose character , life and fortune ,  had at once been attacked , by popular slander , suits at law , and criminal prosecution .
Mr. Andrews , unknowing him , and without any other connection , except the ties of humanity and benevolence , but persuaded of the malice and injustice , at that time raging against him , had generously became a volunteer in his cause  retrieved his character by public writings , and defended his life and fortunes , from the virulence and oppression of his enemies .


He dispatched a billet to this obligée , and waited , in perfect acquiescence of his justice , honour , and gratitude , till the messenger - say rather the friend himself , returns .
It would be impossible to convey an adequate idea of this correspondent 's response , to the reader , without giving him a literal transcript of the letter , which was verbatim , as follows :


My dear Andrews ,


HOW cruel is it in you to put my assured friendship for you , to so severe a shock !
How irksome to the generous mind , to be asked what it must deny .
A burnt child , they say , dreads the fire  and my own danger is still too recent in my mind , to suffer me to run the hazard of incurring so soon again , the public censure , and the resentment of the courts , by thus  openly abetting a person who has had the misfortune ( for my friendship will not suffer me to call it by an harsher title ) of violating the laws of his country , in two such flagrant instances , as a rescue and a murder .


This would be to involve myself in your imputed guilt  and , by looking too like a mutual compact to support each other in iniquity , be apt to endanger anew , that injured character , which you have already so generously , and successfully defended .


I wish you , however , both safety and happiness , and am , as in duty bound , my dearest Andrews , your truly sincere friend , and most obliged humble servant .


Gracious heaven !
that a person should attempt to forge arguments for his ingratitude , out of those very incidents of his life , from whence arose a claim to the highest demonstrations of friendship !
Should it not rather have excited a transport , almost bordering upon vice , of rejoicing at so lucky an occasion of acquitting oneself of such pressing obligations !
Ingratitude is a detestable thing  for , besides the vice , there is a meanness in it also , which disgusts .


There is certainly a most hellish turn of wit , in the above letter , and I could wish , with all  my heart , that the story was not quite so abominable , lest the indignant reader may suspect its veracity .
But , upon the faith of history , I affirm it to be fact , in every the minutest circumstance  and , whenever I shall be at liberty to publish a key to this work , and declare the real personages throughout the whole , I do hereby promise that the original letter shall be lodged in Mr. Folio 's hands , with the names subscribed at length , in order to be perused by the curious , along with several other choice manuscripts , which I hope soon to have the permission of communicating to the public .


25 .
CHAP .
XXV .


WELL !
what 's to be done now ?
Mr. Andrews was a good deal cast down , upon this third , and least expected disappointment  and now , despairing of success , resolved to make no farther essays , of this hopeless kind .
I have already , said he , made experiments upon three of the strongest anchors I had , and they have failed me .
To pursue the trial longer , would be to betray less reason than a dog ,  which , foiled in one or two attempts to get at food , will ne'er again assail the latticed grate * .


However , as he had always a way , in any matter of consequence , of trying every method , probable or improbable , possible or impossible , to compass an end , ( not , indeed , acting from his own judgment , but in order to satisfy the officious queries of unassisting friends , ` Why did you not do so and so ?
or this , or that , or t ` other ? ) '
he sent a person round to the remainder of his list , inviting them all together , to come and spend the evening with him  but without giving the least hint of the request he had a design of making to them  imagining that , though one or two might think the obligation too great , a score of friends might possibly join to divide the load among them .


His messenger had the good fortune of meeting every one of the guests , at home , and having acquainted them that their friend Mr. Andrews had desired their company respectively , to consult together upon a certain difficult matter , which he would communicate to them at meeting , they each of them most readily accepted of  the invitation .
What , honest Andrews , cried one , no business on earth shall detain me from him .
I would run an hundred miles , on foot , to serve him , says another .
He deserves every act of friendship in the world , from me , cried a third .
And so went on the rest .


But when the suspicious scene of appointment came to be named , their brisk countenances were overcast , on the sudden .
They made some kind of inquiries , how it was , and how it happened  and then dismissed the messenger with their condolements and best wishes to their worthy friend Mr. Andrews , who might rest assured that nothing , except some business or other , of consequence , might chance to intervene , should prevent them the pleasure of waiting upon him , in the evening .


This answer began to revive his drooping spirits , and he said , in soliloquy , that one should always make use of every kind of means , in difficult cases  as it sometimes happens , that the most unlikely ones succeed , where the best concerted may sail .
He walked about his chamber for an hour or two , in longing expectation of seeing a groupe of friends rushing together into the room  and his honest heart sprang with joy , at hearing the sound of a number of hasty steps come ecchoing up the stairs .
He threw open  wide the door , and his arms , at the same time , but received into them only a parcel of sweaty porters , with each a billet in his hand .


You have read the story of the invited guests , in scripture - if not , I beg you will immediately turn over to it .
My wife says 't is in Luke , the fourteenth chapter , and eighteenth verse , first paragraph .
For this will save me the trouble of repeating a score of apologies to the unfortunate Mr. Andrews , from so many modern friends .


26 .
CHAP .
XXVI .


A Person thus forlorn of all foreign aids , generally betakes himself to philosophic resources  that is , with deference to the porch , to melancholic reflections .
For , what are all the arguments of Seneca or Epictetus , ( though in truth this last advises sometimes , to hang oneself , The door is open , says he ) that fate is inevitable  that what will be , will be  that we must submit , where we can not defend  that the best have suffered  and that life itself , is but an appointed state of trial - and so forth - What is all this , I say , but holding our misfortunes the  more stedfastly under contemplation , and superadding a further weight from despair ?
Would a physician mean to raise your drooping spirits , by pronouncing you past hopes ?


I heard once of a French surgeon , who most happily expressed the whole spirit of stoicism , in one word  for , upon probing a wound , and being asked by the patient , his opinion of his case , replied , Courage , courage , Monsieur - for begar you die in one half hour .
This I take truly , to be but an epitome of ` inevitable fate , what will be , will be  where we can not defend , we must submit , c. ' Courage , cries old Forceps , for begar you die in one half hour .


But Mr. Andrews had a much better manner of conducting himself , upon all such occasions : for whenever he felt , or even apprehended any kind of difficulty , he immediately sat himself down to ruminate on every means , which prudence or activity could supply , to obviate or remedy the evil : But from the moment that he had digested and applied his expedients , he directly applied himself also to reading , with such an attention of mind and study , that he could , for the time , exclude all thought or reflection , either upon the misfortune or the means , till the crisis or the cure , had awakened his recollection again .


 And this method of avocation , I take to be a much better way , than to sit brooding over misfortunes , or the hardiness of attacking them , to take arms against a siege of troubles , with the weapons of philosophy .
For what is generally imagined to be a strength of mind , is often little more than a command of features , which enables us to put a good face upon bad matters , and only suffers misfortune , like the most dangerous wound , inwardly to bleed .
Zeno , founder of the stoic sect , hanged himself at ninety , for a whitloe .
It certainly was not so trifling an ailment that overcame his temper  but his mind might be compared to a ballance , with philosophy in one scale , plumb , and misfortunes dropping into the other , one by one , till they came both to poise in equilibrio  and then a feather turned the beam .


I have always thought stoicism both an absurd and a mistaken pride .
Expressions and demonstrations of grief , are as natural , as those of joy  and arise often from nobler sentiments , and more generous motives .
And yet , we manifest the one , without reserve , and conceal the other till our proud hearts break * .
To weep is womanish weakness , they cry , but there are tears  which become the bravest man .
Sighs are the effect of sorrow , as well as laughter is of mirth  and both equally designed by nature to discharge certain humours in the mind , springing from their respective sources , which , if not suffered to evacuate themselves , might ultimately affect the body .
If you backen a tumour , you corrupt the blood .


There is another vulgar error too , which has often surprised me  that gravity should still impose upon the world , as a sign of wisdom .
Is it because an owl was the arms of Athens , and the bird of Minerva ?
We seem to have accepted the emblem literally , which the mythologists tell us was designed rather as a caution against being imposed upon by outward appearances .
Gravity generally proceeds from a defect of natural spirit in youth , or a decay of it in age .
When real , it is the effect merely of constitution , or stupidity , and , if assumed , it is either to conceal weakness , or to cover pride .


 That gravity is an imperfection may fairly be deduced from the natural causes of it , grief , misfortunes , sickness , or old age .
But sense is the parent of chearfulness - Addison joins virtue  for to the wicked may justly be applied that sarcasm of Solomon 's , They are mad when they are merry  In fine , good-humour is to morals , what the sun is to nature , whose light not only gilds the objects , but whose warmth improve their virtue also .
And in imitation of Carneades , who stiled beauty Royalty without force , I shall define chearfulness to be philosophy without reflection .


27 .
CHAP .
XXVII .


MR. Andrews remained in this irksome situation , during almost four days , when , on the last of them , about seven o'clock in the evening , a person came limping into the room , and delivered him the following letter , dated London , two o'clock  the hand unknown .


MY gallant , generous , but unhappy friend , how shall I accost you !
I met with a paragraph in one of the public prints , last night ,  about twelve o'clock , and above fourscore miles from hence .
It shocked and alarmed me so extremely , that I instantly took horse , and have rode post hither , where I lie concealed at my attorney 's house .
He has informed me of both the particulars relating to your distress - I can not go on - I leave him to say the rest - For none but a person hackneyed in the ways of men , can speak without emotion , upon such a subject as this .
Adieu , Adieu .


Charles Carewe .


This letter , said Mr. Andrews to the person who had delivered it to him , refers me to you , Sir , for those particulars which relate to the business of it  and , as time presses hard upon us at present , I beg that you will execute your commission without any manner of preface , or delay .
I shall obey you , Sir , replied the attorney , and will deliver myself in as few words , as the nature of the subject may admit .
Pray proceed .


You must know then , Sir , that my first acquaintance with Mr. Carewe , was - Dear Sir , cried Mr. Andrews , since I must know that very interesting particular , I promise you to attend to it any time you please , when we shall be more at leisure .
It can not possibly be necessary  to relate , at present  therefore , pray good Sir , proceed .
And so I would , Sir , if you had not stopt my mouth .
Then , as I was saying , my first acquaintance with Mr. Carewe - Indeed , Sir , I require not the least account of your first acquaintance with that gentleman , all I want to know , at this time , is , what your last conference with him was ?
Why , really Sir , replied the attorney , I was coming to that point directly , if you had not twice interrupted me  and if a man of law is once shuffled out of the regular course of business , d' ye take me , Sir , he will not readily again be able to bring on matters properly to an hearing  d' ye mind ?
I ask your pardon , Sir , replied Mr. Andrews , I pray you go on , Sir , in your own way - For , I was born to suffer !
[ aside .


Well then , as I said before , Sir , continued old Tautology , my first acquaintance with Mr. Carewe , ( who , by the by , is a very worthy client of mine , and indeed in other things , too , the man bears a good sort of character ) was his lodging five thousand hard pounds in my hands , with directions to purchase for him into the four per cent .
funds .
To make short work of the matter , for I perceive that you do n't love long speeches , Sir , I actually did lay out this same five thousand pounds sterling for him , in the said four  per cent .
funds , as I told you before , he had given me commission to do .


Well , Sir - Upon my presenting him with the debentures , what consideration he gave me for my honesty , diligence , trouble , and dispatch - for I did not keep him long in suspence , Sir - is not , by any manner of means , d' ye mark me , material at present , but I believe , Sir , that I may venture to let you so far into the secret , as to inform you that it was no trifle .
No trifle , I assure you , Sir .
For indeed Mr. Carewe , as I think I told you already , is a very worthy gentleman - A gentleman every inch of him , believe me , Sir - And he was certainly , much in the right of it too  for there is no surer thing in the world , than that if you would have your business well done , you must pay for it well .
Live and let live , is the true maxim in trade , Sir .
But that is neither here nor there , d' ye mind , to the present matter in hand  therefore , you 'll give me leave to have done with that part of the story , I presume , Sir - Most willingly , indeed , good Sir .


But to make a long story short , in order to have done with it , quite and clear , and not to detain you any longer from the business in agitation , Sir , there was one thing , and only that one thing , I ever knew him guilty of , which  gave me but a slight opinion of him .
I speak above board , Sir , for they call me old Tell-truth , among my friends , and those that are free with me - And that same thing , Sir , in a few words , was this :


Oh !
[ aside .


28 .
CHAP .
XXVIII .


MR. Carewe employed me once , continued he , to prosecute his servant man , or man servant , as it is termed in the law books , for robbing him of a good new spic and span suit of cloaths , some shirts , and other moveables , to a considerable value .
For Mr. Carewe , Sir , was always a most tearing beau .
I had the villain set and taken , as nimble as he was , and lodged him in this very house , as safe as you are yourself , Sir , at present .


But what would you have of it , Sir , when the rogue was brought upon his tryal , no Mr. Carewe appeared to swear to the goods found upon him .
Not in the very least , Sir .
No Mr. Carewe appeared , though called upon his recognizance , three several times , by the cryer , with a laudible voice , Sir .
And when my younker did not come  and appear , to save his fine , the judge immediately ordered his forfeited recognizance to be forthwith estreated into his majesty 's exchequer , and the rogue was discharged , for want of prosecution .


I went off , Sir , hot foot , from the court , to Mr. Carewe 's lodgings , to see whether he was alive or dead , and who should I find there , but my young dilly dally gentleman , in his night-cap and slippers , sitting by the fire , and reading some conjuring book or other , that I could make neither head or tail of .
Upon which I up , and told him a piece of my mind , very roundly , asking him why the devil he had not come to court , and done justice against his hang-dog Tim ?
But all the satisfaction the dainty gentleman gave me , was , that a woman , with a parcel of children at her heels , had kept bawling and roaring in the hall , all the morning , and that as he had ever a mortal dislike to the crying of brats , he could not possibly think of stirring out of his room while they remained below .
Pray did you ever hear now , so foolish a reason , in all your life , Mr. Andrews , for not going to do what the law directs ?
I believe you might not have understood him , Sir - Not I truly , Sir , nor could any body else , I think , who had either sense or reason .
But so this foolish affair  ended , after having cost us a good round fine of fifty pounds , sterling , in shining cash , Sir , besides my own bill of costs , which I warrant me totted to ten or twelve pieces more .
A pretty business this truly , you ' l say , Sir !


I say nothing , Sir , and could wish , for charity sake , that you had done saying , also !
I must have done now , Sir , for I have nothing further to add upon this subject , that I can now recollect , said he , pausing .
- Oh , Sir !
for mercy sake , proceed immediately to the business you have been sent about , or I shall be obliged to dispatch a messenger directly , to Mr. Carewe , to get that part of his letter , which relates to your errand , explained by himself , Sir .
There need be no manner of occasion for all that hurry , Sir , replied the attorney , for I will deliver it every word to you myself , from first to last , without the least delay , or adding to , or diminishing from , Sir - But first , I must beg you will be so kind as to order me up a bottle of wine , Sir  for I do n't know how it is , but I am a little dry and hoarse , at present .
But I was hurry scurry , there , Sir , and hurry scurry , here , Sir , and then talking away so fast , to get plump to the matter in hand , that this may be the occasion of it , perhaps , Sir - Very likely , Sir .


29 .
CHAP .
XXIX .


 THE wine and glasses were laid upon the table , and after the attorney had swallowed down half a dozen bumpers running , Well Sir , continued , or rather commenced he , the upshot of the matter is this .
Mr. Carewe came to my house about two o'clock , or rather before , this day , muffled up in a chair  and without staying even to ask me how I did , inquired of me whether I had heard any thing , so and so , as how he had been arrested on Ludgate-hill , had been rescued by a gentleman , what was the consequence ?
and so forth .


I told him that the whole story was then current in the courts , for that the plaintiff 's attorney , a very acute creditable man , had told every body he met with , as how one Mr. Andrews , who I presume was you , Sir , after having delivered him from the bailiffs , was fool enough , I ask pardon , Sir , to go to the creditor , and join himself in security for the money in suit  and how he nabbed him there , in the very fact , on account of one of the honest fellows that had been desperately wounded in the fray , and that he was then held to two thousand  pounds bail  which was the restriction the court had laid him under , in resentment for their affronted laws .


Poor Mr. Carewe , said he , dropt tears , at the first part of this story , though I really saw no such crying matter in it  but he turned pale , and fell into a chair , by the time I had come to the latter part of it  overcome , I suppose , by the fatiguing journey he had told me he had rode all the last night and this morning .
Mr. Andrews was much affected at this recital - Mr. Carewe 's distress augmented his own  for his compassion extended itself even to the person through whom his own misfortune had fallen , upon him .
However , he quick recollected himself , and intreated the attorney to proceed , who thus went on :


As soon as Mr. Carewe had a little recovered himself , he pulled the very identical five thousand pounds worth of four per cent .
debentures out of his pocket , and putting half of them , to the amount of just two thousand five hundred pounds , into my hands , Run , fly , said he , in a perfect agony , to my generous and unhappy friend Mr. Andrews , summon the sheriff on the instant , deposit with him , instead of bail , two thousand pounds of these securities , to set that worthy gallant man at liberty - and oh !
send him  quick as lightning to my grateful arms - I have have intrusted you before , cried he , all in a breath , with my whole fortune - And there indeed , perhaps he was right - How much higher a confidence do I repose in you now !
- But this last expression I could not , for the very blood of me , comprehend the meaning of , when I had actually but half of the debentures in my hands , at the same time .


But he really seemed to be a little non com himself , the man did , while he was speaking to me  for you verily never did see any creature in such a hurry combustion , in all your life .
Just for all the world in such a twitter , as a girl going to be married , exactly .
Run - fly - was the word at every hand 's turn - Nay , he would not even suffer me to stay to eat a poor morsel of dinner , neither , which was just then coming upon the table  an , excellent fowl , bacon and greens , with a piping hot shoulder of mutton , Sir , all of the very best meat that the markets could afford  for my crest has always been , Sir , Win gold and wear it , i ` faith .
Nothing less , Sir , as I was saying , would serve my gentleman , but out I must go directly , or there would be no living in the house for him .


So after I had settled a few papers in my desk , Sir , and had put on my hat , gloves , and cloak ,  looking for my cane for some time , which my son Tommy had carried up to the nursery , for a hobby horse - Young things will play , Mr. Andrews - Mr. Carewe fidgetting and fidgetting about the parlour , all the while , I sallied out of the door , without any manner of delay , exactly as it struck three o'clock , Sir .


30 .
CHAP .
XXX .


THREE o'clock !
cried out Mr. Andrews , and looking at his watch - 'T is now just eight , and allowing an hour for your coming to this point , without any manner of delay , since you came in , what , in the name of prolixity and the law , could you have been doing , Sir , during the other four hours ?


Why there now , again Sir , you may easily perceive from hence , the hurry and confusion that both Mr. Carewe and you had thrown me into  for it had made me near forgot one very material article of my errand , which this question of yours , now started , has made me recollect again .
I told you before , Sir , that Mr. Carewe had given me debentures to the amount of two thousand five hundred pounds sterling - The  first two thousand you know already , how that is to be applied  but now for the odd five hundred - Why this , Sir , Mr. Carewe desired me , as soon as I should have dispatched you off to him , to post away to the banker with , to release his bond , with your counter-obligation , and bring them to him directly  that he might have the honest pleasure , as he expressed himself , of delivering them up cancelled to you , himself , Sir .


Well Sir - when I had now gotten into the middle of the street , safe and sound out of his clutches , and found myself at liberty of thinking and acting according to my own judgment or experience of matters and things , I began to consider with myself , that my best way , undoubtedly , would be first to hye me to the banker 's , before I came to you , Sir  arguing the point pro and con , in my own mind , thus : Should I defer this business till the evening , I may possibly miss of my chap , for he may be gone abroad  but as for Mr. Andrews , I shall be sure of finding the gentleman at home , at any hour  for he must necessarily stay till I call upon him .
Ay , ay , bonum securum is the word there .
At dinner is the surest time of meeting with a man of business at his own house , and I can also by this means , kill two birds with  one stone , and pick up a meal for myself , at the same time , in spite of all Mr. Carewe 's hurry and fluster .


I judged the thing for the best , I thought , taking every circumstance together  and so , without any more ifs or ands , away I hied me to the bank , as fast as my legs , which are none of the best , could carry me .
I found the gentleman at home , as I surmised , I told him my errand , he was overjoyed , invited me to sit down at table with him , and indeed , to do him justice , made as much of me , as man could do .


While we were at dinner , continued he , the banker sent one of his clerks to the attorney , acquainting him with the business , and desiring him to attend immediately , and see very thing performed according to law .
He came on the summons , and after I had paid the money , and that we had taken our jolly bottles apiece , and a peremptory , I acquainted them with the other commission I was going to transact  and so came off hither , without stop or stay , only just calling upon a client of mine , for about half an hour , as it happened to lie directly in my way .
Business must be done , you know , Sir .
But for all my hurry , I did not neglect the main chance , you see , added he , throwing two papers on the table , for there are the girth and circingle , my  boy - Five hundred pounds sterling , with interest and costs , ( which latter , by the bye , Mr. Carewe owes me yet ) was a plaguy dear purchase truly , for such dirty scraps of paper - But law is law , Sir .


Mr. Andrews lost all manner of patience , by this time , and ringing the bell , sent off directly for his friend the sheriff , intreating him to come immediately , and take the securities from the attorney , as he dare not venture to let this tedious impertinent go to the office to make the deposit himself , or suffer him one moment out of his sight , till he might be at liberty also , to issue forth along with him .


31 .
CHAP .
XXXI .


THE sheriff returned with the messenger , on the instant , but brought this unwelcome piece of news , at the same time , that about half an hour before , a certificate had been lodged in the office , by the surgeon who attended the bailiff , that upon that evening 's dressing , he had found the wound to have proved mortal  after which notice , added he , I am sorry to acquaint you that it is not in the power  of our office , to accept of bail , without a special order of court .


Mr. Andrews then turning toward the attorney , said with a grave , but dejected air , I thank you , Sir , for this  and I hope that Mr. Carewe will reprove you too , with the same temper .
I understand you , Sir , replied he , but having done every thing for the best , as I told you before , I am not to be chargeable with the consequences , d' ye mark .
Business , let me tell you , Sir , ( because you really seem to be a perfect stranger to it ) business , I say , is not to be scuttled away , as fast as this man , or that man , or t ` other man , take it into their wise noddles  as if they thought of nothing all the while , but their own convenience , forsooth .
But I find that I have no more business here , at present , Sir , and as I hate loitering where I have nothing to do , I shall e ` en pack up my awls , and return home to Mr. Carewe , again , with his two thousand pounds , safe and sound , out of all manner of jeopardy - I am sure my delay was lucky for him , at least .
So saying , he took up his hat , gloves , cloak , cane , girth , and circingle , filled up a brimmer , drank the clerk of the crown 's prayer to Mr. Andrews , and hobbled down stairs .


 The sheriff , who was really a very good kind of man , staid for an hour behind him , to console his friend  and told him he had hopes , even if the bailiff should die , from former instances of the same kind , that upon its appearing to be a sudden thing , merely accidental , and without any manner of malice praepense , on your part , said he , together with the remarkable sobriety and excellence of your character , the crown may be induced to make a favourable distinction , upon the representation of the court , between the accessory and the principal .


I thank you , Sir , replied Mr. Andrews , for your kind wishes  but , free from guilt , I am devoid of fear .
I would not yet die , because nature seems yet unwilling to release me - but , if providence shall think fit to supersede her laws , heaven 's will be done , and I shall submit , without repining .


The spirit and virtue of these expressions , drew tears from the sheriff 's eyes - and so they would have done from the hang-man .
Farewel , most excellent young man , said he , embracing him , and retired .


32 .
CHAP .
XXXII .


 JUST after he went away , the following letter was delivered to Mr. Andrews :


My dearest friend ,


THIS vile attorney has rendered me a most shocking account of his principal commission .
But who can one trust , who depend upon !
A common porter would have been a better , though not so proper an agent .
I could have stabbed him , but your danger has made a coward of me .
Fear not , however , notwithstanding the unpromising appearances of this night , I have a scheme in resolve , which may set you free to-morrow .
My life , and fortunes , are dedicated to you .
Farewel , Amen !


C. C .


This letter appeared quite enigmatical  but Mr. Andrews read , prayed , and went to bed , in expectation of the next day 's event .
No measure rested upon himself , and his anxiety was therefore less , than it would have been had any issue depended upon his own conduct .


The next morning he was informed , that , as soon as the King 's Bench had met , a counsel ,  on the part of Mr. Carewe , had moved the court , setting forth the whole story of Mr. Andrews 's accidental and unmerited misfortune , confessing that Mr. Carewe himself had wounded the bailiff , before Mr. Andrews had come up , and offering , on condition that Mr. Andrews should be admitted to bail , to surrender Mr. Carewe into custody , to take his tryal , should the bailiff die .
The court was extremely struck at the generosity of the proposition , but saying that the laws admitted of no commutation in in such cases , dismissed the motion .


Mr. Andrews himself , notwithstanding the greatness of his own soul , was astonished at the magnanimity of Mr. Carewe 's  and wept then , for the first time since his confinement  crying out , this is a man , indeed , worth living for !
yet I may die , perhaps , without the happiness of any farther commerce with him !
Say , say , ye learned in the philosophy of nature , is there on earth a transport higher than the embrace of such a friend !
But I can not fly to his arms , nor dare he venture into mine .


Just as he had finished this expression , Mr. Carewe , with a flow pace , and dejected air , entered the room , moving up toward Mr. Andrews , who upon seeing him , sprang back from his chair , crying out , Gracious heaven , Sir ,  what has brought you into this horrid place ?
My own extravagance and vice , and your virtue and misfortune , replied he , throwing himself at his feet , embracing his knees , and intreating his pity and forgiveness .
Mr. Andrews , endeavouring to raise him , sunk into his arms .


33 .
CHAP .
XXXIII .


I WAS obliged to close the last chapter somewhat abruptly , because I began to perceive my generous reader too much affected , myself not less so , to suffer me to continue the rest of the story , in description .
Therefore , for the mutual ease of both our nerves , I shall conclude the remainder of it , in simple narrative only .


Upon Mr. Carewe 's having heard that his motion had been rejected by the court , he walked about his room , for some time , like a distracted person - Then sitting down , for a while , composed in thought , started suddenly up again , and , on the instant , rushed out of the house , surrendered himself to the sheriff , and was immediately conducted to the Compter .


The principle , upon which he took this extraordinary step , was this : He feared that if  Mr. Andrews should be tried alone , he might , in all probability , suffer , as being the only delinquent taken for the fact .
But that should the principal take his tryal along with him , he hoped that the punishment of the chief aggressor , might be deemed sufficient satisfaction for justice , and incline the court to extend its favour toward the innocent and accidental accomplice .
Oh !
should this gallant friend suffer for my crime , cried he out , what a legacy of life would he leave me !
I can die with courage , but I can not live with ignominy - Death is but an instant - Infamy is immortal !
I ask pardon of my readers .
But I am not describing , I am only repeating .


These pair of extraordinary friends passed some minutes together , in mutual admiration of each other 's worth , not knowing how to express their heart-felt sentiments of such unmodern virtue , when they were relieved from their difficulty , by the hasty entrance of the sheriff , who running up and embracing Mr. Andrews , cried out , in a transport of congratulation , Joy , joy , my dear friend , and to you , Sir , also , turning to Mr. Carewe , for two of the most eminent surgeons in London , whom I called in myself , to attend the bailiff 's dressing , this morning , have pronounced him absolutely out of danger , and even in a condition to walk abroad .


 While the two friends attended earnestly to this discourse , he thus went on : I confess , said he , that I was much surprised , last night , upon finding such a notice served upon my office , so shortly after my having been informed in the courts , just as I was going home to dinner , that the bailiff had been pronounced to be in a fair way of recovery .
I began to suspect , from this circumstance , that there had been some foul play intended , from some quarter or other , in this affair , and therefore resolved within myself , for the sake of justice , humanity and friendship , to call in two of the ablest surgeons in the city , at my own expence , to attend the dressing of my patient , this morning .
However , I did not mention any thing of this purpose to you last night , added he , turning to Mr. Andrews , thinking it not proper to amuse you , lest the success might not have answered my hopes and expectations .


34 .
CHAP .
XXXIV .


THE former surgeon , continued he , who was by at this report , appeared to be extremely confounded , and sneaked immediately after out of the room .
This strengthened my  suspicion , and running hastily after him , down stairs , just as he had gained the threshold of the door , I seized him by the collar , pretending to have a warrant for him , in my pocket , upon an information of a collusion with some certain person , to impose his patient 's danger on the court , for some sinister purpose or other .


His fright betrayed his guilt , and upon a promise of indemnity he immediately confessed to me , that the banker 's attorney had called upon him in a great hurry , the evening before , and prevailed on him , with a fee of twenty guineas , to make a false return upon his patient 's case  with a design , as I apprehend , said he , to skrew money out of the prisoner , in order to be admitted to bail .


I was transported with joy , said the sheriff , at this fortunate discovery  but resolving not to suffer it to rest here , I sent immediately for a coach , and carried him , with the two other surgeons , along with me , to court , ordering the wounded bailiff , by their permission , to follow us in a chair .


I got a counsel then to move the bench , on your behalf , and after a thorough examination into this iniquitous affair , and our producing the patient on the table , the court directed a prosecution against the attorney , at the suit of the crown , and granted me permission to come  immediately and set you both at liberty , the bench having been just at that instant informed , that you , Sir , said he , and turning to Mr. Carewe , had surrendered yourself up into the sheriff 's office , this morning , upon the dismissal of your extraordinary , and unprecedented motion .


They all mutually embraced each other , and Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe made the most grateful acknowledgments to the sheriff , for his generous and active services  intreating the enjoyment of his company , for the remainder of the day , in some safe and retired scene , beyond the city wards , upon Mr. Carewe 's account  where , by the help of friendly converse , they might endeavour to forget the irksomeness of their late adventure .


The sheriff excused himself , on account of the business of his office , and Mr. Carewe , at parting , put a bill of fifty pounds into his hands , desiring him to discharge the compter fees , to reimburse himself his own expences of surgeons , counsel , c. and to give the remainder to the bailiff .
He answered that he would certainly execute the first and last of these commissions , but begged to be excused from performing the second , saying , that he was no attorney , and that providence had blessed him with a fortune which could afford to treat him  to such acts as these .
Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe then took a coach , and drove out to Islington together .


35 .
CHAP .
XXXV .


NOthing can possibly demonstrate the veracity of these memoirs , more than my two last chapters  for the sudden transition , from the danger of the two friends , to their safety , is certainly against all rules of novel , whatsoever .
But so it happened , and so I was bound to relate it .
It is a common thesis of school declamation , whether or no it would have been a prudent measure in the Carthaginians , immediately after the battle of Cannae , to have marched up directly , to the gates of Rome ?
But then surely , that class which should assert the affirmative , must point their court martial censure against Hannibal alone , who was at liberty to have done as he pleased , and not at Livy , who was restrained by an historic fact .


Livy and I , 't is hoped the courteous reader will please to observe , are perfectly alike , in three very remarkable particulars - In being  equally slaves to truth , in the beauties of our writings , and where the same courteous reader , I am sure , would least of all have suspected any manner of resemblance , even in the very defects of them .
Asinius Pollio * arraigns him of a Patavinité , as he phrased it , in his stile , a sort of impureness of language , contracted at Patavium , the place of his nativity  and as I confess myself to have been born in Ireland - For what Irishman is ashamed ?
I hope that the Critical Reviewers , or self-named Athenians † , will candidly impute the Hibernicities in this here work , to my having been indigenated in that there place .


Had I been at liberty to have suffered events to wait upon the leisure of invention , how pleasant would it be to have locked up the reader in the goal with them , for a week or ten days longer ?
The turnkey bringing them accounts , from time to time , of the still increasing danger  of the bailiff ?
At length , he is given over , and then he dies , and then they are both instantly loaded with irons .


After which , I might have related , how , as they were transmitting from the compter , to Newgate , they were interrupted by a funeral procession , which , upon enquiry , they found to be the aforesaid bailiff , going to be buried - And how , upon its taking wind , no matter how , among the populace , that these pair of unfortunate friends were the culprits for the fact , they were first insulted , and then pelted so furiously with stones , or brick-bats , no matter which , that if it was not for the guard , most luckily coming up in the nick , firing among the mob , and killing seven or eight poor innocent men , women , and children , who had taken no manner of part in the fray , but only stood gaping on - I say , that was it not for this same unexpected and timely relief , which favoured their escape , they would never have lived to be hanged , you may depend upon it .


Well , but after their rescue , I might have lodged them , safe and sound , in the dungeon , for a week , on ten days longer , till their tryals are brought on  during which interval , I could have highly entertained the reader , ( who has voluntarily confined himself to the same condemned  hold , along with them ) with the histories of the several criminals , neck-yoked in the same place  which they might have amused themselves with , to while away the time , till their executions .


As how one man finding another in bed with his wife , did , contrary to his majesty 's peace , his crown and dignity , and contrary to the statute , in that case made and provided , blow out the cuckolder 's brains , with a charged pistol , which he happened luckily to have in his hand , at the very time .
That the adulteress had prosecuted , and convicted him for the fact  notwithstanding it had been specially argued , by his counsel , that jointure-wives should never be admitted as evidence against their husbands , because they are to be gainers by the success of the suit .


How another hang-dog , having cogged a die upon a young heir , just come of age , and stript him of a large sum of money , upon being charged by the loser , with the fraud , and being a person of nice honour , but not having the fear of God before his eyes , whipt him through the guts , upon the very spot .
With several other such extraordinary occurrences in life , as swell and embellish the most of our modern novels .


And after I had held the reader in pain , for his two friends , quantum sufficit , had brought them into the dock , and arraigned them at the  bar , I might have introduced the officious sheriff , aforesaid , leading in the supposed dead bailiff , by the hand , and making a discovery of the whole sham , contrived by , c..
There is a twist for you now , which would be the more delightful , because it was quite unnatural to expect it .


I say , that if I had not tied myself , too scrupulously , down to the very facts themselves , as they really did occur , ( which forces me on a digression , now and then , to give a scope to fancy ) I could have made this work infinitely more ingaging , both to my fair readers , and to my foul ones too  for I could have exchanged sentiment for incident , and have forced moral to give place to -


But , have a little patience , good people , for I hope soon to rid my hands of the confined work I am now upon  and then I promise you to give myself a loose to all the extravaganza of invention  and to present the public with a novel , though nothing new , which shall at once distress and delight all hearts - I have here already , in this very chapter , afforded them a sketch , both of the stile , and manner I mean to conduct it in  which I have picked up out of several successful modern performances .


 For it shall be a most dismal series of adventures , without language , reflection , or sentiment , but rendered perfectly easy and familiar , by the il modo basso *  for one must humour the public , like a child , by telling them a story , of what kind no matter , so you keep going  for the motto of them all may be , that one is good , till another is told .
But methinks , our novelists treat the old babes worse than one does the young ones , for they give them the fable only , but neglect the moral .


And really , after all , what use would the embellishments of thought or expression be of , to a work of this kind , except to take up too much of one 's attention , from the narrative , or action ?
which would be just as absurd , as if you were conducting a gentleman or a lady , for example sake , to see an execution , and should suffer them to loiter at a bookseller 's , or a picture-shop , by the way .


The principle , upon which our fabulous biographers proceed , is certainly a very just one .
That this world is so brimful of happiness , that it quite surfeits us  and it is therefore become absolutely necessary , to invent tales of difficulty , and distress , to relieve our satiated minds , with a  little variety * .
And therefore , since readers have taken up such an unnatural passion for crying , I think proper to acquaint them that I have framed the plan of a novel , which , if it does not blind their eyes with tears , first , shall break their hearts with grief , at last .
The story , in short , shall be this :


I will join Clarissa Harlowe , and Sidney Bidulph , both in the same piece  and , after I have ravished Clary , and married Biddy , I will pack them off on a voyage together , no matter why , or where , but in order to have them taken by pirates , and sold into slavery  where , after they have been re-ravished , and re-married , to the end of the chapter , they shall attempt making their escape from Algiers , and be taken in the fact  tried , condemned , but not executed all at once - not so fast , good Sirs - This would be putting the reader out of pain , too suddenly , either for his pleasure , or my profit , by cutting me short of just forty entertaining chapters , exactly .


For , in the first , I will only lop off a finger ,  and in the next , a toe  and so proceed , alternately , as often as they have fingers and toes .
Oh !
oh !
oh !
till finis shall bring us an account of their tedious deaths and burials .
These Algerines , you know , are a merciless sort of people , and it is no matter , in the least , how many lies a good Christian may tell , of Turks , Jews , or Infidels .


But after all , what signifies lying ?
might it not do as well to print off any old story , of a cock and a bull , in onion juice  which , I warrant you , will oblige the strongest Cabletonians * , in Europe , Asia , Africa , or America , to


`` Drop tears as fast , as the Arabian tree `` Its medicinal gum '' - for certainly , that kind of sorrow , which arises neither from the truth of the fact , nor the art of the representation , must be imputed rather to a weakness , than a tenderness of heart  and may properly enough be distinguished from compassion , by the denomination of eye grief .
N. B .
This work shall consist of nine volumes , in octavo .
Subscriptions to be taken in  by the printer hereof , at five guineas , in hand , and a guinea , on delivery of the first eight books .
The ninth to be delivered gratis .
The first volume to be put into the press , as soon as one thousand setts shall be subscribed for .


36 .
CHAP .
XXXVI .


MR. Andrews and Mr. Carewe dined , supped , and lay , at Islington , that night , Mr. Carewe not thinking it prudent to return to London , for the reasons he had already given to Mr. Andrews , for quitting it immediately after his rescue .
They were sensible of a mutual satisfaction in each other 's converse , and several polite expressions were exchanged between them , during the course of that evening .


But when Mr. Carewe began to compliment his friend , upon the generosity of his late behaviour , Mr. Andrews interrupted him , by saying , that it would rather humble him , in his own opinion , to be praised for what , in honour of human nature , he hoped were but common merits .
My first act , said he , was but the usual  impulse of manhood  and the second , but the result of common honesty , only - Your conduct , indeed , upon this occasion , has been truly noble .
-


Hold , interrupted Mr. Carewe , since you will not indulge me , Sir , in the real pleasure of dwelling on your praise , spare me , at least , the aukward uneasiness of listening to my own .
Let us , rather , added he , since we are , I hope , from this day , cemented friends for life , contrive , after some sort , to commence our acquaintance earlier , by mutually relating to each other , the private history of those aera 's , which have preceded our first meeting  so as , in a manner , to retrieve past time , and thus take hands , as it were , together , from first to last , through life .


With all my heart , replied Mr. Andrews  but as the evening is now too far spent , that you have declared your purpose of retiring farther into the country , to-morrow , and that I must necessarily return to prosecute my fortunes , at London , let us defer entering upon this proposition , till we may hereafter , be more at leisure together  and , for the present , we 'll pass the short remnant of our contracted span , in a more general converse .


 The next morning , they parted  and their different avocations keeping them still at a considerable distance from each other , the first place they ever happened to meet in , after their separation at Islington , was the farm , as before recited , in the first chapter .
And now , ladies , I have fairly kept my word with you , for Mr. Andrews has but just alighted at Windsor , and I shall leave him to continue his narrative to you , which I took the liberty of interrupting , at the end of the seventeenth chapter .


37 .
CHAP .
XXXVII .
The continuation of the story of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe .


I Dined , said Mr. Andrews , at the inn , and , after I had changed my dress , I went immediately to pay my compliments to miss Beville .
I met Mrs. Beville in the hall , ordering some wine into the parlour , where I heard a great noise of rustic mirth , going forward .
I saluted her , and enquired , with earnestness , how her daughter was ?
She sighed , and replied , that she had been , for a considerable time , ill of  something like a slow fever on her spirits , had loathed food , and declined company  that a physician had been called in , several times , but that it had been with great difficulty she could be at all persuaded to use any of his prescriptions  and that the few which she had been prevailed on to take , had yet produced no visible effect upon her health .


She added , that , for a week past , she had confined herself intirely to her chamber  and that , though this was her birth-day , upon which occasion her father had invited some friends to dinner , in order to tempt her down stairs , to do the honours of the table , she had declined it , by saying , after her present low-spirited manner , that it would be insincere in her to affect rejoicing at her birth .
Mrs. Beville then pressed me to go into the parlour , but I refused it , telling her that I always avoided every occasion of drinking  and that since miss Beville had refused rejoicing , upon the present one , it would certainly be extremely ungalant in me , to make merry on it .


After this , she kindly asked me where I had been this age , as she was so obliging to term it  which inquiry I happily took advantage of , by replying that I had been studying physic , ever since  adding , with an affected spirit , that as quacks sometimes succeed , where the faculty  have failed , perhaps I might be in possession of some nostrum , or other , which might possibly restore the fair invalid to her health and spirits again .
She replied , that she really believed poor Fanny would be glad to see me , for that she had always seemed pleased with my company , and had also distinguished me with particular regards , as her dear brother 's friend .
I bowed , and she led the way up stairs , to her daughter 's apartment .


When I entered the room , I saw her sitting at a table , with a pen and ink , and a paper just written , lying before her .
She appeared pale and languid , and had a certain air of melancholy diffused over all her features .
She did not perceive me at first , as her mother walked in before me , I advanced to salute her , and she seemed struck with surprise  she rose to receive me , trembled when I took her hand , faltered in attempting to speak , and instantly fainted in my arms .


I carried her to the couch , loosed her stays , and bared her lovely bosom , while Mrs. Beville sprinkled water on her face and neck  she at length opened her eyes , with a great sigh , but quickly perceiving the situation and disorder she was in before me , she fell into the utmost confusion  which her mother endeavoured to qualify ,  by saying never mind it , my dear child , for this gentleman has become a physician , since you saw him last , and a deshabille , you know , is nothing between doctor and patient .


I turned immediately aside , toward the table , to leave her at liberty to compose her handkerchief , which while her mother and she were adjusting , I was tempted to run my eye hastily over the manuscript , that lay open before me , in which I read the following lines :


38 .
CHAP .
XXXVIII .
On my BIRTH-DAY .


THO ' sorrow fills my swelling heart , And care sits heavy on my brow , Yet shall I with my utmost art , Hail and applaud the instant now .
This day , in time 's extended line , Was mark'd the aera of my birth , It was God 's gracious will , not mine , That I should then first visit earth .
 What tho ' my cup be dashed with gall , Nauseous and irksome to the taste , Do I not know that soon I shall Be from the bitter draught released ?
Then let me welcome this glad day , With choral song and festive mirth , Which steals from life a year away , And brings me near my second birth .
The soldier placed in time of war , Where mines lie hid beneath his feet , Welcomes the coming guard afar , But 'till relieved , dares not retreat .
The sensations which affected me on reading this paper , are not to be described .
I was very near wanting the same assistance myself , which had been just supplied to her .
Where I expected to meet a birth-day ode , as the title had promised me , I was shocked with a funeral elegy , rather .
Sadness , at other times , may arise from some sudden loss , or transient misfortune - The grief may be but temporary - But when a season , otherwise of joy , shall supply occasion of melancholic reflection , it betrays the ingrained complexion of the mind .
Throughout the whole poem she prefers death to life , and seems to  have restrained her impatience , by the consideration in the last line , only .


I did not appear to have taken any manner of notice of the paper , which , the moment she recollected , she sprang forward , turned upon the table , and blushed at the same time  which quick restored her suspended beauties , and made her seem , at that instant , more lovely to my eyes , than methought I had ever seen her before .


I asked her about the state of her health  how long she had been ill , after what manner affected  and at the same time made a physical pretence , of feeling her pulse , for the natural one , of touching her hand .
She answered me every question , with as much gravity as she would have done to a regular physician , only that she seemed to seize , with a certain quickness , an opportunity from thence , of accounting for her late emotion , by adding , that she had dreamed , the night before , that I was dead , and the tediousness of her disorder had reduced her mind , as well as her body , to such a state of weakness , that the suddenness of my appearance before her , so little expected , had struck her , some how , as if it had been a vision .


39 .
CHAP .
XXXIX .


 MRS. Beville , on hospitable cares intent , frequently quitted the room , to order in wine to the company below stairs , and give the necessary directions about her houshold affairs  which left her charming daughter and me , at greater liberty to entertain each other .
Miss Beville , in one of these intervals , asked me what was the whim of her mother in stiling me a physician , just now ?
I repeated our conversation below stairs , and told her that this was a pretence I had luckily framed , extempore , in order to intitle me to the privilege of being admitted to visit her in her present retired and invalid state .
However , added I , the science of physic is not so deep a mistery , neither , as that common sense need be at a loss upon every occasion , how to prescribe  and in your case , Madam , said I , it is not impossible , at least , that I may be able , without a diploma , to retrieve your health , e'er long .


She answered that she was very willing to submit to my prescriptions  adding , that if faith in the doctor , was an help to medicine , no physician could possibly meet with better success ,  in a patient .
This she pronounced with a smile , but a blush at the same time - The highest charms of female beauty , joined at once in one !


She then inquired of me , with a modest , down-cast look , and hesitating voice , to what fortunate crisis she was indebted for the pleasure of my present visit ?
Then raising up her head and voice , a little , hoped that I had returned from Germany , loaded with laurels , and brought home trophies to add to the antient and present glory of England  with other railleries of the same kind .


I smiled at her humour , and told her , as was in truth , the case , that I had been trifled with by my father , who , after several vague schemes for my establishment in life , had at length , left me at liberty to seek out my own fortunes  but that my disappointments were , at present , greatly qualified , by the extreme pleasure I received in being allowed to behold and converse with her once more .
That I began now to look upon myself to be my own master , but would willingly exchange that vain prerogative , for the higher privilege of becoming her slave , if she had not already engaged one more worthy to be commanded .


 She turned her eyes quick upon me , with a regard of emotion and surprise  but collecting herself again , in an instant , replied in a low and softened tone of voice , that politeness afforded men great advantages , because it indulged them the privilege of speaking in a kind of equivocal stile , which none but women who had been bred at courts , could possibly have address enough to answer .
I replied , that though galantry might possibly admit of such hollow language , it had never yet obtained a currency , in friendship  and that , if she would but grant me permission , I would explain myself more explicitly , upon this subject , to her brother .
She blushed , and bowed - I kissed her hand , and retired .


40 .
CHAP .
XL .


I HAD come down to Windsor , you may remember , continued Mr. Andrews , in order to satisfy myself more fully , about my scruples of love and honour  but perhaps you may think that I had here drawn too hasty a conclusion , from the premisses .
Possibly too , there  may appear at least as much of vanity as of generosity , in this precipitation .


But you 'll indulge me , I hope , in the most favourable construction on this passage , by supposing rather , that the strength of my own passion , might have super-added a degree of evidence to her 's  and that having thus wrought the matter up to a moral certainty , at least , it would have been most indelicate , besides seeming to rate my purchase too high , to have required a more explicit declaration .


A delicate lover will never force his mistress , to a confession - She loses a good deal of her price , by such a frankness  and too categorical a certainty , if the expression may be allowed , lessens also considerably , the refinement of his own pleasures .
There is a subordination in love , of that nice and peculiar nature , that , if once destroyed , can never be restored  and the state , thenceforward , either becomes anarchical , without any order at all , or inverted , by inferiors bearing sway .
Until the avowal , a woman reserves to herself , the privileges of her sex , but at that instant resigns her whole prerogative .
Nature seems to have from the first , endowed them with this empire , and a salique law here , would be dissolute rebellion .
The confession humbles a woman too much , and a polite , or prudent  lover should never suffer his mistress to abate the opinion of her own value .
The conferring of favours , preserves the whole spirit of this passion , which sickens and dies away , whenever they come to be challenged as a right .


Besides , is not the confession either needless , or uncertain ?
are there not surer tokens of a passion , even than words or actions ?
Is the love which declares , or the one that betrays itself , the strongest ?
And is a premeditated speech or motion , or an involuntary sigh or emotion , the most certain sign ?
Love is the great purpose , and pleasure of our lives , and yet how few of either sex , are capable of that oeconomy , delicacy , or address , which are requisite to heighten or confirm its joys , by zest or permanency ?


41 .
CHAP .
XLI .


THE next morning , I sent a card , with my compliments to the family , desiring to know how they all were , particularly miss Beville  adding , that I should wait on them immediately after breakfast , to learn the route to my friend 's lodge , in Hertfordshire .
This message  was answered by Mr. Beville 's coming down to the inn , and inviting me to dinner  calling me doctor Andrews , in a laughing way , and saying that his daughter had been so much recovered , by my friendly visit , that she would venture down stairs that day , to receive me .


I readily accepted the invitation , but upon this condition , that my patient should not be suffered to quit her apartment so suddenly  for that it had often proved fatal , the having mistaken spirits for strength - That as I had accidentally assumed the character of a physician , I would humour the title a little farther , by directing the proper meats to be sent up to her from table , and should do myself the pleasure of waiting on her in the evening , to drink tea , feel her pulse , and receive her commands to the lodge .
These preliminaries were agreed to , and I went to dine with the father and mother , at the appointed hour .


I directed some broth , and a little white meat , to be carried up to my patient , and then ordered her a large glass of wine , with very little water in it  which latter part of the prescription Mrs. Beville objected to , saying that it might perhaps inflame her blood , as she had not tasted any thing stronger than tea , for a considerable time .
'T is for that reason I direct it , said I , for  in all depressions of the spirits , we of the faculty , madam , usually prescribe high cordials , in order to raise a fever , and then any dispensatory can point out the cure  which admirable expedient saves us , madam , a world of trouble , in certain difficult cases .


We thus amused the time during dinner , which I thought a most tedious meal , as I was become then more impatient of returning to my charming Fanny , than ever I had been before .
I began to consider her now , in a more interesting light  no longer as one who might merely fill up the vacancies , or amuse the intervals of life , but as the sole person who was both to inspirit the business , and relieve the cares of it - at once to heighten and refine its pleasures .


I soon rose from table , saying that , like a Turk , I preferred coffee to wine , and that a physician should always preserve his blood in an equal temperature , for fear of sometimes mistaking his own pulse for his patient 's .
Then taking Mrs. Beville by the hand , I led her up stairs , to her daughter 's apartment .


42 .
CHAP .
XLII .


 MISS Beville was dressed with the nicest elegance and gaiety , and seemed extremely recovered since the evening before , both in her looks and spirits , though still weak and pale .
I therefore , in order to save her the fatigue of exerting herself to entertain me , engrossed the discourse mostly to myself , by repeating to her every incident which had happened to me since we parted last , to which I added all the articles of news , both foreign and domestic , which were then current in London .
Among the rest , I related to her the story of our adventure , my dear Carewe , said he , and she wept , and wondered , both at the virtue , and the vice of my recital .


I wrought out an occasion , from some part of my discourse , of comparing with disadvantage , all the pleasures I had experienced in London , united together , to the single one I had left behind me at Windsor  adding , that even this , tho ' the same , was far transcended by the present enjoyment , as the total exclusion of every wandering thought , of every alien scheme of pleasure , had now left this favourite one at liberty to occupy my heart and mind intire .


 Oh !
my dear Carewe , cried he out in a rapture , there is somewhat in the rich endowment of a chaste woman 's love , which exceeds all human bliss - How low is ambition , how poor are riches , how insipid is pleasure , when void of this enlivening spirit !
Love can not be deemed a distinct passion , but rather the informing soul of every other sentiment or affection in the human breast .
It refreshes labour , relieves care , and gives enjoyment to pleasure .
It not only inspirits our moral , but even religion is but cold philosophy , without it .
I ask pardon , said he , for this enthusiastic digression , for without experience , all this rapture must appear but Platonic vision .


My dear friend , replied Mr. Carewe , you rave not to me , and perhaps I may have conceived still an higher relish for such hallowed pleasures , even than you , as I have had an opportunity , which your purity may have denied you , of comparing transient and libertine joys , with chaste and solid transports .
Some minutes now passed in sighs and silence , on both sides , after which Mr. Andrews thus proceeded :


After tea was over , continued he , I offered to read to her , which she accepted , and I chose to take up a play , as it afforded me opportunities , in the love scenes , of addressing myself more  personally to her , giving me pretences for sometimes seizing her hand , or catching her in my arms .
She would oppose my transports , and defend herself by saying , that she must certainly acquit herself but aukwardly of a part , which she had never even rehearsed before .
To which I replied , that love was a play , contrary to all others , where the best performers were those who had practised least .


After this chearful and galant manner we conversed and passed away the evening together , till I thought it time for my dear patient to retire to rest .
I then bowed and withdrew , calling upon Mr. Beville in the parlour , to inform myself how to direct my course to the lodge .
I then retired back to the inn , got up early the next morning , and rode post to my friend 's house , about four miles beyond Hertford , where I arrived before dinner , the same day .


43 .
CHAP .
XLIII .


HE was rejoiced to see me , my pleasure was double .
I was affected with a two-fold emotion , both of love and friendship .
I asked him a number of questions , about  the nature of his farm , his interest in it , his oeconomy in the management of it , c. I questioned him after that vague and hurrying manner , in which people are apt to inquire about things they have no personal concern in , and received his answers with that inattention which is natural , when one 's mind is occupied by reflections that relate solely to themselves .


After dinner we fell into a more settled and deliberate conversation .
I gave him an account of my scheme and conduct , since our last interview .
I declared my passion for his sister , but with that polite reserve , that I did not afford the least hint of my fond suspicion about her reciprocal affection .
I told him of my late visit to her at Windsor , that I had urged my love and wishes , and had happily , though only in a tacit way , obtained her permission , to speak more fully to him , upon that subject .


He seemed transported at the overture , and acknowledged that he had perceived a growing passion in his sister 's breast , toward me , for some time past , and that this observation had rendered him a good deal uneasy , with regard to the situation of her mind  as it was certain that love always produces a more powerful effect in chaste , than in dissolute minds  for delicacy of sentiment , like the pureness of gold , increases  its weight , while vice , like alloy , renders it at once both light and fragile .


He concluded this reply , however , with this reflection , that though his mind had been now made easy with regard to that particular , he apprehended some difficulties in others , relating to our mutual security and happiness , together .
For my sister , said he , has no fortune , and I am afraid that your father has as ridiculous a notion of knight errantry , as ever Cervantes had .


I replied , that this danger might be guarded against , for a time , by his being the only confidant in this affair , until I might be able to induce my father into a settlement , at least post mortem , upon the merits of having provided for two of his family already , and at my own expence too .
But that if a discovery should happen to occur , before I might be fortunate enough to bring matters to a safe crisis , I did not apprehend that his resentment would extend itself beyond the present emotion  for that though his character was not , in some things , such as I could wish it , yet I hoped and believed that he had proper notions of justice  for that his few failings had always appeared to me to be rather faults of error , than of vice .
Upon the whole , I concluded that if he would risque the hazard  for his dear sister , I would adventure it myself , for my still dearer wife .
We embraced , and set out the next morning for Windsor .


44 .
CHAP .
XLIV .


MR. Beville rode up directly to his father 's house , while I alighted at the inn , in order to shift my dress to one more seemly for a courtier , and as soon as I was equipt I followed him .
I found miss Beville in the parlour , with her mother and brother  I welcomed her down stairs , and wished the world joy of her returning into it again .
She bowed , and Mrs. Beville replied , with a smile , that she wished her dear Fanny had been a person of higher consequence in it , for my sake  that the fame of the patient 's cure , might make the doctor 's fortune .
In a short time after , my friend led his mother out of the room , upon some pretence or other , whispering these words to me in French , as he passed by , L'amour , et l'occasion .


When we were thus left alone , I told her that I had waited on my friend , according to her permission , and had intirely explained away  all ambiguity of expression , in my late address toward her  and that , in return , he had given me leave to tender her , in more explicit terms , the future services of my life  which I here , madam , in the fondest and most earnest manner , intreat you to accept of , added I , taking hold of her hand , and throwing myself at her feet .


She raised me up with precipitation , expressing these charming words , at the same time , that thenceforth , submission should be not only her duty , but her practice also , which , while she pronounced , a crimson glow added a warmth and richness to her beauties , which inspired me with the following reflection : How ill advised are women who banish blushes from their cheeks !
They are equally ornamental , to the sinner and to the saint , and supply those advantages which either vanity or virtue would desire , at once both charm and awe , allure the lover , and rebuke the libertine .


Just at this instant , a crisis , when a polite lover and a delicate mistress wish equally to be relieved from each other , Mrs. Beville returned into the room , to search for some keys .
I took advantage of this interruption , to retire , on pretence of seeking out my friend and confidant , whom I found in his study , employed as usual , in catching the flying moment to improve himself  in literature or morals .
I acquainted him of my success , expressed my gratitude for his mediation , and consulted with him upon proper measures to perfect my happiness , and to conceal it at the same time .


I dined at Mr. Beville 's that day , and we spent the remainder of it in conversation and reading .
In the evening Beville took his sister aside , to settle preliminaries , and appoint the day for our nuptials , which he told her it was necessary for herself to do , as the expediency of keeping the affair a secret , for some time , left us not at liberty to communicate it even to her father or mother .


She replied that it would , by no means , be decent for a young woman to go upon such an errand as this , without the guardianship of some matron or other  and that since it was necessary , which she did insist upon , that some person in that character , should be confided in , her duty and respect both , required that her dear mother should become the party .
Beville mentioned this to me , I was highly pleased with her delicacy , and consented to the proposition .
We then desired miss Beville to communicate the matter to her mother , who received the proposal with joy , and in a few days I was rendered compleatly happy .


45 .
CHAP .
XLV .


 SOON after our marriage , my friend returned to the lodge , and invited his sister home with him , on pretence of adjusting the oeconomy of his little houshold , making an apology to his father and mother at the same time , on account of the smallness of his accommodation .
I took a formal leave of the family , the same day , and returned to London , to examine into the situation of my affairs there , which finding just in the same hopeless state I had left them , I repaired immediately to the lodge , summoned at once by love and friendship .


In this charming retreat we spent some months together , in the highest enjoyments of mortal bliss  love , friendship , conversation , music , and letters .
My dear Fanny was an excellent performer on the harpsichord , and had a voice and taste so very expressive , that she could almost turn sound into sense  her brother played finely , on the fiddle , and I had been well practised on the violincello .
What an harmony here , of sound and soul !


We secluded ourselves from all other society at this place , except the minister of our parish , whose merit you shall hear of  and were attended  by dumb-waiters at our meals  so that we might converse of books , without the imputation of pedantry , and philosophize , freely , without giving offence to weak minds  for ` squires were excluded from our table , and servants from our side-board .


The pleasures I enjoyed in my new state of life , are not to be imagined but by one who has had the happiness both to love , esteem , and possess a woman of sense , beauty , and virtue .
I was then sensible , for the first time of my life  of a certain solid and permanent joy  for the happiness of marriage , like the interest of money , arises from a regular and established fund  libertines squander the principal , and so become bankrupts .


I happened to rally my wife , one day , about her birth-day elegy , as I stiled it  upon which she smiled , and said , that she had quite dismissed Melpomene from her toilette , and called down Thalia into her place  adding , that as there were to be none but her first and second self by , ( bowing to her brother and me ) her third one being to quit the room , she would communicate one of her hand-maid 's handy works to us immediately .
So saying , she took a paper out of her pocket , threw it on the table , and quick retired .
For her modesty was not confined to chastity  alone , but formed the bloom and complexion of all the words and actions of her life .


Ode on CUPID .
PHOEBUS is stiled the god of wit , But I his influence deny , None e'er the mark of fame has hit , Who could love 's pleasing power defy .
The poet 's and the lover 's rays Are sparks from one congenial flame , True passion must allume the blaze , Which warms the heart , then mounts to fame .
'T was Lydia 's charms raised Horace ' verse , Lesbia that made Catullus write , 'T was love that decked fair Laura 's herse , And brought the nut-brown maid to light .
From Eloisa 's plaintive tongue , Such tender accents ne'er had flowed , Nor had we wept , nor had she sung , But for the little pur-blind god .
Ask Hagley 's muse * , whose love-lorn tears Fell melting soft as feather'd snow , If Titan 's shafts have pierced our ears , Or Cupid launched the heartfelt bow ?
 To Venus ' son I tune the lyre , Who first inspired my soul to write , He kindled my poetic fire , And not the feebler god of light .
46 .
CHAP .
XLVI .


IN order to enjoy the pleasures of this dear society without interruption , or alarming my father , I , soon after our marriage , took a large farm in the neighbourhood , which I set again in divisions , to a considerable advantage , reserving one of the inclosures in my own hands , to lay out my profit-rents upon .
About the same time my friend took some other farms also , and obtained several agencies which enabled him to inlarge his house , and encouraged his father to rent his employment at Windsor , to a deputy , and remove with his wife and family , to settle at the lodge .


 Soon after this , my father summoned me up to London , to assist him in raising my sister 's portion , who had lately received a proposal from a gentleman of good fortune , in Surry .
Our sole capital stock had been derived from my mother .
It was a sum of ten thousand pounds , in the funds  but her father dying when she was a child , her guardian and trustee had involved it in the intricacies of the law , by borrowing some money for his own use , upon it , before my mother had come of age .


From the time of my father 's marriage , to this aera , the difficulty about proving the trust , had continued in chancery  which prevented his getting an absolute dominion over the principal , though the court had permitted him , all along , to receive the interest .
And though his claim became finally ascertained in the preceding term , yet the time requisite to make up the decree , with some other common forms , or usual delays of law , obliged him to borrow the money , wanted upon the present occasion .


This he had engaged from a banker in the city , who happened to be our former acquaintance , my dear Carewe , said he , and who , having conceived a good opinion of me , from my former transaction with him , and which he related to my father , insisted upon my joining in  the bond , as counter security .
I readily concurred  but when the deeds were brought to be signed , I confess that I was both shocked and surprised to find that his old attorney was the person who was employed to transact this affair .
I hinted it to the banker , and the answer he made me was , that the man was perfectly acquainted with the business of his profession , and that this article was all the concern he had with him .
But as for morals , and all that stuff , said he , 't is a mere jest , in things of this sort , for attorneys will be true to their clients , for their own sake , and what matter is it to us , how they play the rogue with all the world besides ?
Were we to enter into enquiries of this kind , added he , what would become of half the trade of London ?
A person may be a good man , on the Change , who is a very bad one , in his own house .
Whores and rogues must live , concluded he , or the world would be too thinly peopled - I signed the deeds , and returned to the country .


Mr. Beville and I gave our whole application toward the improvement of our farms , which was an exercise , both to body and mind , equally pleasant and healthful .
The constant succession of business , relieves the fatigues of labour , and the rich and various fruits of the earth , ripening one after another , present us still with something  new , to hope , or to enjoy , preventing all satiety  so that the farmer may say , with Milton , ' `` All seasons and their change , each please alike . '' '


47 .
CHAP .
XLVII .


WHILE Mr. Beville and I lived together at the lodge , we became acquainted with the clergyman of our parish , of whom I hinted to you before .
He was a man of sense , learning , and humanity , a person of strict morals , and exemplary piety  but at the same time so easy in his manners , and polite of address , that all who conversed familiarly with him , would have taken him for a mere man of the world  the divine or philosopher never appearing , but in his actions , or devotions .
My Fanny said wittily of him one day , that he certainly did himself a sort of injustice , by being so agreeable , for that the love and esteem which his worth alone had intitled him to the whole of , was by this means divided , and each merit thus defrauded of half its due .


His first appointment in the church , was to acuracy of forty pounds a year , during which  time , his sister was left a dowerless widow , with a great number of unportioned children .
He immediately fled to their relief , took a house to accommodate this helpless family , and opened a Latin school in the parish , in order to maintain them .


While he was labouring under these difficulties , and life wasting away in celibacy , some of his friends proposed the scheme of matrimony to him .
But he declined it , saying , that , till he had made provision for his present children , he could neither think it just , or prudent , to incumber himself with any future ones .
`` Why , man alive , these children are none of your own , surely '' - ` Not in a natural sense , indeed , answered he , but in a moral one , I consider them in the same light .
Children are the gift of Heaven , added he , and since Providence has thought proper to ccmmit these orphans to my charge , I will , like Jacob , endeavour to wrest a blessing from the struggle , by striving to perform the duty of a parent , toward them . '


Well , but doctor , are there not warm widows , or snug old maids enough , in your parish , to feather your nest withal , and no danger of incumbering yourself with a second brood , as you term it ?
` But , gentlemen , sometimes ladies , he would reply ,  I will not mock the church 's rites , and to marry , without a lover 's wishes , or a father 's hopes , is the basest prostitution , surely  nor would I grasp another 's wealth to enrich an alien .
'T is enough that I forego my pleasure for my charge , but too much to expect that I should sacrifice my moral also . '


His virtue was applauded by all the bishops , and afterwards rewarded , by a lay patron , who promoted him to the benefice of that parish , which is computed to be worth about five hundred pounds a year - Exactly the income of the man of Ross .


48 .
CHAP .
XLVIII .


HIS church was always crowded  for there was , in his manner of preaching , something which caught the attention and fixed it , without either action , or grimace  so that many passages in his sermons used to be remembered again , and quoted in conversation  and often urged as authorities , upon more serious occasions .
I shall endeavour to recollect , said he , some of them which my Fanny used to repeat , for your entertainment , and to make you , in some sort , better acquainted with our worthy pastor :


 The poor man 's scrip , is the rich man 's treasury .


The perception of virtue is a sixth sense .


If , among the questions of scholastic philosophy , it should be asked , what is the strongest thing , in nature ?
I should answer , Piety .
It subdues this world , and wins the next .


Religion is not a stoical habit of penance and self-denial , but a physical regimen for pleasure and self-enjoyment .


God is the spring and ocean of our thoughts and actions .
Every wish , every purpose , every deed , as they arise originally from him , should refer finally to him .
Whatever design , though ever so virtuous , falls short of that great ultimate , unphilosophically makes the means the end - This reaches not up to true religion , but terminates in moral heathenism , only -


The exercise of virtue upon the mere score of intellectual pleasure , has no more merit than the practice of temperance to give a zest to Epicurism .
As neither of them make any part of the Christian religion , they can not be entitled to the promises of the gospel .


To rejoice at rain , without an acre of land  to redeem a debtor , remaining still unknown  to quench the fire-brand in others haggart , without a boast  to wrest the dagger from an assassin 's  hand , and ne'er inform the victim  the secret transport of such acts as these , can never be described equal to the feeling .
In this sense alone , stolen pleasures are sweet , in any other , bitter .


There is a moral precept obligatory upon all mankind , to do good , as well as to abstain from evil .
Suppose that all the world should refrain from absolute ill , and yet perform no positive good ?
in what state should we remain then ?
But , in reality , there can never be such a supposed circumstance in society , for the declining of actual virtue , is the incurring of negative guilt  Qui succurrere perituro potest , cum non succurrit , occidit  says Seneca , de beneficiis  but we have an higher authority , in scripture , for , were not the priest and levite both censured , for passing over on the other side , though they took no part with the assassins ?


It was the opinion of the stoics , long before Christianity , that all crimes were equal , and that an offence against any one moral , was the same with a breach of the whole ethic .
Can philosophy then complain against the severity of this text ?
` He who is guilty of the breach of one part of the law , is guilty of the whole . '


Epictetus , in the 24th chapter , of the third book , has these remarkable words : ` My children 's children will bear the punishment of  my disobedience , and fighting against God . '
Compare with this , part of the second commandment , and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children , unto the third and fourth generation , of them that hate me .


49 .
CHAP .
XLIX .


THIS most excellent person both ornamented and enriched our little society  and my dear Fanny , added he , with an heavy sigh , seemed to receive a more particular satisfaction , in his company and conversation .
She said to me , one evening , just after he had left us , ` How amiable is virtue , in the sacred character !
Is it not remarkable that it should strike us with an higher beauty here , where it must be most expected , than in any of the other conditions of life , where it might appear more extraordinary ?
Is it perhaps , that in proportion as the deficiency of a character might offend , the perfection of it may please ?
Is it not for this reason , said she , that modesty is most charming in woman , because it is their peculiar characteristic ?
Is it that virtue seems more immediately derived from heaven ,  in them - That in the clergy , it appears inspiration  in the laiety , but instruction , only ? '


` What an advantage , continued she , must such a pastor bring to morals and religion , in whom the purest virtue , and most exemplary piety , are shewn not to be inconsistent with the easiest manners of a gentleman ?
For it is the formality of parsons , and the stiffness of mere good men , which disgust the world , and not their strictness , or sanctity . '
All which she concluded , with this ingenious allusion , that as matter , indued only with its necessary properties , would be a lifeless mass of uniformity  so virtue without manners , would be as morally unamiable . .


The intervals of all these transactions which I have recited to you , are not at all material  and indeed , continued he , sighing , Though I have dwelt long , with pleasure , upon the former part of my relation , I shall now make amends , by shortening the sad remainder of it , the principal event of which , I shall comprehend in the exclamation of Brutus - Portia is dead !


He attempted to pronounce this sentence in the spirit of ancient philosophy  but he was no actor  and , few as the words were , his heart , if I may use the expression , failed him in the middle of them .
A torrent of fond and grateful  tears , gushed suddenly to her memory , a generous sympathy affected Mr. Carewe , and Mr. Beville coming just then , into the room , quick joined a brother 's sorrow to an husband 's grief .


50 .
CHAP .
L .


MR. Carewe , in order to change the subject , and give a new turn to their thoughts , asked Mr. Beville what general news he had brought home from Scarborough , and what adventure had detained him so much longer in town that day , than usual ?
He replied , that every thing of a public concern , was comprehended in the London prints , which he took out of his pocket , and that he was delayed by taking leave of some friends of his , who were setting out from Scarborough , for the York races , which had carried off most of the company out of town , and left the rooms extremely thin .


Suppose , said Mr. Carewe to Mr. Andrews , that you and I should accompany our friend , in his walk , to-morrow ?
It will serve to shift the scene a little , and diversify our ideas .
The emptiness  of the place , continued he , will be lucky enough for you , but , for my own part , I would be content to bear a little more crowding , for a little more company , to-morrow .


Why truly , I could be satisfied with it , myself too , replied Mr. Andrews , upon your account  for I would sacrifice my own ease to a friend 's pleasure , at any time .
Nay , I will do more for you , added he , I will sacrifice even my pleasure to yours also , by setting you at liberty to go off to the races , to-morrow  and Mr. Beville , I hope , will be so kind as to accompany you thither , for a few days , as I really think that both his health and mind require a little more exercise and amusement , than he takes , or can possibly meet with , at the farm .
Beville bowed assent toward Carewe .


No , gentlemen , replied Mr. Carewe - But first , let me thank ye both , for your politeness , upon this occasion .
However , as well as I love company , I would not ride thirty miles to seek it in a crowd .
Besides , your sentiments upon horse-racing , said he to Mr. Andrews , have much abated my relish for that sport , which I confess I was formerly very fond of  as , in truth , I was once , of every thing that had gaiety , spirit , and hurry in it .


 Formerly , and once , upon a time , you should have added , my dear Carewe , replied Mr. Andrews , these are expressions too antiquated to be uttered by a young , handsome fellow , of five and twenty .
Oh !
my dear friend , answered Mr. Carewe , with a sigh , and grasping his hand , at the same time , you have loved - and must therefore know that true passion renders us philosophers to all other pleasures , and an eunuch to every other desire .


The starting of this subject , sent each of the three friends home to their own thoughts , for the rest of the day  which not supplying us with any thing to entertain the reader , who is , I assure you , my principal concern throughout this work , I shall conclude this chapter with just acquainting him , that they read the newspapers , conversed upon general topics , till supper , made a slight repast , and then retired to bed .


51 .
CHAP .
LI .


 THE next morning , Mr. Beville called upon his two friends , to take a walk with him to Scarborough , according to the purpose of the night before  but their spirit for the frolic had subsided in sleep , and they suffered Mr. Beville to pursue his course alone .
After breakfast , Mr. Andrews led his friend to take a walk with him , along the sea beach , and thus re-assumed his memoir .


I had brought my story to a short period , yesterday morning , continued Mr. Andrews , for two reasons .
The first , because it gave me pain to dwell , for any time , upon a circumstance , that whatever has already , or may hereafter befal me , of loss , or sorrow , I may venture to stile , by way of eminence , the only misfortune of my life .
And next , that as I had turned toward the window , to hide my eyes from from yours , I perceived Mr. Beville coming up the avenue , and I would spare his grief , as well as my own .


But as there remain some particulars yet to be mentioned , to compleat my own history , I shall relate the last article again , more at large , during  our present leisure , and the sorrows which it must necessarily renew , will , in some sort , be relieved by the pride and pleasure I shall at once receive , in letting you a little farther into the beauty and delicacy of that amiable woman , my lost Fanny 's character .


Our marriage had been kept still a secret from her father , till my wife had become with child  and , as he then lived in the house with us , it was not possible , at least my nicety about her same rendered it improper , to make a mystery of it to him , any longer  and he was therefore , admitted to be a member of our privy-council .
He received the news but coolly  he was naturally warm and proud  he , at first , resented his not having been made a confidant , from the beginning  and then seemed mortified at the necessity his daughter was reduced to , of carrying on a clandestine commerce , to the hazard of her reputation , and the humiliation of his own pride .


He had a precipitate manner of resolving , and acting .
He took his resolution on the instant , and , without communicating his design , wrote a letter , that very evening , to my father , informing him of our marriage , saying , that he had been a perfect stranger to it himself , until a few hours before  adding , that he had already  pardoned the breach of duty , on his daughter 's part , hoping that he might do the same on his son 's  and concluded his letter with saying , that he would readily join his interest with my father 's , to compass some preferment , or civil employ for me , to make amends for his daughter 's want of fortune  which he , with justice indeed , affirmed to be the only merit in which she could be deemed deficient .


To this indiscreet epistle he received no answer , but I did .
My father inclosed it back again to me , with a few lines in the cover , declaring that he had that day made and perfected his will  and had cut me intirely out from all chance of inheritance , for ever , of any part of his present , or future fortunes .


52 .
CHAP .
LII .


I happened to be at my farm , when the post came in , and as I had always indulged my dearest Fanny in the amusement of opening my letters , in my absence , she had the unhappiness of receiving this shock , which I would have saved her from as long as it might have been in  my power , if the letter had fallen first into my hands .


When I returned to the lodge , that day , I perceived a remarkable alteration in her countenance , though she received me with the same tenderness as usual .
I appeared alarmed , and taking her fondly by the hand , asked her , with some emotion , whether she had been taken ill , during my absence .
The softness of my manners affected her , she fell into tears , and took the letters out of her pocket .
I read them hastily over , and after making this short reflection , that the indiscretion of a friend , may sometimes do one as much mischief as the malice of an enemy , I caught her eagerly in my arms , crying out with hope and fondness , that Heaven had , for virtue , more fathers than one .


We then agreed not to mention any thing of this affair , to her father or mother , in order to preserve peace and harmony at home .
Her brother had been accidentally made acquainted with it before , as he happened to be by when she opened the letters , and snatched them up as they fell from her trembling hand .
I endeavoured to re-assure her spirits , for the present , by this philosophical reflection , that as I had long despaired of any manner of assistance from my father , during his life , it was too soon to  grieve , till we should first feel the effects of his resentment .


Such turns of thought as this , have frequently assisted me to parry , or postpone several uneasinesses in life  but my dear Fanny had not the least particle of stoicism in all her composition .
She was all delicacy , feeling , and sentiment .
This event therefore , preyed constantly on her spirits , and , finally , affected her health  and mine also , in a great measure , along with it .
For though I am an excellent philosopher , for myself , I am the worst in the world , for another .
My mind  indeed , is masculine , but my heart of the true feminine gender .
My sympathy is stronger than my nerves , and I feel misfortunes , as one does heat , weak in the direct line , but forcibly from reflection .


53 .
CHAP .
LIII .


SHE laboured under a depression of spirits , till she delivered a son to my arms , and then fell into a fever  from which , however , she recovered , but with so slow a progress , that I was alarmed about her declining into a decay   and , to increase the danger of which , her fond mother , her first connection in life , both of duty and affection , expired in her arms , of a disorder she had contracted by her constant watchings , and assiduous attendance upon her beloved child , during the course of her late and present illness .


About this time Mr. Beville , the father , received an account from Windsor , that his deputy had failed , and imbezzled his revenues  which obliged him to return , and try what measures he could pursue , in order to vindicate his right , and recover his employ again .
My wife remained with her brother , who spared no manner of expence , in physicians or medicine , for the re-establishment of her health  while I did every thing , on my part , that tenderness , love and duty could suggest , to assist her remedies , and expedite her cure .
For , oh !
I loved her , to the last moment of her existence , with tenfold the ardour with which I first received her virgin sacrifice to my longing arms .
For where true virtuous passion is , the torch of Hymen but singes the wings of Cupid , and anneals his arrows .


Our difficulties were , soon after , considerably increased , by the falling away of Beville 's agencies , one after another , by minors coming of  age , and others , for whom he was employed , returning from abroad , to reside upon their own estates  while , in the midst of these streights , and gloomy prospects , my family was increased by the birth of a daughter  which threw the dear mother back again into her former weakness , from which she had , for some little time , appeared to be tolerably well recovered .


Just at this interval , her aunt , by the mother 's side , became a widow , with a good jointure .
She had been made acquainted with our marriage , as soon as the veil of secrecy had been withdrawn  and as she lived within twenty miles of our residence , we had had frequent intercourse of visits , while my dear wife was able to ride abroad .


Soon after her husband 's death , I waited upon her to pay my compliments of condolance  and , on my informing her of our apprehensions about her niece 's relapse and danger , she very kindly offered to carry her with her to Spa , whither she was advised to repair immediately , on account of her daughter , and only child , a very handsome young woman , about twenty years of age , who had been , for some time , in a very precarious state of health .


I expressed my thanks , in the most grateful and affectionate manner , and returned directly  to the lodge , to acquaint my dear wife of this kind and opportune invitation .
She , at first , declined accepting of it , but , after some reluctance , and her being informed by her physicians , that those waters were absolutely necessary , toward the recovery of her health , with a religious exhortation too , upon this subject , from her favourite divine , she was at length prevailed upon , to prepare for her journey .


In a few days after , her aunt and cousin called upon her - I put her into the coach - I saw her then , for the last time !


54 .
CHAP .
LIV .


I Returned to her apartment , threw myself on the bed , and felt infinitely more wretched than at any interval of my confinement in the compter  for now , I had her life to fear for .
As my eyes wandered about the room , I perceived a manuscript paper lying on her table , which , apprehending to be some necessary memorandums she had forgot to take with her , I hastily arose , read , kissed , and wept over the following lines :


'  A Soliloquy .


I HAVE been the child of sorrow , or of care , e'er since my first reflection 's dawn .
My heart was early taught to melt at other 's woe , by feelings of its own .
In my first spring of youth , I sought for wisdom , and dulled the roseate bloom upon my cheek , by searching for her sacred lore .
The midnight taper oft has been extinguished by the radiant sun , which found my sleepless eyes unwearied .


Yet then did vanity intrude , and youthful spirits mounting to my heart , whispered that all this philosophic pride was fruitless , the means were pleasant , but the end was endless  and that in love alone , was happiness supreme .
The trial soon was made - I loved , and was beloved again .
But , oh !
what anguish did that passion cost my timerous heart !
Fear entered with it , and held the alternate empire of my breast , for many a tedious day .
Without the latter , how unsafe the first  and with it , what a slavery to sustain !


At length , what can be found of happiness in love , was mine .
The object of my choice , with generous tenderness and reciprocal flame , approved me his , and left me no ambition .
 Sorrow and fear now vanished for a while , but to return with allied strength .
Attended by pale poverty they came , and , to extend their cruel power , have with a double barbed arrow pierced me .
For on their iron darts are graved the tender names of husband , and of children !


How then can I defend my unshielded heart , or vindicate the empire of my soul , when these dear ties , the nearest and the best , give added force to every wound , and rise auxiliaries against me !
Yet sure there is a strength , superior still to theirs , and , oh !
endow me with it , Heaven !
A resignation to thy all-wise decrees , a calm dependance on thy paternal providence , and grace to say , Thy will , my God , not mine , be done .
Amen .


F. A .


' 55 .
CHAP .
LV .


 Enter Mr. Beville in a hurry .
Beville .
The chidren are come .
Andrews .
( springing from his seat ) My children !
Carewe .
Let us fly to embrace them .
Exeunt A. B. and C. Manent Triglyph and the Reader .
Read .
PRAY now , Sir , sha n't we follow them too , and have the pleasure of seeing the dear little prate-a-paces also , which I must confess I long to do extremely , from the affection and esteem you have taught me to conceive for their father and mother .
Tri .
I do not chuse it , at present , Sir , and I 'll tell you why .
I have been all my life afflicted with a certain praecordial weakness , which the Cabletonians , before mentioned , stile nervous * .
I saw Mr. Andrews and his children meet once - that was enough for my disorder .
Believe me , Mr. Reader , that , for all the money I expect to make of you and your whole fraternity , I would not review such another scene - To see the storgé , to perceive the workings of the father ,  when he placed little Harry on his knee !
But the looks , the emotions , the tears , when he snatched up la petite FanÁhon in his arms !
` So like her mother !
Eternity , I have bought you , with her loss ! '
And then we should be plagued , at the same time also , with the nonsense of the nurse .
This is daddy 's eye , and that is mammy 's lip .
This is daddy 's this thing , and that is mammy 's t ` other thing .
Now , master Harry , walk up strait to your uncle , there - Ah !
Mr. Beville , is ` nt he the very gunter-part of his father ?
And miss Fanny , too , pray hold up your head , miss , and drop a daisy there , for the gentleman - The mother 's air , as I am a sinner , to a tilly - Read .
You are a whimsical man , Mr. Triglyph , and shift so suddenly sometimes , from serious to comical , that I declare one does not know how to accommodate themselves to your humour  for you possess a certain art , of setting the upper part of the face a crying , and the lower a laughing , so histerically , at the same time , that I am sure I must , at this instant , make as drole an appearance as a whipped school boy eating a tart , while tears with syrup mixed , run down his chaps , together .
Tri .
Indeed , Sir , you happen to mistake both my talent , and my character .
My cast is intirely  grave , nor do I mean to jest , even in those parts of my writings , where I sometimes speak in humourous images  but I happened to have learned my philosophy in the porch of Democritus  and it is a certain , though a ridiculous truth , that , after one has been taught to laugh at the follies of mankind , it becomes morally impossible for him , ever after , to preserve a serious countenance .
But then , Mr. Reader , this is not mirth , nor is my moral the less severe , upon this account  for human frailties do not divert , but tickle me  and extort a smile , through pain .
56 .
CHAP .
LVI .


THE next morning Mr. Beville staid from Scarborough , to play with the children  and Mr. Andrews was as great a romp as the rest .
But , lest this particular might be apt to sink the characters of these philosophic gentlemen , with a certain class of readers , I think proper to acquaint them , that Agesilaus used frequently to amuse himself , with riding hobby-horses with his children , in the nursery .
Some have hobby-horses , and others have hobby-asses .


 Mr. Carewe assisted in the tumult , for a while  but , not being actuated by the same parental feelings , his spirit soon began to flag , and he retired alone to the sea-shore , where he spent the rest of the morning in walking with folded arms , and musing in deep melancholy , till he was called in to dinner .


There was something in this charming young man 's distress , that had a nobleness , a generosity , a virtue in it , which , in my opinion , must interest the mind , even more than the misfortunes of either Mr. Andrews , or Mr. Beville .
For I shall just hint here , that the latter had some to lament , distinct from those of the former  but the reader must suspend his curiosity about these matters , till the regular course of this history shall , in their proper places , introduce the several stories , both of Mr. Beville , and Mr. Carewe .


Their conversations for the rest of that day , and indeed all their evening entertainments , were extremely ingenious , and polite .
I must confess that I have been several times tempted to interrupt the narrative , in many places , where I thought that I could make the reader sufficient amends , by introducing him to amusements of a more refined nature .
But those who may have a true relish , for such reading as this might afford  them , will be perfectly capable of imagining to themselves , in a more lively manner than I could possibly represent it , what an elegant , and elevated society , three such persons of talents , virtue , literature , and taste , whose minds had been softened by adversity and disappointments , and who were mutual friends to each other , must be capable of forming together .
O noctes , caenaeque Deûm !


And as for the rest of my readers , who may not have been blest with a genius for such delicate enjoyments , they will very readily excuse the interludes , in order to pass more immediately on to the catastrophé of the action .
I shall therefore , suffer the representation to proceed , without intermission , except where I shall think that any of the passages in the story may need to be illustrated , or explained .


The next morning every thing went on , as usual , Mr. Beville walked away to Scarborough , the two other friends retired themselves after breakfast , into the library , and Mr. Andrews thus pursued his adventures , in context with those of Mr. Beville .


57 .
CHAP .
LVII .


 ABOUT a year before this event , my worthy friend , Mr. Beville , who , though a reading and contemplative man , had a great spirit for adventure , had engaged himself in a certain manufacture  in order to carry on which , with effect , it was necessary to borrow a considerable sum of money  and for which purpose I recommended him to our old banker , before mentioned , my dear Carewe  who , in order to judge of his security , sent his same attorney down into the country , who staid a week with us , to inquire into the circumstances of Mr. Beville 's fortune , the interest of his farms , the nature and progress of the manufacture , with the responsibility of his character .
About all which particulars having received sufficient satisfaction , he drew up the deeds , paid the money for his client , and returned back to London .


While he remained with us in the country , he appeared extremely pleased with all the improvements made both upon Mr. Beville 's farms , and mine  but said that it was a pity they were not held jointly , by the same tenant  for as one was moist , and the other dry , they would yield  a double profit and convenience together , to the value of both , separately occupied .


He seemed to be charmed with the situation of the lodge , the gardens , orchards , fish-ponds , and the accommodation of his offices  and said , that it would be an happy scene of retirement , for any wearied citizen , from the hurry and bustle of a town , there to pass , in peace , and religion , the remainder of his days  rejoicing in the fruits of honest industry , and enjoying the fulness of a well-earned fortune .


Some time after my dear wife had gone off to Spa , leaving her brother and me in the highest of human afflictions , despairing , from the many symptoms of her disorder , with some dark expressions dropt by her physicians , of ever seeing a person return to us , again , whom we so tenderly loved , and so deservedly esteemed  we received a private intimation , one day , from the sheriff of our county , that executions against our bodies , goods , and lands , had been lodged in his office , that morning , by the banker 's attorney , aforesaid .


We then , both of us , too late , perceived the unguarded weakness of putting ourselves , or fortunes , into the power of a person who lay under the dangerous , and wicked influence of one , whose malice and revenge , we had reason to  apprehend , might have instigated his avarice and extortion , to injure and oppress us .
But we soon exchanged reflection for action , having but just time enough to secure our persons from arrest , by flying up to London , together , with what bills and cash we could muster up between us , at that time , and of which we made one common purse , amounting to about an hundred pounds .


58 .
CHAP .
LVIII .


OUR farms , stock , and furniture , were soon after put up to sale , and in these difficulties we - Nonnulla desunt .
-


The above hiatus shall be supplied in the second , or third edition  for there is a peculiar nicety in this article , which requires some time to be able to accommodate for public view .


Biographer Triglyph .


 I wrote also , to my father , continued Mr. Andrews , intreating that he would take some speedy measures to stop the execution , and relieve my slight and unpatrimonial fortune , from the heavy weight of a family debt , which rested solely upon him to provide for .
This letter I sent to him by his own attorney , who informed him likewise , of the banker 's malice , in this affair .


His answer was perfectly calm and temperate , for he was a great philosopher , in his own way .
He replied , that I had very romantic notions , in some things , but vulgar ordinary ones , in others .
That my first dealings with the banker , and my marriage , were instances of the former  and the seeming now to consider my sister 's portion , for whom I was , by the laws of reason and virtue , equally obliged to provide , as his sole debt , was an instance of the latter .
But that , as the laws of the land had made the same distinction that I did , I was welcome to recover the debt against him , as soon as I should have discharged it myself , and had the judgments assigned over to me  by which time he hoped , by the finishing of his own suit , to be in a condition to answer mine : - Multa desiderantur .
-


 Here the three following chapters , in which are contained some curious anecdotes , must sleep some time in manuscript , for the reason already given above  so I shall pass on to


59 .
CHAP .
LXII .


AFTER these disappointments , I wrote to the principal tenant on my own farm , to come up to town , and give us an account of the transactions which had passed in the country , with regard to our unhappy affairs .
He was an intelligent person , and had attended the sheriff 's sale , both of poor Beville 's effects , and mine .
He told us that every thing had gone off , at a third or fourth of their value , as they always do upon such unhappy occasions  except my wife 's picture , and mine , which , having been bid for , by our honest friend the clergyman , dropping some indiscreet expressions of regard , at the same time , were raised upon him to a considerable price , by the attorney , who was present at the sale , and took the hint from his earnestness .


He then added a large encomium upon our friend , and concluded with an expression , the  simplicity of which forced a smile from both Beville , and me , even in the midst of our distress , that the doctor was certainly a primitive Christian , if ever there was one .
He told us also , that the attorney had purchased the interests of both our farms , at a very trifing value  as the sub-sheriff immediately declared the sale , as soon as he began to bid for them .


I settled accounts with this man , for his rent , and the ballance in my favour , which was forty pounds , I directed him to pay into the hands of his worthy pastor , to whom I also wrote a letter of thanks , begging him to keep that deposit in his hands , to defray the current expences of my dear children 's nursing , who were rearing in his parish .
I offered him the money he had paid for the pictures , and told him where he might find us incog .
if his occasions should summon him up to London , before we might have determined upon any scheme of life , or rather of living .


About a week after , a carrier called at our lodgings , left a letter for me , with a large deal box , and went away directly , without waiting either for payment , or an answer .
The letter was from our friend , the clergyman  and I give it to you here to read , added he , just as I received it , excepting a bill for forty pounds ,  which was inclosed in it .
Mr. Carewe took the letter , and read


Dear Sir ,


ACcording to your order , I have received the money from your tenant , which I take the liberty of returning into your hands again , because I think that you are a much fitter trustee for your children , than I can be .
Besides , as their nurse is my tenant , it will be time enough , in all reason , to discharge her wages , when I call upon you for them .


I have also , sent up the portraits you desire  but must beg the favour of being excused from accepting payment for them .
Did I part wholly with these dear relicts , I might , perhaps , be induced to settle a more sterling account with you , on this article  but while you intrust the living miniatures of these prized originals , to my care , I shall , by looking stedfastly to that precious charge , be overpaid for parting with these faint resemblances .


Pray make my most affectionate compliments to my amiable friend Mr. Beville  and here let me most cordially intreat you both , that , as soon as the situation of your affairs may admit of your returning into this country , you will both of you accept of my roof , till you shall be  able to establish yourselves in some happier scheme of life  for , by assisting me in my endeavours for the good of mankind , you will be justly intitled to a right of sharing that income , which Providence and the church have vested in my hands , for no other purposes .


Adieu .


60 .
CHAP .
LXIII .


AFTER Mr. Carewe had made proper reflections upon the polite address , and truly Christian spirit of this letter , Mr. Andrews re-assuming his story , with an heavy sigh , a flowing tear , and hesitating voice , I am arrived now , said he , to the last period of my life - To my first death , at least - To the last event that can ever be of moment to me hereafter , except so far as I have revived again in my dear children , and renewed my fondness on those living relicts !


I wrote every pacquet to my dear Fanny , but without giving her the least account of our misfortune , for fear of disturbing her mind , in the present state of her body , and had received some letters from her , in which she informed me that she had got a severe cold in her voyage , which  had greatly increased her disorder  but that the physicians at Spa , had put her into a regimen , and that she would do every thing in her power to keep up her spirits , and assist her medicines .


In the midst of these difficulties , while poor Beville and I remained in privacy together , mutually assisting each other 's philosophy by moral reasonings , and religious arguments , scheming from day to day , some new project , or untried adventure , toward rescuing us from our present forlorn condition , I received a letter from our aunt , at Spa , that my dear Fanny 's cold had fallen so heavy on her already exhausted strength and spirits , that the physicians had almost despaired of her recovery .


The next pacquet brought me a black seal !


61 .
CHAP .
LXIV .


AS Mr. Andrews will not be inclined , for some minutes , at least , to continue the remainder , and less interesting part of his story , I shall make use of this interval to verify the authenticity of these memoirs , by observing to the reader , that no writer in the world , who had either sense , taste , humanity , or virtue , could  possibly think of dispatching the amiable Mrs. Andrews off the stage , so abruptly , without bringing about any other catastrophé , but her own .
To be at such expence of beauty , wit , sentiment , love , and delicacy , merely to render a man of worth miserable , during his surviving life !
Sed parcae vocant , the relentless fates have snatched her from us  and the severity of history admits of no redemption .


You have now before you two unhappy men of virtue and merit , labouring under a complication of misfortunes , which , so far from having been incurred by any vice , or folly of their own , were brought upon them rather by their very sense , and virtue  and therefore may more properly be stiled afflictions , by way of contradistinguishing them from inflictions  being such as neither forecast could foresee , nor prudence might prevent .


The changes of this life , have been frequently observed to be so extraordinary , so contrary to the allowed designs of Providence , so much beyond even the mere fortuitousness of events , that the antients were induced to worship a deity , under the title of Fortune , quite distinct from Providence  an intelligence of caprice , only - I think it was a goddess * .


 Thus one man shall be attended with a constant series of success , during his whole life , Quibus dormientibus Dii omnia conficiunt , while another , employing the same means , diligence , and virtue , shall be unlucky through the whole course of his .
Some are fortunate , or unfortunate , during certain periods of time and the changes are seen frequently to shift , without any manner of alteration in the person 's own conduct .
Even at play , where every thing seems to be left to blind hazard alone , how often have we seen ill luck stick to one particular seat , for a whole evening together  while , at other times , it has pursued one person quite round the table , in spite of all the shifting , cutting , and shuffling of the night ?


This subject has just now brought to my memory , a speech that I once heard pronounced by a certain fellow , of a certain college , as he was common-placing on the changes , and chances of this mortal life , at the university : ' Single misfortunes , said he , seldom come alone , and the greatest of evils are attended by greater . '
This person was afterwards made a bishop , and died an archbishop .
Must it not be to chance alone , for it was not in Gotham , that he owed his preferment ?


62 .
CHAP .
LXV .


 POOR Beville , continued Mr. Andrews , restrained his sorrow , and did every thing in the power of good sense , religion , and friendship , to strengthen my mind , and support my spirits under our mutual calamity  while I , in tenderness to him , used to turn aside to mourn , and endeavour to conceal a woman 's heart , under a stoic 's mask .
And this generous attention toward each other 's grief , was of more real service to us both , than all the bravery of philosophy .


But , one day , after I had brought myself tolerably well , to the preserving of appearances , at least , an unlucky incident happened to occur , which occasioned me to relapse again , into all my former indecencies .
After dinner Mr. Beville drank off a glass of wine to my health , and taking me by the hand , at the same time , Dear brother , said he , this is your birth-day .


The first expression conjured up , almost to view , my blushing Fanny , in her bridal robes , and the last brought instantly to my mind , that triumphant , that transporting scene , which I had exulted in at Windsor , upon such another aera .
Memory , like lightning , shot quick through  every interval of bliss , till the last fatal close .
My spirits were hurried on too fast , I grew sick , my manhood failed me , I fainted suddenly into my friend 's arms .


When he had recovered me to sense again , I just hinted to him , without daring to dwell upon it , the groupe of thoughts which had overpowered me .
He lamented his expression , though innocent , and we passed the remainder of the evening together , in mutual silence , sighs , and tears .


We immediately removed the wine , after my emotion , being both of us of opinion , as well from our own experience , as from a general observation upon others , that there never was a more fallacious maxim , than that which has been too often imposed upon the already too unhappy , that wine is serviceable to banish care .
When the body is oppressed by fatigue , sickness , or pain , high cordials may relieve , or asswage  but where the mind has caught the infection , water is our safest potion .
Wine but augments the disposition it encounters  sinks dulness into stupidity , raises mirth into madness , and aggravates melancholy to despair .


63 .
CHAP .
LXVI .


 TOward the hour of rest , having composed my spirits a little , a kind of parallel still running in my mind , between the two birth-days , I took the pen , and wrote these lines , said he , opening his pocket-book , and presenting a paper to Mr. Carewe , which you will find to be expressed in the very same gloomy strain of thought and sentiment , with those I repeated to you before , of my dear Fanny 's .


On my BIRTH-DAY .
ON each revolving year , I 'm pleased to see , That hour approaching which by fate 's decree , Is doomed the last of my mortality .
Life is a race , still verging to a post , Which he who soonest reaches gains the most , But , if precipitate , the prize is lost * .
Men should with years , as hosts do at a feast , Welcome the coming , speed the going guest , Till night comes on , and then rejoice in rest .
 Then farewel nonage , welcome ripen'd years , Which but emancipate , and make us heirs , Instead of earthly , of coelestial spheres !
I could not close my eyes , all night , and the next morning I found myself in an high fever .
I continued ill for about three weeks , ten days of which my life was despaired of .
During the whole time Mr. Beville lay on a pallet , by my bed-side  and our worthy friend the clergyman , upon receiving an account of my danger , by a letter from Mr. Beville , came up immediately to London , and staid in town till I was quite recovered  visiting , praying , and reading by me , every day .


How often , and how ardently , my dear Carewe , continued he , have both Mr. Beville and I wished for the high relief of your friendly converse , during our confinement here !
But I knew not where to enquire for you , nor dared I venture abroad , to search for you in coffee-houses , or on the public walks .


And this restraint was perhaps not the least part of my difficulties in this situation  for so great is my love of liberty , that though I seldom stir from home , and usually , through choice , pass most part of my time in my study , I believe  that there are few persons alive , who can brook imposed confinement , less than I could .


64 .
CHAP .
LXVII .


THE clergyman remained in town for a few days after my recovery  he had taken a lodging near ours , and spent most part of his time with us .
Among other subjects of conversation , happening to speak about our late misfortune in the country , he told Mr. Beville that , as is generally the way , a few pitied his distress , but many blamed his conduct  for with mankind , said he , it is crime enough to be unfortunate  and , in your present unhappy circumstances , censure has pursued you , even for merits , because unsuccessful .


This is by no means uncommon , replied Beville , for the world , like women , never pardon an attempt - if you fail - But prithee , dear Sir , said he , what are the charges produced against me , and in what particulars is my conduct reproached in the country ?


Why , in the first place , answered the clergyman , that you turned your mind to extravagant projects , animum habuit semper ingentia , semper infinita expetentem .
Secondly , that you had once an opportunity of establishing your fortunes , by  the management , as they term it , of seven or eight thousand pounds a year * , and yet have nothing to shew for it , as is the expression .
And lastly , that you have lived above your fortune , till you finally ruined it .


In answer to the first of these indictments , replied Mr. Beville , I hope it will be accepted as a sufficient plea , that as I never had patrimony , profession , trade , or employ , my life , of necessity , must have been a life of adventure .
Project , or starve , was certainly , in this case , my motto .
In such a situation as mine , to live , itself , required a scheme - Necessitas ante rationem .
For life hath long since ceased to be a sine-cure - Spontaneous fruits rise not , at present , from the earth , as in The Garden  nor does manna now drop from the heavens , as in The Wilderness .


With regard to the second charge , I do confess that I have known many persons thrive , forgive the expression here , upon far less advantages  who have raised fortunes , by purchasing some their neighbour 's , some their employer 's estates , and sprung from dung-carts into a coach and six .
All this indeed , I know to be true - I had like to have said too true - Too true , alas !
for themselves , I fear .


To take advantage of one man 's misfortunes , to over-reach another 's weakness ,


 To wring From the hard hand of peasants , their vile trash , By any indirection , were arts my pride disdained , my moral started at .
I have a sympathy in my nature , which , like the cameleon 's hue , catches the complexion of occurring objects - I rejoice , and mourn for feelings not my own - What should I gain then by another 's distress , when by augmenting his I must increase my own !
With what a ravening hunger must that wretch be seized , who eats one morsel in another 's wrong !
I should deem myself unhappy to have inherited a fortune , so dearly earned - How much more wretched then , to be the guilty purchaser !
Yet much I fear , there are , who could revel in a sacked city , and reckon plunder among the goods of fortune !
The last objection , said he , I need give but a short answer to - It has been urged , that I have lived above my fortune - But in reality , I never did , I never could do so .
I never had any - I have , therefore , only lived above no fortune , which the most thrifty person alive must do , in like circumstances .


I entered the world - I must repeat it - without patrimony , profession , trade , or emyloy  I have unportioned , and unpensioned , maintained  the post and character of a gentleman , ever since I have entered into life  and , had I not experienced the miser 's gripe , had I not felt oppression 's weight , I could now walk uncaptioned on the Exchange , with a thousand pounds in my pocket .
Let any man first shew a better oeconomy , and he shall then be free to censure mine .


I can not chuse my life , continued he , all that rests upon me is to make the best of it , as it occurs .
My desires are reasonable - above dependance , but below ambition , and I despair not of Providence .
Should even this whole world fail me , my hopes remain unabated still , nay rise in measure to my disappointments here .
The business of life is so to live , as not to fear to die .
This once secured , anxiety is o'er - The rest be Heaven 's care .
Amen !


65 .
CHAP .
LXVIII .


MR. Carewe appeared charmed with the spirit and virtue of Mr. Beville 's justification , and acknowledged to Mr. Andrews , that the generous warmth , with which that gentleman  had expressed himself , upon this occasion , had stampt an higher character for him , in his mind , than any thing he had yet seen , or heard of him , till then , had been able to raise .


In fine , said he , I think that both he and you have revived the credit of the antient philosophy , and restored to poverty its former dignity , in your single and singular characters .
Regum aequabat opes animis .
I wish you could also , added he , bring back the golden patronage as happily , that some Pollio , or Macaenas , might seek you out amidst sequestered groves , and ' `` Beckon modest merit from the shade . '' '
In the mean time , as Pliny says , Est quidam vera felicitas , felicitate dignum videri .


Mr. Andrews bowed , and returned him equal thanks for his encomiums both upon his friend , and himself  and then replied , that he had never considered poverty in the abject light that the world is too apt to do .
There are two sorts of pride , said he , with regard to this point .
One , the antient and philosophie spirit , which chose , and gloried in it  the other , the modern , and beggarly one , that avoids , and is ashamed of it .


But poverty , in itself , is so far from being mean , that it requires certain accidents , to render  it so .
Ignoble birth , servile office , low condescensions , vulgar manners , dishonest actions , or poorness of spirit .
Any of these particulars , indeed , may debase poverty to meanness  but will they not , at the same time , diminish the grandeur of riches ?


Poverty , continued he , hurts our credit , only on the Change , yet even there , character alone , has raised a fortune  but considered singly , excludes us not from a court .
The opulence of Plato enriched not his philosophy , but the indigence of Socrates has reflected a lustre upon his .
Is there then a soul so poor , as not to prefer a pedigree from the latter , to the whole lineage of Attalus ?


Just as Mr. Andrews had finished this expression , Mr. Beville and the children came rioting into the room , to acquaint them that dinner was on the table .
They passed the remainder of this day more chearfully together , than any of the former , except a sigh or furtive tear , which would often escape involuntarily from Andrews , and sometimes from Beville , also .


66 .
CHAP .
LXIX .


 HERE give me leave , Mr. Reader , to offer you a further proof of the authenticity of these memoirs , from an observation I shall make upon some parts of the two preceding chapters .
And first , there is a very obvious personality , perceivable in the warmth , feeling , and lively resentment , which Mr. Beville has expressed in his defence , so different from the natural coldness of composition , that must certainly , to a critic , manifest some real and peculiar adaption in it , and sufficiently evince these writings to be genuine .


But the particular which most eminently points out the ingenuousness of this whole performance , is the high encomiums which Mr. Carewe bestows upon the characters of both Mr. Andrews , and Mr. Beville .
Supposing this triumvirate to be three real , and distinct persons , such politeness might very fairly have passed between ingenious persons , and friends  but , upon the hypothesis of its being merely a novel , where every thing that is said , in whatsoever character , is to be directly imputed to the author , such self-applause , admissible in no case  whatever , except the testimony of a clear conscience , would certainly be most abominable .


For though the commendatory verses , which one often sees prefixed to the works of several modern writers , seem to savour a good deal of this vanity , yet still they are but the compliments of others , though published by themselves .
And notwithstanding the express eulogies , which some of the antients have left us of their own works , as the


Non usitat , nec tenui ferar Penn , biformis per liquidum aethera Vates , - of Horace  The Exegi monumentum aere perennius , Regalique situ pyramidum altius , of ditto  The Jamque opus exegi , quod nec Jovis ira , nec ignes , Nec poterit ferrum , nec edax abolere vetustas , of Ovid  What Hesiod tells us , ` that the muses had given him a white wand , and a branch of laurel  had breathed into him a divine song , and taught him to celebrate things past , and prophesy things to come . '
What Homer , in his hymn to Apollo , boasts of , ` that when it shall  be inquired who is the sweetest singer among men , you may make answer , ( dictating to the god ) it is the blind bard who dwells in Chios , and whose songs excel all human harmony . '
Nay , even the modest Virgil has his Ille Ego too , with other similar passages of flattering authority , might seem to warrant a presumption of this kind , yet these are to be considered as prophetical vaunts , or poetical licences , only , which have never yet been indulged to vulgar prose , and therefore can by no means be justified in an humble writer of simple memoirs , who pretends not the least claim to inspiration , of any kind .
For I speak as I think , and I think as I please .
67 .
CHAP .
LXX .


JUST about this crisis , and after an interval of five years silence , I received the following letter by post , directed to my father 's , from my old acquaintance and condisciple , whom I mentioned to you before .
Dear Andrews , cried Mr. Carewe , you can not imagine what pleasure it gives me to have that careless lively fellow  brought upon the stage , once more .
He comes in critically here too , said he , to relieve your mind , and give a new turn to your thoughts  and will , at the same time , treat me too , with a little variety , and satisfy my longing to be somewhat farther acquainted with this irregular genius .
But the letter , the letter -


The Letter .


Old Friend ,


I MAY well call you so , for it really seems an age , since we parted .
I never forgot you , however , but thought of you as often as I could of any thing , in the dissipated kind of life I have ever since led .
It was what you would have stiled perfect squirely .


But I have lately taken one thought into my head , that will probably last for life  and am very busy , at present , in collecting my scattered affections together , to place them all upon a single object .


In fine , I am to be married , without reprieve , on the tenth day of next month  and , as it is usual for the dearest connections to attend the departure of a friend , I intreat the favour of your flying to me directly , on the receipt of this summons , to accompany me at my approaching execution .


 Here now , I expect that you will throw one of your systems at my head .
What !
to open the solemn nuptial scene , at once , without an amorous prologue ?
But methinks , in this instance , I act the philosopher 's part better than you would do - You guided by your passion - I governed by my reason .
I wanted her fortune to improve my estate  and her alliance to strengthen my interest .


The deeds are engrossing , and I expect you .


Adieu .


P. S. My affectionate compliments attend our Windsor friend , Will Beville , and I beg the favour of him to accept this postscript as an invitation to afford me the pleasure of his company , along with you .


The same man still , I find , said Mr. Carewe  Not the least alteration , replied Mr. Andrews .
On the receipt of this letter , my former fondness for him began to revive , I needed exercise and amusement , myself , in my then weak and solitary state , and was also pleased at an opportunity of releasing poor Mr. Beville from his heavy confinement .
So we both of us agreed , in his own phrase , to attend him , took leave of our amiable friend , the clergyman , and accordingly  set out together , in about a week after the receipt of this letter .


68 .
CHAP .
LXXI .


HE received us with his usual briskness , and seemed particularly pleased to see me .
His character ran through his whole oeconomy .
His living was extempore .
A market , at six miles distance , supplied him with every thing in his house , and his demesne was over-run with deer and horses .
Within , all hurry , and no order  and without , a number of improvements begun , but nothing finished .


For his way was , whenever he resolved upon any thing , he immediately commenced it  and , if any other whim came into his head , before he had compleated the first , he took off his hands , directly , to enter upon that also , for fear he should forget it .
So that his whole demesne was but a confused heap of memorandums , and might not improperly be stiled Notes for improvements .


Before his house was laid out a mile avenue , of fifty yards long  behind it , a Caspian Sea , with  an hogshead of water in it  on one side , was an obelisk , three feet high  and on the other , a rialto , of half an arch .
His garden was but half inclosed , in one corner of which stood the four seasons , huddled together in a groupe , as in the chaos  and in the midst of them were seen time , and a sun-dial , lying in wait for their pedestals .


I found my friend much impaired since I last saw him , both in his looks , health , and manners .
His face was emaciated , his hand shook , and instead of that free , disengaged air , which used to give the grace of youth and fashion to all his words , and actions , he had contracted a stiffness in his gesture , a constraint in his address , and a certain mediocrité throughout his whole appearance .


I essayed him a little , upon literary topics , but he soon cut me short , by acknowledging that he had not read one crabbed line , as he termed it , ever since we had parted .
And why , after all , said he , should we idle away our time , after the concerns of the past world , when the present supplies us with sufficient occupation , for our whole lives ?
I perfectly agree with you , my dear friend , replied I , that the current world may very wisely employ the full measure of our time , provided that we consider it , not as a distinct interval , but as a commencement of the next .


 I know , doctor , said he , smiling on me , that theological philosophy is always for blending of systems  but I hope that I do not separate these two , myself , when I declare that I take the whole duty of man , both absolutely and relatively considered , to consist in these three things : Fear God , honour the king , and pay twenty shillings in the pound .
Which , in my opinion , added he , fully comprehend the scope of all our religious , civil , and moral obligations .


Beville and I strolled into his study , the morning after our arrival , and took a survey of his books .
They were but few .
About a dozen volumes of plays , novels , and miscellanies , Bolton 's Justice , with Hobbe 's , Woolston 's , Tindal 's , and Chubb 's works , Shaftsbury 's Characteristics , and Bolingbroke 's philosophical writings , composed his whole library .


At length the nuptial morn arrived .
Our friend dressed himself in the gayest manner , for the occasion , and we all took coach together , to wait upon the bride - To commence that fatal course of the supremest bliss , or deepest misery .


69 .
CHAP .
LXXII .


 WE got thither about two o'clock , at noon , and were accosted with a great deal of rustic hospitality , by the parent squire , and two familiar cousins of the family .
Sack and cakes were immediately called for , and the father , filling up an half-pint rummer , presented it to the bridegroom , crying , Pop down this primer , my young soldier , for a man must make but a feeble assault o n't , that has not a dram of courage in him .
Ha , ha , ha !
good , good !
damn'd good , that !
cried the cousins .


My friend excused himself from the draught , saying that he needed no such auxiliary , that he should not be found bashful on the field of battle , that he had seen Pharsalia , c. Pharsalia , Pharsalia , cried the old gentleman , why that is not my wench 's name , d' ye mind me  she was christened Ethelinda , I remember very well - Her godmother was an old romantic maiden lady , and had picked up that unchristian name , out of some heathenish book , or other .


That may be , Sir , said I , winking at my friend , but lovers claim an ancient privilege , stiled Poetica Licentia , of giving their mistresses a  sort of poetical baptism , and of borrowing names from history , or romance .


Very good , very good , replied the squire  but , prithee , says he , who was this same - what 's the word ?
Pharsalia , replied I. Ay , this same Pharsalia , that I find is now become my daughter 's nick-name ?


That is a name , replied I , well known in antient story , at whose relentless feet many thousands have died , in strife to win her .
A cruel jade , a cruel jade , quoth the squire - The beauties of your outlandish times , continued he , were terrible people , terrible people , indeed , Sir .
But , thank our stars , they are all of them distinct , now .
Dead and gone , and rotten too , for all their conceit , I dare say , long before this .
And there is no dying for love now-a-days , not in the least , not in the least , Sirs  no more dying for love , I assure you , gentlemen .
So my gallants , you may set your hearts at rest , for the future , believe me .
Ha , ha , ha !


Do n't you think , continued he , addressing himself more particularly , to me , that we are much wiser now , than your old people were formerly ?
I can not tell , Sir , said I , for I never was in company with any of them , and I never pretend to judge of persons characters , by hearsay .


 Very right , very right , good Sir , replied the squire , as they are not heretofore , to answer for themselves , it would not be quite fair to be too hard upon them .
You really seem to have good notions , right notions , indeed , Sir , added he , taking me by the hand , and bruising my knuckles , when luckily a servant came in to my relief , by annoncing us that dinner was upon the table .


70 .
CHAP .
LXXIII .


THE squire led the way , and we followed him into the parlour , where we saluted the ladies , and took our places .
I was struck with the whole air , and person of the bride , altogether , but did not fix my eyes upon her attentively enough to distinguish her beauties , out of regard to good breeding  as the looks of a stranger might have thrown her into confusion , at such a delicate crisis as this .


And indeed , this politeness I soon found to be but common humanity toward her  for she had a world of sorry mirth to sustain , from the vulgar facetiousness of her father , and cousins ,  who exhausted all the common-place jests , and railleries , that are usually thrown out by merry dulness , upon such occasions .


The bridegroom too , joined in the same stupid humour , though I said every thing I could to restrain him from it .
I hinted to him , in French , that though , in the rest , it might be ill breeding only , in him it was indecent , also .
He replied that he had a design in it , for coyness was troublesome , and that he always observed when womon once became familiar with ideas , they were seldom apt to start at things .
I answered that he must not only be an indelicate , but an indiscreet husband too , who would desire to lessen a wife 's modesty  but to call in foreign aid , for that purpose , added I , is gross indeed !


The father still went on , blundering in sense , and mistaking in expression .
While the familiar cousins made more than amends , by speaking rather too plain , arresting every innocent word that was uttered , by any of the ladies , and torturing it to confess a double entendre .


Among all the improper behaviour of men toward women , I think that the wresting a single to a double sense , is the most inexcuseable .
A rape upon their persons , may have some temptation , but one on their words can possibly have none  and the violating an innocent  expression into an immodest sense , may justly be censured under this harsh appellation .


There is certainly , in some men , such a malady , as grossness of ears , which , like a dull medium , gives a bluntness to the acutest sounds .
I would have the aures asini affixed to such an head , which , like Midas , prefers a satyr 's voice , to the melody of Apollo  and that may be compared to blisters , which extract only the foulest humours .
Immodest wits may be resembled to beggars , who betray their poverty , by exposing their nakedness .


71 .
CHAP .
LXXIV .


DUring the entertainment , the parlour door was left open , to stun us with the noise of shrill fiddles , and hoarse hautboys  which supplied still fresh occasion of insipid mirth , by affording opportunities of calling for certain tunes , with arch names  but , at the same time , they served to drown a good deal of the ribaldry that was bandied about , while the dinner lasted , which therefore , in some sort , reconciled me to the interruption , for that time .


 But I have generally thought the introduction of music , at meals , to be a most absurd entertainment .
Friends are more particularly selected , and assembled at these times , to be chearful and sociable together  't is therefore , most highly improper to suffer any kind of avocation to intrude upon such jovial occasions , which may either divert the attention , or lay the free circulation of familiar converse , under any manner of difficulty , or restraint .
Is there a scold , an evil spirit , or a tarantula , in company !


When a person treats his guests with music , at meals , he should always provide each of them with a speaking trumpet , to fill the concert , lest the vocal should be found too weak for the instrumental .
At least , I think that the company ought to converse together in recitative , only .


I met with a sign once , in Ireland , that was perfectly emblematical of such an absurdity .
It was a cat eating a mouse , and playing on the bagpipes , at the same time .
Is this an Irish blunder ?
No - It is there only , that it is not one .
For music may not improperly be blended with conversation , where most people speak with a tune .


Pere Le Compte , describing the manners of the Chinese , says that they eat and drink to a certain measure , which is marked by a person  who stands at the side-board , and bea [ ... ] [ ... ] during the dinner .
He farther adds , that they never speak a word during meals , but that their whole address of compliment , is performed by gesture , and grimace , only .
Music would not be impertinent at such festivals as these  and might likewise , have not been improperly introduced at Belshazzar 's impious feast , where all the guests were struck dumb at once .


Socrates , in the Protagoras , reprehending the sophist , for quoting poetry in a philosophical argument , compares it to certain ignorant people , who , for want of sense to entertain their company , have their feasts accompanied by music .


72 .
CHAP .
LXXV .


ABOUT six o'clock in the evening , we were summoned into the drawing-room to tea , where we found the parson ready to perform his office .
After the ceremony was over , every one saluted the bride , in course  and when the squire gave her his blessing , perceiving that she trembled a good deal , he cried out , Hey girl , are you falling into a panatic ?
Look ye there , look ye there , said he , pointing to her  mother , she had the same frantics , in her time , wench , and yet you see that she is still alive , to tell the story - The cousins , the parson , and the footmen laughed .


After tea the music struck up again , and the ball began  the father and mother led up , I excused myself from mirth , Beville danced with the bride , the bridegroom with one of the paranymphs , first cousin with the other , the parson with my lady 's woman , and second cousin with a chair .


These six couple jigged it away , as one of the cousins termed it , for the rest of the evening , with a great deal of rustic mirth and jocularity  the only part of which that I remember , was what the parson said , on their first setting out .
Exulting at the preference he had obtained over poor second coz , who stood next under him , What , Mr. Tom , said he , are you tired already ?
Tired , Sir , tired !
prithee how came such a crotchet into your nobb , Mr. Parson ?
Why really , Mr. Tom , replied he , is it not natural to suppose that a man is so , when he takes a chair ?
Here a loud laugh - Ay , but doctor , doctor , parson upon Dorothy , I have this advantage over you , again , that when I am tired , I may rest myself in my partner 's lap , which is  a liberty you dare not take for your cassock , doctor - Here a louder laugh -


Mr. Beville entertained his fair partner with his usual good breeding .
He talked to her of indifferent matters , in the gay and polite world  of plays , music , and dress - Not upon any particular modes of the latter , but treating it only as a general topic , and exposing the improprieties , and extravagancies of certain fashions , where caprice reigned alone .
From whence he took occasion of comparing taste and wit together , which , however they may strike upon the fancy , at first , are equally false , said he , if one be not founded in sense , and the other in nature .


He found her extremely attentive , intelligent , diffident , and modest .
He treated her like a rational creature , notwithstanding her youth , and beauty  and was so perfectly polite all the evening , as to keep quite clear of every subject , hint , or expression , which might even glance , or seem to allude to the circumstances of her present situation .


During supper , he and I both concurred in the same sentiment , and endeavoured , as much as possible , to parry all the rude merriment that was thrown out , upon this occasion .
The chaplain though , pressed us hard , for he shewed himself  indeed , most truly orthodox - in all the mysteries of weddings and christenings - which , by the warmth of his imagination , he joined so close together , in his expressions , that in a bottle or two more , I believe he would , like the projector in Tristram Shandy , have proceeded to baptize the infant , slap dash , in potenti , rerum .


Our difficulty , with regard to this gentleman , lay here  that we could not tell how to reprimand a person , under his character , without saying some things , at the same time , too severe for good breeding , or the laws of hospitality .
We contented ourselves , therefore , with taking him in the groupe , and giving a turn to their prolific ein of conversation , by entering into country politics , in which none of us were in the least concerned , or abusing the ministry - because they had never provided for any of us , with such other squirely topics  in which the rest of the company ingaged with modern patriot warmth *  to moderate the ardour of which , we frequently interluded with quibbling upon words , or retailing Joe Miller 's Jests .
Chusing rather , to be silly , or stupid , than loose , or profane - And in this turn too , they equally  joined us , with native humour , and most mortifying applause .


The stocking thrown , we retired .


73 .
CHAP .
LXXVI .


WHEN Mr. Beville and I were lest alone , we commented upon the incidents of the day  and agreed together , that none of the men wanted understanding , within their own sphere , but yet , from an ignorance of the rules of good breeding and decorum , had rendered themselves either ridiculous , or absurd , during the course of the whole entertainment .


We then pursued this subject up to a general reflection , and Mr. Beville very justly observed , that some of the characters which had distinguished the antients , seemed to be quite lost among us , at present .
We have neither a Socrates , nor an Alcibiades now , said he .
The good are formal , the wise severe , and the learned pedantic : while the young shew little spirit , but against religion , the gay are profligate , and the unlettered unmannered also .


Abroad , continued he , we hear that appearances at least , are still preserved  and as charity  is said to cover a multitude of sins , so politeness has the address to conceal a number of faults  and 't is some merit , certainly , to be able to palliate a defect in morals , with the decent substitute of manners .


From this reflection we carried our observations up to the British constitution , both of church and state  by taking notice that the freedom which we are too apt to indulge ourselves in , of framing the councils both of our God , and king , gives a certain bravery perhaps , to our speech and actions , which may possibly render us greater heroes in a state of war , but are quite incompatible with a state of peace .
Our ebullient spirits become impatient of inactivity , and where a foreign enemy does not unite our prowess , we are too prone to create a sort of civil discord among ourselves , and set one half of the nation at strife against the other  either by the sword , or by the pen .


By this means , the ingenuous arts of life become neglected , the generous emulation of genius subsides , all civil commerce is interrupted among us , that traffic chiefly encouraged , which tends merely toward luxury and profuseness , and merit is allowed no other test , but that of party , only .
Thus do we grow invalids from too much health , and even our wealth but furnishes  us with means of impoverishing ourselves again .


We then parted , and retired to rest .
The next morning , we escorted the bride home to her new empire  the father , mother , paranymphs , first , and second coz , with the parson , forming our cavalcade  who all returned back again , the next day .


74 .
CHAP .
LXXVII .


WHEN we had passed a week together , Mr. Beville and I attempted to take our leave , but were pressed by our friend , to pass , at least , the honey-moon , with him , as he stiled it  in which invitation , the fair Ethelinda joined him , with such an air of hospitality , and politeness , that we readily consented to their request .


She was tall , finely proportioned , fair , and of most captivating beauty  she had a grace and decency in her air , motion , and gesture , with so remarkable a mildness and modesty in her countenance , that one might imagine nature had infused no more blood into her body , than what was just sufficient to blush in her cheeks .
 In fine , there was something in her look and manner , altogether , which won one 's friendship , at first sight  and I may pronounce that whoever saw her even once , with a heart not preingaged , could scarcely have it to offer , but at second hand , to another .


I attended to her sentiments and conduct , during the time I remained in the house , and observed that she was possessed of a disposition singularly compassionate , and humane .
Her charity was extensive  but I have known it sometimes restrained , by the fear of having it taken notice of .
Her moral was curbed by her modesty alone .


My friend and condisciple was a most unfit character to be yoked with hers .
He was very inconsistent , had a princely grandeur in some things , and a pedling meanness in others .
His mind might be compared to an old mansion-house , with a few large rooms , but crowded with closets .


His temper too , was incertain  for caprice , good-humour , and passion , used to shift so quick upon you , that there was no prescribing to oneself any certain measure of conduct toward him .
His chearfulness resembled the air pent up between two hills , which in the calmest day is subject to be disturbed by squalls .


 He had no steady principle of action , neither .
He would strike his dependents this hour , and make them presents , the next .
He often gave charity , but repented of it as often , so that he impoverished his purse , without enriching his soul .


He was indefatigable at all country diversions , without understanding any of them  and might literally be said to be a slave to his sports , for he was master of none .
So that I have sometimes known him to lounge away whole evenings on the couch , like a tired post-boy , lamenting the fatigue , without resenting the pleasure .
He used to drink hard , though it always made him sick  and seemed generally to prefer inferior company , which appeared too visibly in his manners .
He who ever affects to be the highest of his company , will probably become , in time , to be the lowest of it .


He had been but little conversant in polite life  for want of which he had contracted an uncouthness in his manner , and a freedom in his speech and behaviour , that must be extremely disgusting to a woman of delicacy , or breeding .
Joined to all which , he had fallen under the common prejudices of weak , or vulgar minds  namely , a gross suspicion of female chastity , and an ignorant contempt of all women 's understandings .
 The fair and polite Ethelinda , soon saw , felt , and mourned her disappointment .


75 .
CHAP .
LXXVIII .


SHE had no visitors while we staid in the house , for it was in the months of November and December , the nights dark , and the roads impassable  so that all the compliments she received upon her coming into the country , were only cards of congratulation on her marriage , and postponing visits till the spring .


Her husband used to spend his mornings in hunting or shooting , and his evenings in carousals , or sleeping on the couch .
So that her whole time was left intirely at her own disposal  which she used to divide between working , reading , painting , and music  during which occupations , Mr. Beville and I would relieve , or assist her , by turns .


We used to read to her while she was employed at her pencil , or her needle , and accompany her at the harpsichord , which concert she much improved by the addition of a fine voice .
We used at first , to call upon our friend , to take his part , as I remembered he had formerly  been a good performer on the violin  but he had only one in the house , which he resigned to Mr. Beville , and shewed so little relish to an entertainment of that elegant nature , that he would not even send into the neighbourhood to borrow one .


In these amusements though , he would sometimes interrupt us .
He would stride across the carpets , with dirty boots , give his wife a rustic smack , then a stroke of his whip over her petticoats , and cry , ` these jessamin philosophers , girl , will turn your head .
Knitting and pastry are fitter occupations for a housewife .
Knowledge was the first thing that destroyed your sex , my dear , and the devil has never so sure an hold of a woman , as when he makes her learned . '
With other such common-place sarcasms as these .


The greatest difficulty that Mr. Beville and I had at first , to struggle with here , was to get ourselves excused from drinking  but as our host had remembered that we had both of us always declined the least excess of this kind , he would after this glass , or that bottle , or clear the deck , or just take what is in the room , with such other dalliances of debauchery , suffer us to make our escape  which I take to be the justest expression , in all the peculiar phraseology of drinking .


76 .
CHAP .
LXXIX .


 AFTER this manner did we pass the honey-moon together  till toward the latter end of it , Mr. Beville began to grow silent , thoughtful , and disturbed  neglected his favourite studies , and used to take long and solitary walks in the wood .
I quickly perceived the change , and spoke to him upon it .
He replied , that he had lost his spirits , rest , and appetite , of late , and apprehended that some disease was undermining his constitution , by slow degrees .


His danger , together with a languid and dejected look which he cast upon me , at the same time , resembling the last view I had had of his dear sister , produced such a sudden effect in me , that I could not recover myself again , for the remainder of the evening .
I retired soon to my apartment , and passed the night in fruitless tears , and vainer wishes .


The next day my dear friend found himself unable to leave his room .
I sent immediately for a physician , but he was with difficulty prevailed on to see him .
He prescribed some medicines , which he refused to take with an obstinacy which I had never before observed the least  symptom of in him .
In two days he was confined to his bed , in a raging fever .


I got a pallet into his room , and attended him solely , myself , not suffering even a servant to enter his chamber , on pretence of the danger of communicating his distemper to the family  but more on account of some symptoms in his disorder , which greatly alarmed me with regard to the cause of it .


He raved much , and in his deliriums would frequently repeat the name of Ethelinda .
Sometimes he would cry out in an extasy , O she is all angel !
nothing but air , voice , and colour !
we can but see , hear , and breathe her !
An Anadyomene * !
an Anadyomene !
O !
had Ulysses seen but such a sea-nymph , or Scipio taken such another captive !
At other times , Well !
I am a a king now , but where is my queen ?
What is a world without her !
with many other extravagancies of the same kind .


The physician attended regularly , but I always took care to keep him waiting in the ante-chamber till I found my dear unhappy friend was  composed to rest , that he might have an opportunity of feeling his pulse , and prescribing for him , according to the changes in his disorder , without the hazard of suffering a secret to escape which had already given me such complicated uneasiness , and might farther be attended too with such unhappy consequences .


In a few days he began to recover his reason , and in ten more was pronounced out of danger , though his spirits still continued extremely low .
I constantly kept up the appearance of chearfulness in his company , and whenever I found my art begin to fail me , I used to select books of the highest wit and humour I could meet with in the fair Ethelinda 's study , to entertain him .
Serious or religious writings would have been improper for him , at that time .


I took not the least notice of his raving hints to him , nor did he remember any thing of the matter , himself , or let me any farther into the secret , except by such involuntary intimations as sighing at the sound of her name in a message to inquire his health  or by a visible emotion upon hearing her voice as she walked under his window  with such other unequivocal signs of love , more certain than the most explicit declarations of passion .


77 .
CHAP .
LXXX .


 AS his fever was not inflammatory , I did not confine myself so closely to his room after his delirium had ceased , but used to go down to meals , and during the intervals of his rest .
I found the tender and humane Ethelinda extremely concerned at Mr. Beville 's indisposition , and very assiduous about his cure .
She measured the proportions , and compounded the medicines herself , and appointed her servants to relieve each other , by turns , in sitting up every night in the ante-chamber .


She also intreated the favour of her husband not to bring home any of his jolly blades , during Mr. Beville 's illness , as his chamber happened to lie directly over the dining parlour .
He complied indeed with her request , by staying generally abroad with one or other of them .


The first two or three days after I had used to come down out of the sick room , the weather happening to be unfit for sports , the condisciple and I passed most of our time in her dressing-room , which he employed chiefly , in discountenancing her from reading , holding lectures upon huswifry , and passive obedience , or in  speaking or romping with her after too free and course a manner , before her maids , or me .


I quickly perceived how much she was disgusted at such sentiments and behaviour , and using the privileges of long and early friendship , I reprehended him for it , sometimes in private , and sometimes before her , as the occasion happened to urge , or that I found her to be affected .


This piece of good breeding rendered her at length , so much at her ease before me , that she used to speak to me with the same freedom as she might to a brother  which , joined to the open and ingenuous frankness of her nature , without the least reserve in her manners , but what modesty , or politeness had inspired , led her to address me thus , one evening , just after my friend , having thrown her into confusion by speaking to her somewhat too indecently before me , had quitted the room and was rating at a footman in the hall .


Pray , Sir , said she , what is the reason that there should be so remarkable a difference in the manners of men ?
While I am in Mr. Beville 's company , or yours , I am sensible of both the pleasure , and the pride of considering myself as a rational and independent creature , a person of some rank , or character , in life  but in the  presence of my father , or my husband , I feel the humiliation of finding myself dwindling by turns , into an house-keeper , or a puppet-doll .


I have , continued she , had but little opportunity of becoming conversant with polite life .
I have , indeed , sometimes read the characters of it in books  but in comparing them with those of my father , cousins , the chaplain , and our neighbouring squires , though all of them very good sort of men , in the main , I have hitherto been apt to impute the descriptions I had met with , intirely to the wanton imagination of romance , and used to rank such chimeras in the class of genii 's and centaur 's .
But some observations which I have lately had an occasion of making , added she , and bowing toward me , have convinced me that good breeding is not purely ideal , and that men may be possessed of sense , manners , and virtue , without being above the stature of others , or having the power of rendering themselves invisible .


I bowed , in return , thanked her for her too polite compliment , and replied , that the disadvantages of not being born to rank or fortune , were sometimes compensated by advantages in other things  for that the observations and decorums which were necessary to conduct such persons upon equal terms through life , were  things which their superiors in these articles , too frequently looked upon themselves dispensed with from paying a sufficient attention to .


I instanced this matter in courts , where it has been observed , that the most polished manners were generally met with among the second or third classes , rather than in the first .
I quoted also from history , that the most shining characters had often risen from privacy to the purple  and then concluded this climax of heroes with his present majesty of Prussia , who though born a prince , was bred a private man , till his accession to the throne .


However , added I , this observation is not universal , as in the instances of the chaplain , and your cousins , for it is not every one who is born with elasticity enough to spring under a weight  but they , on whom this gifted energy may have been bestowed , should only with humble gratitude enjoy the blessing , and not with arrogance assume a merit from a grace .
Your argument is just , and fine , replied she , but though your modesty may reduce the merit , it can never abate the excellence , of such a character .


78 .
CHAP .
LXXXI .


 ONE evening after Ethelinda and I had dined alone , and that Mr. Beville had sat up for two or three days , she proposed to me that we should drink tea together in his apartment .
This alarmed me .
I did not think that his state , either of health or mind , was sufficiently valid at that time , to stand such an interview .


Besides , the kindness and condescension of it too , might possibly , I feared every thing , have too much flattered his hopes .
I knew his honour , and his moral perfect , and had conceived as high an opinion of her innocence and virtue .
But then again , he had passion , and she sensibility .


Upon these considerations I declined the proposal , saying that Mr. Beville would be extremely distressed at receiving a visit from a lady whom he had so much respect for , in his present deshabille .
Never mind a punctilio of that kind , she replied , I have visited the sick often before  my father 's gout has made nurse-tending familiar to me , and if I am willing to dispense with forms ,  said she , surely neither of you can possibly have any reason to be difficult about them .


I then thought it proper to assume an higher key , and told her that my apprehension was by no means , that Mr. Beville would not be pleased with the honour of her visit , but that I feared he might perhaps be too well pleased with it .
Which last words I pronounced with a look and emphasis , that sufficiently marked their import .


The lovely Ethelinda blushed , and cast down her modest eyes , at this expression .
I found myself too far advanced to retreat , I therefore hurried on as fast as I could , to rid myself of a subject which I so little cared to dwell upon .
I gave her then an account of every particular , since my having first observed the change in Mr. Beville , just in the same manner I have now recited them to you .


She was silent for some minutes , and then replied with a sigh , I confess , Sir , that I am both concerned and surprised at this misfortune of your friend  but as Mr. Beville has shewn so much good breeding and respect toward me , as never to have given me the most distant hint of his improper passion , it would be injustice in me to express any manner of resentment upon an accidental discovery of so unhappy an event .


 But your own good sense and prudence , Sir , continued she , lifting up her head , must certainly think it extremely proper to remove your friend , as far as may be , from this unlucky scene , whenever the safety of his health may permit .
I wish him every success and happiness that his merit deserves , or his virtue can desire  I approve his manners , and esteem his character - My circumstances in life forbid me to say , or even to think more  but even thus far , Sir , said she , with a severer air , you must not be at liberty to pronounce  for what has escaped me , in justice to your friend , might not perhaps , in honour to myself , be proper to repeat .


I bowed respectfully , and having passed my word that I would never suffer the least hint of this conversation to transpire to Mr. Beville , I went up to his chamber and found him moving about the room by the assistance of the tables and chairs , trying his strength , as he told me , with a design of beginning his journey on the next day , if possible .


I was pleased at this motion arising from himself , but told him that I was afraid his health would not permit him to set out so soon .
To which he replied , that he was pretty certain he should be able to perform the first day 's journey ,  in our friend 's coach , and that if he should not have strength enough to continue his route on horseback , he would much rather linger at an inn , than where he was , for that he began to feel himself extremely uneasy at the trouble and difficulties his disorder had subjected the family to .
Adding , that he had stronger reasons still , for removing himself , even at the hazard of his life , from that too fatal scene of his present misery .


These words he pronounced with an heavy sigh , and faltering accent , which however , I did not seem to take the least notice of , but replied , that I would speak for the coach as soon as our friend should return home that evening .
Then shifting the discourse to general topics , I remained with him till he retired to rest , and then went immediately down stairs .


79 .
CHAP .
LXXXII .


WHEN I came into the parlour I found our friend just returned home .
He was much fuddled , told us that he had spent a jovial day among a parcel of [ ... ] , of the first head , but  was somewhat afraid that the wine had not been quite sound , for it began to make him sick already , and that he would , with my leave , retire immediately to bed .


I advised him to take an emetic first , which he promised to do , and went away , desiring his wife to stay and entertain me at supper , which just then came upon the table .
But she excused herself , saying that duty should ever take the lead of civility .
Then desiring me to drink the healths of all my sick friends , walked up stairs to her chamber , along with him .


I had no manner of inclination to sit down alone , and would have declined it , but from a nicety about giving offence to the hospitality of my hosts .
I therefore went through the supper with an appearance of appetite , and then filling up a bumper , drank , with a truly sincere heart , the double toast which our fair landlady had recommended to me , joining her health and happiness along with it .


Thus left alone , I began to reflect , as usual , upon the unhappy circumstances of poor Beville 's fortunes , and my own .
I revolved many schemes in my mind , but what signifies reasoning , without premisses ?
At length I resolved upon this measure , that we should both join our little fund and application together , toward  assisting Mr. Beville , the father , in vindicating his rights against his deputy , and then live with him till my father should have extricated his fortune out of the courts  and afterwards , enter jointly into some project of life , together , upon the fund of two thousand pounds , which I had paid for my sister 's portion , and which was confessedly my due .


While I was revolving these thoughts in my mind , the post arrived , and the packet of letters was laid upon the table , among which I saw one directed to myself .
I opened it , and found it to be from our worthy friend , the clergyman , before-mentioned  the contents of which were these , continued Mr. Andrews , taking a letter out of his desk , and presenting it to Mr. Carewe to peruse .


80 .
CHAP .
LXXXIII .
The Letter .


 London .


Dear Sir ,


I Staid a few days here , after my good friends , Mr. Beville and you , had left it .
The minister of St. Martin 's , in whose parish I found out that your father lived , was my old acquaintance , and cotemporary , at Oxford .
I paid him a visit , renewed my intimacy with him , entered into the subject of your situation and circumstances , and got him , very readily indeed , to concur with me in jointly employing our good offices and address , toward bringing your father into a proper sense , both of your merit , and his own duty .


My friend invited me to dinner , the next day , and introduced me to your father , without dropping the least hint of my profession , having before directed me to lay aside my clerical habit , upon that occasion  telling me , that Mr. Andrews , though a most rigid churchman , had , from some personal disgust , conceived a strong prejudice against the private character of a clergyman  and that one moral sent [ ... ] , spoken  by a lay-man , would have more weight with him , than fifty , pronounced by an hireling , as he is apt to stile a parson .


We spent the day very chearfully together , and I played off his own character , so successfully against himself , by helping him to roast the parson , who pretended sometimes to be serious upon it , in order to heighten the sport , that I won his affections so far as to be invited to dine with him the following day , which I most readily accepted of .


The next day , after dinner , I asked your father what had possessed him with such a resentment against the clergy , considered personally , while he appeared , at the same time , to have a very orthodox belief of their appointment , and a just sense of the high importance of their office ?


He replied , that his father and brother had been both clergymen  the first disinherited him , in favour of a second wife 's children , and the latter had left him involved for five hundred pounds , which had given him a mortal aversion to the cassock .
This story I had been apprised of before , by my friend , and only led him into it , in order to supply an occasion of exclaiming loudly , against the injustice of his father , toward him , which I did .


 Yes , Sir , said he , and if you 'll consider at the same time , that I was not , on my part , guilty of any one act of disobedience , to provoke him to such a diabolical partiality .
No , Sir , I replied , that is a circumstance , which I can by no means admit into consideration , in such a case as this  for no conduct of a child , which does not contradict the laws of God , or man , can possibly be pretended , as a palliation , for so unparental a severity .


I pressed this subject no farther , at that time , because I did not chuse to let him perceive my design , too abruptly  so I shifted the subject to indifferent matters , and soon after took my leave  having first ingaged him to spend a few days with me , in the country , telling him that the parson there , would escort him .
I fixed the time afterwards , with my friend , and left London the next morning .


They both of them came down to me , according to agreement , and we passed our time pleasantly enough , as I exerted myself to the utmost stretch of hospitality , toward my new guest .
I still concealed my parsonship , during the remainder of the week , for though we had prayers , as usual , morn and eve , I appointed my friend of St. Martin 's , to the office of chaplain , during that time .


 I had your lovely children , my dear Andrews , in the house with me , all the while , and frequently called them into the parlour to fondle with before him , letting them pass for relations of my own .
He was struck with their beauty , and used to take them often on his knee , by turns .
I have sometimes felt myself a little aukward , on account of my disingenuousness toward him  but then I quickly solved it again , by thinking that if ever a pious fraud was allowable , it must be in so virtuous a cause as this .


At length , Sunday morning arrived .
I sent off my guests to church before me , and when I had put on my proper garb , I followed them , walking through the isle , directly into the desk , where my friend the clergyman had taken his place before me , after having seated Mr. Andrews in a pew opposite to the pulpit .
St. Martin 's read prayers , and I preached that day , upon a text selected for the occasion , namely , the fifth commandment .


In this discourse , I carried the duty of children up to the highest degree , by shewing first , the general sense of mankind , upon this article , from the earliest account of nations , and among even the most savage race of men  and then wound up my doctrine , by confirming this great  natural , and moral obligation , with the express command of God .


I then proceeded to consider , on the other hand , the great and alarming duty of parents toward their children  which point I carried even higher than the former .
For after having first inculcated it from nature , morals , and universal concurrence , I pleaded even the silence of the decalogue , in this article , as an argument to confirm it .


We have , said I , a command , not to kill  but none against suicide .
We have also a precept to love our neighbour  but none to love our child .
And this , because it was thought superfluous to frame injunctions , for , or against things , whereof the passion , or aversion , had been so strongly rooted already , both in our reason , and our nature .


Upon the whole , I concluded , that an unkind parent must be considered as a reprobate both to reason , to nature , and to grace  and I preached the sermon , with that natural , and most persuasive kind of eloquence , exceeding all the arts of oratory , with which a person is indued upon a subject where his mind is convinced , and his heart affected .


During the duties of this morning , I did not attend to any particular , which did not relate  immediately to the offices of the day  therefore , I could not perceive what manner of effect , either my unexpected appearance , under a new and solemn character , or the arguments of my doctrine , might have produced , upon my most immediate object , next to God  but , on my descending into the isle , and saluting Mr. Andrews in the midst of the congregation , he seemed to be in a sort of confusion , and received my address with a certain distant respect , and awed obeisance , which gratified me extremely - not from cleric pride , but christian charity .


As we walked home together from church , he asked me why I had concealed my profession from him , all this while ?
To which I answered , that in general , I neither took pains to reveal , or conceal it , but would however , rather chuse to suffer that particular , always to remain a secret , among strangers .
Because , said I , should they happen to be good , and formal , epithets too frequently joined , the awe of it might , possibly , throw some restraint upon the freedom of conversation  and if profligate , and ill-bred , which are terms as often coupled , it might tempt such characters to become rather too free .
We should be Christians , every where , said I , turning toward our friend of St. Martin 's , but parsons , only in our pulpits .


 During the remainder of the day , I behaved toward your father , with the same ease and freedom as usual , but perceived that he , on his part , seemed to hold a greater reserve over his speech and manners , than before .
I took notice of this particular to him , and he ingenuously confessed to me , that he could not readily got the better of the surprise which had seized him , upon seeing me walk through the isle in the sacred habit , and take my place at the desk , before he had been in the least apprised of my profession  and that the suddenness of the transition , from my supposed , to my real character , had struck him somewhat like a divine vision , and impressed his mind with a certain religious awe , which he could not , for that day at least , nor desired , during his life , ever to get the better of .


In the evening , I brought your dear infants into the parlour , in my arms , and placing them on their little knees before him , said , Since this has been a day for discovering of secrets , Sir , I shall now acquaint you with one , which is of infinitely greater moment to you , than that which you were let into this morning - Here , Sir , are your grandchildren - whose mother your cruelty has already sent weeping to the grave , has reduced their father to a wandering exile , and driven these lovely innocents , these peculiar  favourites of our redeemer , crying to a stranger 's gates for bread .


The strength of my expression , with the sternness of my look , and the voice of authority , which I thought proper to assume upon so justifiable an occasion , threw Mr. Andrews into the utmost confusion  and I could perceive a certain mixture of shame , horror , and self-condemnation , in his countenance , at the same time .


I turned carelesly aside , to leave him at liberty to collect himself , and indeed in order to hide my own disturbance , also .
Upon which , he hastily laid his hands on the children 's heads , crying , in an hurry , God bless you , God bless you both .
Then saying he was not very well , he suddenly quitted the room , and retired to his chamber .
I then snatched up the children in my arms , kissed them , and wept  while the sportive innocents sat smiling at each other , and clubbing their little mischief together , to throw off my wig upon the floor .


Mr. Andrews came in to supper , and after the cloth had been removed , he addressed himself to me thus : You accosted me this evening , Sir , said he , with such a suddenness , and severity , that I must confess myself to have been totally deprived of all power of vindicating my character , from so heavy a charge .


 I am truly sorry for the fatal consequences you have mentioned to me  but then , Sir , I hope you will admit , that these have arisen solely from my son 's own undutifulness , and can not , therefore , be in the least imputed to my cruelty , as you were pleased , just now , to stile it .
He married , without my consent , and without a portion  and as my fortune is in my own power , I have but exercised my right , in making a will , which , in proper time , may shew the gentleman my just resentment , against so high an act of disobedience .


Sir , said I , whatever the tenour of our lives may be , we ought to be more particularly careful of the last , than about any other act of it .
A will , Sir , though perfected at any time of our lives , as it is not to take effect , till after our death , ought certainly to be considered in this most interesting light  and we should therefore , never attempt to sit down to so tremendous a work , but in such a temper of charity and forgiveness , as we would perform any other action in our latest moments * .


 Sir , said he , all this may be very ingenious reasoning , for any thing I know , but as the laws of the land have invested me with an absolute dominion over my fortune , I think that no person whatsoever , can possibly urge a claim of right , against me  a petition of favour , is the utmost they can pretend to , and my eldest son , by disobedience , has forfeited even this pretence .


Dear Sir , I replied , we are not here litigating this point , according to law , but merely debating it agreeably to justice .
Your absolute dominion I dispute not , but Heaven is not a court of law , but of equity  before which dread tribunal , a suppliant is required to do justice first , himself , before he can be intitled to receive it .
And , believe me , Sir , continued I , with a stedfast look , that whoever has not virtue sufficient to distinguish between a right , and a power , is a casuist for the devil .


These last expressions seemed to startle him  he immediately appeared to retire into his own thoughts , and a dead silence ensued on all sides , for some minutes  till the bell rang for family prayers , which I administered myself  and had the sincere pleasure to observe that Mr. Andrews joined in them with a more emphatical devotion , than usual .


 Our supper passed away in general subjects , but a good deal constrained  and the next morning , Mr. Andrews took his leave , and returned back to London .
I desired my friend to found him , on the road , and try what effect my lectures and experiments , might have produced upon him .


He did so , and wrote to me , the next post , acquainting me that Mr. Andrews seemed to have been a good deal awed , was more thoughtful than usual , had several times repeated to himself , the words right , and power  and had treated him , all along , though a parson , with somewhat more of decorum , than he was wont to do .
But that with regard to the point in question , his only answer , when pressed to it , was , that resentments which had been gradually growing warm , must be allowed time to become cool , by the same degrees , again .


Thus far , my dear Andrews , had I written to you , a month ago , but delayed sending the letter , upon my friend 's last hint , in order to wait the final result , either to be able to afford you a successful account of my interposition , altogether , or not to interrupt your resignation and philosophy , with fruitless hopes .


Last Monday I came up to London , in order to feel my patient 's pulse again , and accordingly  waited upon your father , the next day .
I found him in an high fever , but perfectly in his senses , and much pleased to see me .
He told me my reasonings had wrought a most salutary effect , upon his too hasty notions of right , and wrong  and that if I would but take the trouble of drawing up a few lines , according to my own sentiments of justice , he would most chearfully subscribe to them .
This was immediately performed - I prayed by him , and took my leave - The next day , and the following , his fever increased  and last night , -


I have left every thing in charge with my good friend of St. Martin 's , and am just returning to the country again , to embrace my dear little adoptions .
I was young , and now am old , yet never did I see the righteous forsaken , nor their seed begging bread .


Adieu .


81 .
CHAP .
LXXXIV .


 THIS Letter , continued Mr. Andrews , affected me extremely , in various ways  I was charmed with the active virtue of my friend , I rejoiced at the proper , though late moral of my father , and do declare that the first and principal pleasure I received from this fortunate event , was in the reflection of his having been brought , at length , to a just and equitable sense , of his parental obligations .
I resented the grant , more than the gift , and was sensible of a certain pious transport , in thinking that this last act of my father 's , had retrieved his character , and sealed his merits .


But , oh !
my friend , what a torrent of tears rushed from my eyes , at the thought of my dear wife 's death , just then occurring to my mind at the instant of these reflections !
How did I lament her missing of that virtuous transport , which would have affected her fond heart and generous soul , at seeing her husband and her children thus securely placed beyond the scorn of fools , and spurn of fortune !
In fine , I was struck with such a complicated emotion , of filial gratitude , conjugal grief , and parental joy , that  it was late before I could compose myself to prayer , or rest .


The next morning I lay so long , that Mr. Beville , impatient to fly that fatal scene , had come into my room , and asked me whether I had prepared every thing ready for our journey .
I told him that our host had returned home , the night before , so much out of order , that I did not think proper to mention our going , just at that time  but as I had received a letter from our friend the clergyman , last night 's post , with an account of my father 's illness , I thought it might afford a fair pretext for quitting the house , so abruptly , and that I would immediately rise , and send in a message to borrow the post-chaise .


Poor Mr. Beville was still so weak , that even his short walk across the gallery to my chamber , had fatigued him so much , that he was forced to lay himself on the bed , by me .
I did not think it prudent , in such a state of health , to acquaint him with the full contents of the letter  as the pleasure it would have afforded him , might possibly have had too sudden an effect upon his present low condition of strength and spirits .


I arose immediately , and as soon as I heard my condisciple 's bell ring , I sent Mr. Beville 's compliments and mine to inquire how he was ,  acquainting him with the summons we had received , and desiring the favour of his equipage to convey my friend the first day 's journey , at least , as his health was not sufficiently established to venture on horseback , so immediately upon quitting his chamber .


He returned his compliments , said he had discharged his stomach by an emetic , the last night , found himself pretty easy that morning , but was just going to take a medicine which would prevent him the pleasure of seeing us .
He ordered the post-chaise , wished us a good journey , and added , that he would be glad to see us both again , as soon as our affairs might permit .


The fair Ethelinda too , sent us her compliments , and desired that we should take the chaise on to London with us , if we found it either necessary , or convenient  but , from a very becoming nicety , which confirmed my opinion and esteem for her , neither joined in her husband 's invitation , nor came down to breakfast , on pretence that her attendance on him , required her staying above .


Mr. Beville and I breakfasted together , and immediately after , set out upon our journey .


82 .
CHAP .
LXXXV .


 DUring the first day 's stage , I avoided all particular conversation with my friend , speaking chiefly upon general topics  pointing out to him the several beauties of the country through which we passed , which were so strong as to manifest themselves , even through December snows .


It was now near Christmas - I made reflections upon that hallowed season , and took notice of the remarkable goodness , wisdom , and oeconomy of Providence , in appointing that great festival to fall upon a time of the year , when the husbandman 's labours are suspended , and that nature had already ordained a vacation , to rejoice in !
At the most gloomy period of the year , to send us the most glad tidings , that ever yet have reached the sons of man !


I do not recollect , Mr. Carewe , said Andrews , that these remarks have been ever made before , by any of our divines .
They occurred to my mind , upon this occasion , for the first time  they warmed my heart , amidst December frosts , and I endeavoured to communicate the same fervour from them , to my friend  in order to dispel his melancholy , and elevate his thoughts  to a sublimer passion , to a love equally void of satiety , or despair  and which , contrary to all other objects of desire , we are nearer the fruition of , in age , than youth .


He joined in my reflections , with that religious and philosophic turn of mind , which was natural , and habitual to him , and which gave me strong reason to believe that if I could detain him in some distant scene , where he might never see , or even hear the name of the too lovely Ethelinda more , his heart would soon recover its former spring again .
For without hope , passion subsists not long  and I knew that his virtue forbad him even to frame a wish , which might serve to keep it alive .


When we had been settled for the evening , at our inn , he asked me what scheme of life I had planned out for us both  for you were more at leisure than I , said he , with a sigh , for such contemplations , during our late visit in the country .


I told him of the purpose which I had framed just before I received the letter , and added , that I had some encouragement from my friend , to hope that all matters would be accommodated between my father and me , as soon as we should arrive in London .
How should I rejoice at such an event , replied he , but much I fear that misfortune  has marked us for her victims !
Such extraordinary incidents !
such uncommon adventures !


We made a slight repast , went early to bed , and pursued our journey the next morning , in the chair .
He seemed to be much recruited in health , but still too weak to venture to ride , or even drive post  so we travelled together at his leisure , through the whole journey .


This second day I found him continue thoughtful , and melancholic , and imagined from the hint he had given me , when he pressed to quit the country , with some others which he had let drop , the night before , that he would be pleased to be questioned upon this subject , though his delicacy seemed backward to propose it , in a more direct way , himself .


I considered also , that it is a great relief to a mind oppressed , to be at liberty to communicate its uneasiness to a friend  and being myself also , sollicitous to know how high his passion might have arisen , or what kind of sentiments he had himself about it , I resolved to enter upon the subject with him , at our next stage  and accordingly , after dinner , accosted him thus :


83 .
CHAP .
LXXXVI .


 MY dear friend and brother , the disorder which you have been lately affected with , has given me most extreme apprehension , and concern  which is , however , rather increased , than abated , by your recovery  if we may stile it one , while it leaves you still subject to the depressed and melancholic state , which your mind and spirits seem , ever since , to have laboured under .


And yet , even this , is by no means , my principal concern about you  for the most obstinate distempers are still within the dominion of physic : But , I am much afraid , from some expressions which have escaped you in your ravings , with others that you have thrown out , since the recovery of your reason , that your principal malady may be of that nature which Ovid says , ` Non est medicabilis herbis . '


He blushed , and appeared in confusion  but quickly asked me , with great emotion , after what manner he had exposed the secret , or betrayed his passion , during his delirium ?
I soon made him easy , with regard to this particular ,  by assuring him that no ears , but his own and mine , happened to have been within the reach of his voice , on his first extravagance , and then acquainting him of the precaution I had used , during the remainder of his distraction .


O !
then , cried he out , in a transport , my alarmed mind is again restored to peace , and this secret shall be now entombed with me  for I may truly say , that it hath not yet escaped me , since you alone , my second self , are the only master of it .
Yes , my dear Andrews , I confess the passion , but deny the guilt .
It was not my choice , it is not my acquiescence - It was my fatality , and is my misfortune .


My dear Beville , I replied , the slightest suspicion , either of your honour , or your virtue , has never yet rested on my mind .
But , in this unhappy affair , you must give me leave to be somewhat diffident , of your prudence , or discretion , at least .
For love , whatever the poets may have written of that passion , is a fair , and open enemy , and always affords us sufficient warning , for a retreat .
It is by dalliance alone , that we are conquered  and after we have delivered ourselves over , willing victims , to the soft persuasion , we would defend our own weakness , by pleading of its strength .
The bravest , who stand  their ground , may be o'erpowered , but the fugitive was never yet o'ertaken .


I intreat my dear friend , replied he , that you will be so charitable as to suspend your judgment , till you have heard my defence  and though I trust that I shall be found an object of compassion , rather than of censure , yet I must confess , that the fond nicety , which I have ever had , about preserving your favourable opinion toward me , oppresses me , notwithstanding , at present , with a kind of generous diffidence , on my defeat , though conquered by surprise - even as a general , before his mistress , for having lost a day , though the odds a million .


84 .
CHAP .
LXXXVII .


WHEN first I beheld the fair Ethelinda , continued Mr. Beville , I was struck with admiration at her transcendent charms  her form , her grace , her air , her features .
The contemplation of beauty , in whatever subject , is natural to the mind of man  and not defended by the most severe philosophy .
I indulged myself , therefore , in this sublime delight , while I  found the chaste pleasure not yet descending from , the refinements of taste .


When I became acquainted with her mind , was conversant with her understanding  had considered her virtues , and observed upon her manners  I found myself affected toward her , with a warmer sentiment indeed , but still of the same platonic kind .
For the beauty of morals and of nature , are reciprocally analogous  and we may become susceptible of a sensation for either , quite distinct from passion .


Again , when I began to observe upon the uncouth manners , and indelicate behaviour of her husband toward her , seeming totally devoid of the least taste or sentiment , for her mind or beauty , was it not virtue to lament her fate !
This was humanity - not desire .
I grudged him an happiness , which he seemed unworthy to enjoy .
But this was envy , and not jealousy .


Thus were my admiration of her beauty , my esteem of her merits , and compassion for her misfortune , restrained within the precincts of innocence , and virtue - As disinterested , and pure , as is a brother 's love .
Under such chaste , and delicate sentiments as these , had I passed the first three weeks of our acquaintance , without receiving the least hint from my passions ,  which might have alarmed my virtue , or have warned my prudence .


I endeavoured often , though obliquely , to reform his manners , but without preferring my own  and have , upon some occasions , even restrained my own politeness toward her , where I imagined that the contrast might have been too strongly marked .
My sole desire was to have reclaimed his conduct , and my warmest wish breathed for their mutual happiness .


A father might have felt such sentiments - an angel might have loved her so - But ,


85 .
CHAP .
LXXXVIII .


ONE morning , I happened to take a long and solitary walk through the woods , ruminating upon our past misfortunes , my dear Andrews , said he , and forming visionary schemes for future life  when returning dispirited and fatigued , I strolled into the green parlour , and there threw myself upon the couch  where , perceiving my wearied senses disposed to rest , I loosened the cords of the suspended curtain , and  letting it fall carelessly about me , folded my arms , and resigned myself to slumber .


After some time , I was awakened by persons coming hastily into the room , and from under part of the veil , where the cord had happened not to have run to its full length , I perceived the lovely Ethelinda issuing from the warm bath , which lay within this apartment , attended by her maid , who laying down a parcel of cloaths upon the carpet before the fire , retired immediately out of the room , locking the door , and carrying off the key .


I felt myself in the utmost confusion , upon this adventure  but had no retreat  and before I could possibly have resolved upon what measure of decency to observe , the charming fair let fall her loosened wrapper to the ground , and at once revealed her naked beauties to my ravished view .
O , my dear friend !
she was ipsa forma * , indeed !
Were the Anadyomene † of Apelles but half so bewitching , how happy for the world it was so early lost .


She dressed herself in haste , and every attitude exposed some new , some hidden charm to my racked sense - '  In me tota ruens Venus . '
I gazed - I doated - A sudden fever rushed through all my frame - My senses were intranced - Reason in vain opposed the fond delirium - I could as well command a dream - Religion was suspended - Chastity swooned away - I quick lost all reflection  and Pigmalion 's statue , new informed with life , was equal mistress of its passions .


When she was dressed , she rung the bell for her maid , and retired out of the room , without having perceived me .
I immediately arose , and stole out to the woods again .
How did I feel !
My mind was disturbed , my frame disordered .
I walked through the groves like a frantic person  now with a quick , now with a slow pace .
The bell tolled - I returned to the house - The dinner was served - I entered the room with confusion - I avoided even your eyes - I dared not look on him .
But when she appeared - what a two-fold emotion , equally of shame , and passion !
I felt a convict - Imputed a crime to accident  and , like a rifled maid , found myself shocked at the unhallowed pleasure , even of a guiltless deed .


Oh !
I could never think of her from that moment , without the most turbulent affections !
 My admiration of her beauty , my esteem of her [ ... ] , my compassion for her misfortune , were deprived , at once , of all platonics , and became new fuel to my flame .
Whene'er I saw her , I felt as if I had injured her - and when her husband happened to occur to my mind , methought I had wronged him too .


Such passion , with such conflict , such desire , with such scruple , soon , my friend , o'ercame me .
I pined , I raved , I drooped - I betook myself to my bed .
A double fever seized both mind and body - The rest you know - O !
spare my weakness , and assist my virtue !
Tears forced their passage through his eyes - He threw himself into my arms .
We embraced .


86 .
CHAP .
LXXXIX .


I SHALL really be under a good deal of uneasiness for ye , ladies , while ye are reading the foregoing chapter .
You had certainly a natural right to have expected somewhat more of adventure , in so critical , and opportune a scene .
A young fellow , in health and vigour .
A lovely woman , in flower of youth , and beauty 's pride , naked ,  and alone - A couch - The door safe locked , and the key in the very bottom of Abigail 's pocket !
Had mother Behn , or grannam Heywood the handling of this passage , they would have satisfied your curiosity , at once , without even waiting to have raised it .


Now let us frame an hypothesis in this very crisis , by way of argument only .
Suppose , I say , that the very moment she had slipt her bagniane , he had slipt also , into her arms - She could not , in decency , have done less than faint .
He lays her on the sopha , and applies his best endeavours to awaken her senses .
She revives , and resents his services - by looks and struggles , only - For she certainly , could not have the assurance to have cried out , and expose herself in so suspicious a situation , and such unseemly circumstances .


In all difficult cases , one is apt to govern themselves by precedent , and as she was a lady of great reading , she must surely have known , that throughout all history , sacred , or prophane , there are but two examples of female chastity , upon record .
And between you and I , ladies , queer ones enough , they are .


Susanna 's coyness could possibly supply no rule of conduct here , for in the naked Ethelinda 's case , there happened to be no Elder .
Lucretia 's  story indeed , was the very case in point .
And how did she acquit herself , I pray ye ?
Why she first most heroinely yielded , to save her fame , and then wickedly destroyed herself , to revenge her adultery .
Now , though the chaste Ethelinda 's discretion might possibly have induced her to the first , her religion , Lucretia was an heathen , 't is to be hoped , would have saved her from the latter * .


But poor Mr. Beville was verily , in a most aukward situation , as he describes himself .
I mean for such a sort of man as he was .
He might truly be compared to Tantulus , viewing the staking font , and the forbidden fruit , with unquenched thirst , and appetite unallayed , And  as listeners are said seldom to hear good of themselves , so is there a proverb also , that folks generally pay for their peeping .
The story of Acteon is known by every school-boy - Coventry Tom , too , of prying memory , is the second instance in history  and the unfortunate William Beville is now put upon record , as the third example of this fatal curiosity .


87 .
CHAP .
XC .


MR. Andrews , continuing his narrative , said , I really felt a most extreme compassion for my unhappy friend .
Sense and virtue add strength to love .
The same vigour of mind , which exerts itself in reason , takes equal hold of passion  and refined affections , like purged waters , preserve their properties longer than foul .


I therefore endeavoured to reconcile him to himself , by acquiescing in his justification .
I condoled with him upon the unluckiness of his adventure , and concurred in the virtuous and manly resolution , which he seemed to have taken , of exiling himself from the object of his fatal passion , and of excluding from his mind  all manner of fuel , which might serve to nourish his unhappy flame .


I then thought it might relieve his spirits a good deal , to let him into the intire secret of my late letter from London , and accordingly laid it before him , for his perusal  saying , My dear Beville , though fortune has used us sometimes for her sport , you see she has not quite marked us for her victims , yet .


The reading of this letter had the desired effect  it diffused a chearfulness over his countenance , and he confessed to me , but with an ingenuous shame , that he was sensible of perhaps a quicker kind of pleasure , in having my fortunes established by this sort of revolution , than possibly it might have done to have had them even augmented , through any other medium .
For besides my concern for your misfortunes , my dear brother , added he , I have also laboured under a certain delicate distress , from the reflection that your alliance with my family , had been the occasion of them .


I then took an opportunity , from this expression , to mention a sentiment to him , that my heart had , for some days , with difficulty restrained  which was , that the alliance he hinted at , was not dissolved , but devolved only , and that I hoped he would henceforth consider himself  as heir , in his dear sister 's place , to share an equal benefit in my fortunes .


He bowed , but quick replied , that he could not possibly think of accepting a thing he had no claim to , in a case where even the gift could not confer a title  as his sister , he rejoiced to say it , had left more rightful , and more worthy heirs behind her .


To which I answered , that as I had , in the first instance , already dedicated my fortunes to love , I could not think in the second , of excluding friendship , its younger brother , from its share of the portion  and that as virtue forms stronger connections than nature , the fond tie which had once allied us , would induce me ever to look upon him as a real brother , if that title were not already comprehended , under the higher and nobler one , of friend .


At length , after several days travelling , we arrived in London  he recruited by the journey , and I fatigued with the delay .
We passed the evening at the inn together .
The next morning he went down to Windsor , to wait upon his father , and I called on the minister of St. Martin 's , to settle with him about the effects committed to his charge .


He came with me to the house , and delivered me the will , and keys .
The scene affected me .
 I dropt tears of filial duty , and felt my heart fill at the same time , with pious gratitude toward the great dispenser of all earthly , as well as heavenly blessings .


88 .
CHAP .
XCI .


UPON looking into the situation of my affairs , I found that the family suit , which had subsisted for so many years , had been ended the preceding term , and the debentures , for ten thousand pounds , were lying on the desk , with about three hundred pounds more , in bills and cash .


The will had bequeathed the intire fortune to me , except two legacies of one hundred pounds , apiece , to each of my brothers  the eldest of whom had been lately promoted to a troop of horse  and the younger , besides his employment , had a little time before , been married to a merchant 's daughter in the city , with a fortune of four thousand pounds .
My sister had died in childbed , about six months before .


Both my brothers happened to be in London , at this time , and came to condole with me upon  our late loss .
I had always loved them affectionately , and was much rejoiced to see them .
I laid the will before them , and they very generously acquiesced in the disposition of it , without the least jealousy , or murmur .
They were both of them already well established in life , and acknowledged the intire merit of it , to be owing to my disinterested , and fraternal kindness .


I then paid each of them their legacy , and made a present , at the same time , to my married brother , of all the family plate  which might be in value , about an hundred pounds  promising the captain also , to pay him a like compliment , whenever he should do me the pleasure to invite me to his wedding .


In a day or two after , my friend Beville returned from Windsor , and told me that he had found his father in the greatest distress  for his attorney had informed him , that the laws could not possibly afford him any manner of relief , for as he had disposed of the income of his employ , during his life , he could not possibly recover his office again  and that , as his deputy had sold his interest , and retired to Holland , there was no remedy to be had , against him , neither .


My friend left his father all the money he had about him , and seemed to be extremely depressed , upon this additional misfortune  though I  said every thing that friendship could suggest , to support his spirits , by intreating that he would suffer me to consider us all , as of one family  adding , that in this instance too , I might challenge it as a right  as I had the honour of claiming his father , as mine , also .


89 .
CHAP .
XCII .


I WAS impatient to see my dear children , and to return my most grateful thanks to my valuable friend , the clergyman  but I could not think of revisiting any of those once happy scenes again , which had prevented me from paying my duty , at Windsor , also .
I therefore wrote a letter of acknowledgment to my friend , intreating the favour of a visit from him , at London , and at the same time , sent down a coach and four , to bring him up , with the children .


They all arrived in town , the next day , and in this fond society , the pleasures I enjoyed , were so blended with those I had lost , that I might be said to have truly felt that ' `` Sad luxury , to vulgar minds unknown . '' '
So that I had but little advantage , in this particular , by shifting the scene , while such strong remembrances stood still before me .


 Poor Beville 's health and spirits recruited not so fast as I had hoped for .
He was frequently absent , in company , and would sometimes suffer a whole morning to pass unmarked away , without books , or music  and when he did play , it was always in the andante , pastorale , or amoroso strain  and when he read , Ovid , Catullus , or Petrarch , were his studies .


I took notice of this turn of mind , to him , and he seemed so alarmed at it , himself , that he laid aside music intirely , as he acknowledged that harmony , of any kind , might be a dangerous solace , in the present disturbed situation of his mind  for that the soft airs but soothed his passion , and the bolder ones served only to elevate its transports .


He then began to apply himself to his former , and severer studies , but was soon interrupted in them , by an illness which had the appearance of a milliary fever .
The physicians were called in , and determined it to be a scorbutic humour , which had been thrown into his blood , by checking his late disorder , too suddenly , and suffering him to come abroad , at so inclement a season , before the dregs of his disease had been sufficiently purged away .
They prescribed him medicines , and recommended the Scarborough  waters , and sea-bathing , to him , as soon as the weather might permit .


I took a hint from this advice , to propose to my friend , to take a journey with me , immediately , to Scarborough , and fix ourselves in some convenient situation , near that town , before the concourse of sick and gay , who are generally so oddly coupled , at all Spa 's , might render our accommodation difficult , or inconvenient .
He readily accepted my proposal , and after I had set off my house , and disposed of the furniture , by auction , we set out together for this country .


Before I left London , I sent my dear children back again to Hertfordshire , with my good friend the clergyman  to whom , at parting , I made a present of a select collection of books , value about two hundred pounds  which had devolved to my father , from his father and brother , who were both of them persons of learning , and had formed their libraries with judgment and care .


I also wrote an invitation to Mr. Beville , at Windsor , to come and reside with us at Scarborough , during the season  and then to accept of an apartment in whatever mansion I might afterwards fix myself , during our joint lives .
He wrote me an answer , full of acknowledgments ,  and promised to follow us , as soon as he could sell the interest of his house and parks , at Windsor , and dispose of his other effects .


90 .
CHAP .
XCIII .


MY friend and I took lodgings at Scarborough , and about a month after , old Mr. Beville came to us , with a debenture of five hundred pounds , which he had realised out of the remnants of his reduced fortune .
He was very ill on his arrival , languished for some time , and at last expired of a broken heart , as he confessed , occasioned by the loss of his wife , and his daughter , together with that of his fortune .


As soon as we had got to Scarborough , I began to inquire whether there was any place to be let , near the town  for I liked this country extremely well , as we rode through it  and the purpose , which had occurred to my mind , at London , was now framed into a kind of resolution , of settling myself somewhere hereabout .


The only counties I had ever any acquaintance with , were Berkshire , and Hertfordshire  and being now self-banished from these , all other places had become quite equal to me .
But  this one had obtained a preference , in my election , upon my dear friend 's account , because of its extreme distance from the still too charming Ethelinda 's residence .


I was informed of several houses and farms to be let , and rode out to see them  but as none of them happened to be situated near the sea , I declined them all .
I considered , in the first instance , that they could not accommodate my friend , with regard to one part of his prescription  and I confess also , that in the second , I had all my life the highest relish for sea-prospects , and a desire to fix myself in some situation near the coast .


There is something extremely awful and commanding in a view of the ocean , which enlarges our ideas far beyond the richest landscape  and in the contemplation of its uses , properties , movements , and contents , our minds and hearts become naturally elevated toward the greatness and goodness of Providence , at the same time .


But I own that there is another sentiment , much stronger than this , which had always induced me to such a choice of situation  and it is this , that I might possibly have the good fortune , after some horrid storm , of supplying relief to some poor ship-wrecked voyagers , and of defending them also , from the savage cruelties ,  and inhumanities , too frequently exercised by the greedy and lawless peasants , upon all coasts , against such unhappy objects of real distress , and commiseration .


At length , I fixed upon this charming spot  the rent of which farm was considerably abated , on account of its not having the accommodation of a house or offices upon it .
Which consideration being computed , and added to the savings of alterations and repairs , brings the expences of this building , almost within a saving upon the preference .


I commenced this house on the first day of March last , and , as it was constructed with brick and wainscot , it was rendered habitable by the first day of this month , July , when I entered into possession of it , and shall very probably here fix my station , for the remainder of my life .


91 .
CHAP .
XCIV .


 WHEN Mr. Andrews had brought his story to a conclusion , Mr. Carewe made him a great many acknowledgments for the high entertainment it had afforded him .
He said that there were a great many interesting events , in these memoirs , even to an hearer  but as a friend , added he , I could most sincerely have wished that they had been less rich of incidents , by two very affecting particulars .


My story , continued he , which by agreement you are intitled to exact , will by no means return you the same amusement , either in kind , or degree .
You are not to expect from me , a continued series  my life has been too dissipated and extempore , to afford much chain , and may rather be stiled a collection of incidents , than a connection of events .


I have been generally too much an individual of society , and , till a late crisis - whether happy , or unfortunate , added he , with a sigh , remains yet within the womb of time - there was not any person in the world , who could either direct , or govern , give a consistent tenor , or steady purpose , to my life and actions  which  for the matter of them , and following after your 's and Mr. Beville 's , may be considered as a lively epilogue , or a merry farce , after a moving tragedy .


My dear Carewe , replied Mr. Andrews , the most trifling particulars , relating to one friend , are interesting to another .
Their passions , their affections the same , namely , a mutual resentment of each other 's pains and pleasures .


But this is a treat which I must not churlishly enjoy alone .
We have secluded my dear Beville long enough from our retired converse , already  and if you will be so kind as to suffer him to form a triumvirate with us , in our mutual confidence and friendship , it will double my pleasure and satisfaction , by affording to that unhappy man , some kind of amusement and relief from his too fatal passion  which , in spite of time , absence , philosophy , and virtue , seems still to ingross too much his whole heart , mind , and affections .


I most cordially agree to your proposal , my dear Andrews , answered Mr. Carewe , for I should think myself but half your friend , were I not wholly his .
Nor do I , in the least , apprehend that the admitting this very worthy person a third in our union of souls , can in a [ ... ] sort  diminish our own mutual fondness toward each other  but that we may then be considered , rather as a triangle , whose angles , though they exceed not the quantity of two right ones , serve however , by this division , to strengthen and support each other .


When Mr. Beville had returned from the Spa , he was made acquainted with this plan of amusement , and received the motion with the utmost satisfaction  for he had conceived an high esteem and affection for Mr. Carewe , from the story of his adventure with Mr. Andrews , which had possessed him with a fond and generous concern in the smallest matters which related to him .


He therefore returned thanks to Mr. Carewe , for his kind concurrence with Mr. Andrews 's proposal  and , in order to leave Mr. Beville still at liberty to continue his course of bathing , their future evenings were fixed upon for this entertainment .
Accordingly , after dinner , that day , Mr. Carewe commenced his memoir  as you will find it written in the second volume .


92 .
CHAP .
XCV .


 I THINK it full time , here , Mr. Reader , to put a Finis to the first volume of these memoirs , in order to give you leisure to digest the matters herein contained  and afford you opportunity also , for a relection .
For , believe me , dear Sir , that no book is worth reading once , which does not both require , and deserve it twice .


Of writing of books there is no end , said Solomon - but whether he spoke literally , of his own times , as we have no cotemporary account of them , except what he has been so communicative to hand down to us himself , I can not say  but he has certainly spoken prophetically , at least , of ours  if , instead of writing , you will give me leave , after the manner of scholiasts , to substitute copying in its place .


For , in reality , what are the volumes that load our presses , now-a-days , but transcripts , transpositions , or translations ?
Most of our modern writers have the impudence to steal , even in the face of the living , and the most modest of them are but robbers of the dead .


This imposition on the public , however , is nothing new among us , for our fathers and  grandfathers have laboured under the same grievance , before us .
Let us but look back into the amass of literature , for half a century past , and we shall hardly meet with any thing new , except the type , ink , and paper .
Nothing but former writings dressed up again , and republished .
No work of genius , no useful discovery  except the hardy , but ingenious attack upon Longinus , and one or two attempts toward discovering the Longitude , at sea , if demonstrated .


What are Gassendi 's , or any of the modern treatises on morals , but extracts , or paraphrases on the Enchiridion , on Seneca , or Tully ?
Or Derham 's physics , but compilations , or compendiums of Galileo , Boyle , Descartes , or Newton ?
Works of learning , and labour , indeed , but not of talents , or genius .


A person well grounded in a college course , has , at present , nothing new to read , except a very few writings of wit , or humour  and yet , books are printed , or rather reprinted , every day , which but vary or transpose the pages written in former centuries  and only serve to puzzle and obstruct all science , by opening different avenues to the same point , and by inducing students to imagine the Encyclopoedia to  be more tedious , and difficult , than in reality it is .


In fine , we may venture to pronounce that the wisest man , even at present , as was once said by a learned antient , is he who has read the fewest books - provided he has but chosen them well .
For learning , beyond certain limits , but dulls the genius , confounds the intellect , and multiplies study , without increasing knowledge .


If an ingenious society of men would take the trouble of making a critical review of the Mega Biblion , or tautology of learning , and reduce it all into a digest , I dare affirm that the whole compass of science , physical , philosophical , theological , political , metaphysical , and moral  taking in the classics and poetics , in all languages  with all history that is worth reading , for knowledge , stile , or observation , would not compose a library exceeding the purchase of fifty pounds  and the whole study might be comprehended , within a seven years college course .


But then indeed , I shall confess that there must be an intire reform also , among the professors in each several branch , with regard to their present prolix method of instruction .
For the proverb of ars longa should be more properly changed to artifices lenti And the rapid progress which some extraordinary , and uneducated  persons have been reported to have made in the arts and sciences , might have been owing to their having instructed themselves more by reason , than by rule .


Nor would this scheme be of the least disadvantage to the world in general  for though some laborious dunces might by this means , perhaps , want bread , unless much better employed in sowing and reaping it , yet the useful and necessary trades of printers , booksellers , and stationers , would still continue to thrive , even better than before .
For there would then be a thousand libraries , for one we have , at present  as men are often discouraged from making collections , for want of proper catalogues to direct them where to begin , and where to end .


I know many persons of fortune who have not five pounds worth of books in their studies , at present , and those picked up by chance , or inheritance , and who would not give five shillings for five pounds worth more , and yet would readily lay out fifty , to purchase a compleat library  which , if once pointed out , and ascertained , would be then deemed one of the appendages of fortune and grandeur , even to those who can not read , as many furnish stables of horses , which they can not ride .


FINIS .


 APPENDIX TO THE First Volume OF THE TRIUMVIRATE .


 If they will have a may-pole , why let them have a may-pole .
Vide Tristram Shandy .


Volume first , pages 73 and 74 .
Volume third , pages 169 and 170 .
Volume sixth , page 147 .
 I must here ingenuously resign the palm to Mr. Shandy , in the novelty of this thought  nor shall I in the least , pretend to dispute any merit with him , before modern readers , by hinting that my conceit , though poor , has some little meaning in it .


A CATALOGUE of the several advantages and benefits , which the publisher of these memoirs hath received , from the patronage hinted at in the two precedent pages .


1 .
It made me a religious observer of the precept in scripture , never to put my trust in man .
2 .
It gave me the benefit of the ninth beatitude * , Happy is he who expects nothing , for he shall not be disappointed .
3 .
It made me to depend upon my own industry , and not upon another 's favour .
4 .
It has taught me the safest oeconomy in the world , to trust to my own fortune , though ever so small , rather than to another 's , though ever so large .
5 .
It warned me , too late , never to run in debt , for there are no sureties for the pauper .
6 .
It has made me resolve never to breed a son to the church , for , without patronage , merit will not avail in that profession , as it may in physic or the law .
 7 .
It has instructed me in this useful lesson , that - 8 .
It has informed me also , that - with regard to the two last articles , I must be silent for the present  as the reflections upon them point too strongly at certain persons , who though their friendships freeze under the pole , their resentments burn under the line .
Si quid benefacias , levior plum , gratia est  at si quid peccatum est , plumbeas iras gerunt .
There are such characters !
But have a little patience , my good readers - I may outlive them , and shall then speak out - For the maxim of de mortuis nil nisi bonum , is not of authority sufficient to controul the privileges of an historian .
But enough for the present .
Notes * .
See the first note in chapter xxxv .
* .
The marbled paper .
† .
Page 147 , vol .
6 .
* .
Yoric 's sermons .
* .
Sermon 2d , page 41 .
† .
Sermon 3d , page 53 .
* .
This Preface was wrote in the year sixty-one .
* .
Augustus Caesar .
† .
Caesar , Pompey , and Crassus .
* .
The initials of A. B. and C. were objected to in the manuscript , as being too abstracted , and fitter for geometry than novel  that they did not distinguish the persons sufficiently , in the memory , nor impress the ideas of them strong enough on the mind .
In compliance therefore with this indolence of attention in my gentle readers , I have embodied thought , and thickened shadow into substance for them , by supplying the above names throughout the remainder of this work .


- Giving to airy nothing A local habitation , and a name .
* .
` There was speech in their dumbness , language in their very gesture : They looked as they had heard of a world ransomed , or one destroyed : A notable passion of wonder appeared in them  but the wisest beholder , that knew no more but seeing , could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow  but in the extremity of the one it must needs be . '
WINTER 'S TALE .
* .
Buckingham upon this subject , in his ode on Brutus .
† .
Diogenes , observing that the whole State of Athens had sunk into debauchery and corruption , and meaning to reproach them for having dwindled from the original dignity of human nature , walked through the city at noon , with a lighted torch in his hand , and being asked what he was in search of ?
answered , I am looking for a Man .
á .
A character in a modern novel .
* .
I here freely make a present of this distinction , to the ingenious modern architects of Chinese orders  and as terms of art are necessary toward the conciseness of sciences , I shall dub it with the technic of dimagdomé , which I have most learnedly compounded from the words dimidium magnae domûs , vel domi .
* .
Henry , in the series of letters , says , I will forgive none but a pick-pocket for loving a crowd .
* .
Bridemen or bridemaids , indifferently used .
* .
Quinbus Flestrin , or the man-mountain , in Gulliver .
* .
Among the lives of Plutarch , which are said to be lost , was Hannibal 's , and Mr. Rollin has supplied it .
But in the king 's library , vide Casley 's catalogue , there is a translation of Plutarch 's life of Hannibal , by Henry Parker , lord Morley , written in the reign of Henry the eighth .
Surely the original can not have been lost since that aera , when literature was beginning to revive in England .
* .
Philosophers urge this article , among the instances of that animal 's rationality  whereas , say they , were he guided by appetite or instinct , merely , he would still continue the attempt , till his strength failed him .
* .
Shakespear has given us a beautiful image of this unequal struggle between philosophy and misfortune , in his Twelfth Night .


- She never told her grief , But let concealment , like a worm i ` th ' bud , Feed on her damask cheek  she pined in thought , And , with a green and yellow melancholy , She sat like patience on a monument , Smiling at grief .
- * .
Some historians say it was Augustus Caesar .
† .
A set of self-sufficient persons once erected themselves into a tribunal , which they stiled the Athenian Oracles proposing to answer every question , or solve any difficulty , in wit , morals , or physics - several ridiculous queries were proposed to them , and one of them begins thus :


Self-named Athenians pray let it be shewn , For sure 't is obvious to such mighty wits , Why , c. * .
An Italian phrase , for low-life expressions .
* .
A fellow in London , who hawked the daily papers about the streets , upon finding them to lie on his hands , toward the latter end of the day , while he cried only Great News , suddenly bethought himself to change his tune , and roaring out Bad News , sold more in an hour , than he had been able to do the whole day before .
* .
Cabletonians - Persons whose nerves are as tough as cable ropes  and who have no feelings , but what are simply natural to animal nature  who are sensible of pain , but not grief , of pleasure , but not joy .
* .
I was going to supply a note upon this passage , but having neglected to mention Petrarch or Prior , when Laura and Emma were introduced above , I thought I might , for the same reason , omit the name of Lyttleton here .
* .
See the last note , chapter xxxv .
* .
Timoleon built a temple , and dedicated it to her .
* .
Compare this line with the last of those upon the same subject , in chapter xxxviii .
`` But , till relieved , must not `` retreat . ''
* .
His agencies .
* .
In some manuscripts the expression is party rage , and in others pet-valiant fury .
* .
Have a little patience , reader , and I 'll answer you to that question , by and by .
But in the mean time , I must caution both my belle and beau readers , not to mistake this word for Anno Domini , for I do assure them that it was in being , long before that aera .
* .
This point was enough for the clergyman to insist on , upon this occasion  but Marcus Aurelius carries the moral farther , by advising to consider every action of our lives , as if it were to be our last .
* .
Induiter formosa est , exuiter ipsa forma .
Ovid .
† .
A famous picture of Venus , rising naked from the sea .
* .
Since I had wrote the above , I have been informed by a lady of severe example , that there is a third instance of female chastity , in history , which ought to be taken notice of here , in honour of the sex .
This was Margaret , countess of Richmond , and mother to Henry the Seventh  of whom bishop Fisher gives the following curious anecdote , in the funeral eulogy he preached over her remains  and which I shall here present you with , in his own extraordinary words : ` She obtained a licence , to live chaste , from her third husband  whereupon , she took upon her the vow of Celibacy . '
So that , according to the bishop 's opinion , the dues of marriage , are a breach of chastity - But perhaps , he might have meant second , or third marriages , and in this sentiment , many scrupulous persons agree with him .
* .
See Pope .


VOLUME II .


LONDON : Printed for W. JOHNSTON , in Ludgate-street .
MDCCLXIV .


 THE TRIUMVIRATE : OR , THE AUTHENTIC MEMOIRS OF Andrews , Beville , and Carewe .


Nec furtum feci , nec fugi - Libera , per vacuum , posui vestigia - HOR .
1 .
CHAPTER XCVI .


THE next day , after dinner , the Triumvirate , being tempted by the fineness of the evening , took a walk to the sea beach , between two double lines of elms , planted so artfully , that every tree of the outward rows , covered the interval between two of the inward ones  which served to shade you , both from sun and wind , as effectually as if they had been  all placed in the same lines  and yet left , at the same time , the trees themselves their due proportion of air and soil , to thrive in .
This avenue extended about a quarter of a mile , and was terminated by a cIump of trees , which though only nineteen in number , were so ingeniously and paradoxically placed , that they formed just nine rows , with five trees in each * .


In the midst of this regular confusion , there was a seat formed round the center elm , under whose umbrella they sat down together , fixing upon that aspect , which regarded the sea .
Here they all remained mute , for a considerable time , as that element had occasioned reflections to arise in each of their minds , which occupied their whole thoughts , in silent and self-contemplations .
At length Mr. Andrews , who by being the most certainly unhappy of the three , was therefore become more collected and composed , than those who remained still in suspence , first broke silence , and turning to Mr. Carewe , claimed his promise , who thus readily began his story .


2 .
CHAP .
XCVII .
The story of Mr. Charles Carewe .


 MY father is , for he is still alive , a gentleman of a considerable estate , in this kingdom .
And my mother , who died lately , brought him a portion of five thousand pounds , and was a woman of remarkable beauty .
I was their first , and only son - But my mother happened , unluckily , to be delivered of me , about a fortnight before the usual time .


As such accidents are known frequently to have happened , and that her character was irreproachable , the world , contrary to its usual bent , refrained from all manner of censure , upon this event .
Nor did my father , who loved her as well as he was capable , seem to receive the least alarm , upon that occasion  but rather in a coarse jocular manner , as was his way , applauded his own prowess , as he termed it , which could bring that matter to bear , such was his quibble , in about eight months , which required nine , with another .


However , about ten years after , he began to grow jealous and uneasy , about this very article , upon the following incident .
A gentleman ,  who was no way related , either to him or my mother , who had lived above an hundred miles distant from us , and had never even visited at our house , happened to die unmarried , and left his estate , which was about a thousand pounds a year , to me , appointing trustees for it , till I should become of age .


This person , it seems , had been a lover of my mother 's , before her marriage , and was well received upon those terms , by her father  but more advantageous conditions happening to intervene , before matters had been concluded upon , she was compelled by her parents , to break off her engagements there , and was immediately married to my father .


These three concurring circumstances , her being wrested out of a lover 's arms , the praematurity of my birth , with this adoption , joined all together to raise a suspicion in my father 's mind , which had never once occurred to him , till the last of these unlucky circumstances had happened .


Upon the first alarm , he with a precipitancy which was natural to him , and without giving my poor mother an opportunity of vindicating herself , from so foul a reproach , took a solemn oath that he would never see my face again , and immediately hurried me off to the trustees of  my fortune , to be educated and maintained , out of my own patrimony , as he stiled it .


The most interesting part of this story , the cause of my excile , I knew nothing of , till some years after this event , when my mother had obtained leave to visit me , at the school where I had been placed by my guardians , about forty miles from my father 's seat .
She then related to me the particulars I have just mentioned , which she said she would never have informed me of , but lest they might , by any chance , happen to come to my knowledge hereafter , from any other hand , and then possibly occasion some doubts to arise in my mind , which were unworthy of her .
To obviate which , she immediately entered into a vindication of herself , with such an air of sincerity and virtue , that must have removed all manner of suspicion , from any but uncharitable and disingenuous minds .


At the same time , she afforded me the extreme pleasure of being informed , that she had perfectly quieted my father 's uneasiness , by giving him every satisfaction that a christian could offer  which , with his own reflections upon the prudence and nicety , and of her whole conduct , ever since they had been married , had rendered him so conscious of the hastiness and injustice of  his suspicions , that he declared to her , according to his rough manners , and illiberal notions , that he would actually have asked her pardon , if he was not her husband .
And as for that poor fellow , Charles , said he , I am sorry I took that rash oath , d' ye see me , but that 's past and gone , and he must stay where he is now  for , since I have sworn it , let who will go to the devil for a liar , by the Lord I am resolved that it sha n't be me , d' ye mind .


3 .
CHAP .
XCVIII .


HERE Mr. Carewe seems to be very delicate , upon what weak people imagine to be a material point  and takes great pains to clear up his legitimacy - But why ?
If the word bastard offends his ear , let him assume the title of private relation  which is a more polite expression , in this case , that I here make a present of to the civilians .


Letters of safe conduct were issued by Edward the fourth , to the count de la Roche , natural son to a duke of Burgundy , who was coming over to ingage in a tournament , at London , with  lord Rivers * , who had challenged him .
These letters were titled Pro Bastardo Burgundiae , super punctis armorum perficiendis .
The being admitted into the lists , was an article of honour , and therefore the stile of the Pass , could certainly never be intended as an affront .


Or , to take it higher still , were not Romulus , Alexander , by Olympia 's confession , Hercules , Themistocles , Jugurtha , king Arthur , Homer , Demosthenes , and Adrian the fourth , cum multis , every one of them notorious bastards ?
And was not Ego Gulielmus Bastardus the preamble to one of William the Conqueror 's charters ?
But away with such upstart examples as these , and if you are tickled with pedigree , derive your origin from Cain , the first bastard of the world .


` Let Bourbon or Nassau go higher . '
Civilians distinguish bastards , by the title of Natural Children , in opposition to those born in wedlock  which latter may philosophically be divided into unnatural , and artificial ones .
The  first be those , who are begotten in the ordinary course of matrimony .
For surely , no man can have the face to tell me , on this side of threescore , that it is natural , for a couple already agreed upon the epenthesis , the medius terminus , or mean point , to sit playing at push-pin , pitch and toss , or hide in the hand , while a lame sexton is limping round a whole parish , to summon a fat , full-dined , lethargic parson , waddling a snail 's pace , to come and sanctify a deed , which by an express text , has already been declared a divine command .


These slow-begotten brats , babes of grace before meat , these postponings of love and joy , are what , in obstetrics * , as Shandy chuses to say , may be stiled unnatural , or untimely births , as coming into the world , contrary to the due course of nature , and as it may be called , after their time , also .


By artificial children , I mean those succedaneums to generation , where barrenness or impotency are repaired by help of medicine , or other arts of physic - They may likewise be stiled Exotics too , as reared by cookery , in cold ungenial zones .
Such adventitious children , such interlopers in families , should certainly never be allowed by the  English constitution , to intercept an estate from the heir at law .
And for this opinion , I shall give you a constructive case , in point , taken out of Whyte 's Reports , folio 23 , and page 678 .
*


A man fell down in a fit , at a certain coffee-house - A by-stander immediately proposed a bett , that he would not recover - Another unconcerned spectator took him up - Not the poor patient , but the challenger .
A surgeon , who happened to be in the room , drew out his lancet , and stript up the dying man 's arm  but the bettor called out to him to have a care of what he was doing , for that he should pay the bett , if the man recovered - An appeal was made to the jocky club , then present , who confirmed the sentence , ` for that the gentleman had staked his money , upon nature only , not on art . '


Besides , these surreptitious heirs seldom ever arrive to the size or vigour of manhood , neither , but remain a kind of ` Puny insects , quivering at a breeze  ' like some of our modern nobility and gentry .
For my part , ( had I any thing to leave ) [ aside . ]
I would much sooner adopt an heir , out of a warming-pan , than an apothecary 's shop .
And ,  if a woman may be allowed to take medicines , to get herself with child , why may she not be indulged in getting herself with child , sometimes , by way of medicine , also ?
For physicians have prescribed this cure , in some cases .


Bastards - I ask pardon - Private relations are also said to be generally more endowed with spirit , wit , and genius , than the legitimate .
Which must certainly be owing to their parents being both of one mind , at the same instant , and then in steps the good old proverb , that two heads are better than one .
Is there always such a concordance , in matrimony ?
And where this is wanting , can the offspring of mere ceremony , be ever fit for any thing , but to make heralds , dancing-masters , or gentleman-ushers .
* ?


These merry begotten too , have another advantage over the legitimate , as they may be at liberty to adopt a father  and shew themselves wise children , in their choice .
The legal son may have a scoundrel , or a scavenger , for his parent , buthe bastard must have had bad luck , indeed , if among the number of galants , who may be imputed to his mother , he can not be able , like  some of the antient heroes , to pick out one , that he need not be ashamed of .


4 .
CHAP .
XCIX .


I Remained at this school , continued Mr. Carewe , till I had compleated the course I had begun at a former one , before my banishment  and was thence removed to the university of Oxford  where I passed through my studies and exercises , with as much credit and success , as most of my cotemporaries .


I do not pretend to say , that I applied myself to books , with the same sedulity that either of you , gentlemen , said he , bowing , would probably have done , in so advantageous a situation for letters  I was too volatile , and fond of pleasure , to ingage deeply in study  but I had ever a certain pride of character , which notwithstanding my dissipations , and the disadvantages of an independent fortune , propelled me always , just to fill up the striked measure of my duties , though to say truth , I seldom heaped it .


And in truth , the college courses there , are so very easy , to any person well instructed , and  attended to at school , that I have been frequently surprised to see so many young men , of sense and parts sufficient , pass through them , or rather , pass them by , with so little credit , or advantage .
For a person may be perfectly idle , in a moral sense , without being so , in a literary one .
Let him but diligently apply only that time , to his studies , which he can not find room for , in his pleasures , and I 'll answer for it , that he shall pass through all his degrees , with ease , and honour too .


But the misfortune is , that young fellows do not , time enough , take up a sense of this oeconomy , at the beginning , and then , like other bad managers , the arrear of business they find on their hands , often affrights them from adjusting their accounts , till it may be , perhaps , too late to retrieve either their time , or their fortunes .


5 .
CHAP .
C .


WHILE I was at the university , I happened to attach myself particularly , to a young man , who was of the same hall with me .
He was a perfect Adonis , in face and person .
 This , you may be certain , was a matter of no manner of consequence to me  but some friendly pieces of service , which happened to fall in my way to do him , with his sense and gratitude for them , mutually endeared us to each other .


He was not possessed of any great logical facultles , but had a refined taste for poetry , painting , music , and the classics  with a remarkable facility in learning languages  and he applied himself with such diligence to this superficial part of literature , that he could not only read French , Italian , Latin , and Greek , but speak them too , with perfect ease , fluency , and correctness .


But in the deeper or more abstruse parts of study , such as physics , metaphysics , and mathematics , in fine , through most of the arts and sciences , he was remarkably backward and flow .
He used to attend diligently indeed , all the lectures upon natural philosophy , on account of the experiments , which he seemed passionately fond and curious about , but would very gladly have excused himself from the reasonings upon .


He was sensible of this weakness , and so mortified at it , that he was resolved to use every assistance toward coquering this imbecillity  and as these were branches of learning in which I had  happened best to distinguish myself , and who was two classes above him , he used frequently to come to my chambers in a morning , or invite me to his , and intreat me to help him forward with these tough businesses , as he termed them .


I was flattered , and he obliged , by these conferences  and it was this which first founded our mutual friendship  which was afterwards farther cemented by a piece of humanity and politeness , I had frequent opportunities of exerting toward him , after our union , and which I am just going to mention to you .


He was very lively , had a good deal of wit and frolic , and was a perfect rake too , as far as sitting up all night , which he would frequently do  but then he indulged himself in no other kind of excess , at these , or at any other times .
He would neither drink , nor scour the watch , nor ransack brothels .
His amusements , on these occasions , were conversation , reading , drinking coffee , playing cards , walking by moon-light , or hiring a coach , with two or three friends , and setting out at midnight , to be early enough to see some fine seat or improvement , fifteen or twenty miles off .


But some of the idle fellows who happened to be of our parties , used to press him sometimes , quite rudely , to join with them in their debaucheries   which perceiving in him such a virtuous aversion to , I used constantly to defend him from , though I was frequently too ductile myself , toward such idleness and excesses .


6 .
CHAP .
CI .


THIS harmony had subsisted between us for about two years , when my poor friend happened to have a very aukward piece of business fall upon his hands .
He had been at billiards , which he played remarkably well  he had much the advantage of the party  but men are not , at all times , masters of their art , and he lost the game by one manifest bad stroke .


Upon this , an hasty Welchman who stood by , and had lost a few shillings on a bett , swore by St. Taffit , hur had played buty .
My friend resented the assertion , and quick replied , that no person could have suspected him of such a baseness , who was not capable of it himself .
Hur plood poiled over , at this sarcasm , and snatching up one of the tacks , he broke it over my friend 's head  who retired out of the room , with an `` I shall find a time , Sir . ''


 It was late in the evening , and the poor discomfited squire retired home to his own apartments - He had been reared under his mother 's eye , who employed the curate of the parish as his private tutor , in her own house .
This was by no means a process of education likely to inspire much prowess  and accordingly my pretty effeminate friend had not the least spark of chivalry about him .
He passed the night without sleep , and with very uneasy struggles , and reflections , between the opinion of the world , and his mortal aversion to killing people .


The next morning early , he called upon me , looked pale and disturbed , told me with a trembling voice , the adventure of the night before , and asked my advice after what manner he should conduct himself , upon this unlucky occasion .
I replied , that the testy Wallian had left him but one rule of action , which was re-action , and that I was ready to carry him a challenge instantly , as there was no time to lose .
That a thing of this sort , should always be resolved on quick , and acted briskly  for that the sooner we vindicate our character , and the shorter time we bear resentment , the better .


He replied that it was not for such advice he had called upon me , on this occasion  that he knew full well what the false notions of the  world had too strongly established in such cases  but that his principles of morals and religion , stood more strongly still , on the other side of the question .
He added , that supported by these , he could muster up philosophy sufficient to withstand a mere popular hiss  but that this was not his sole difficulty , for his whole fortune depended on the favour of his grandfather , who had already declared him heir to two thousand pounds a year  but having been bred all his life in the army , and totally ignorant of any character but a military one , had comprised all worth , all virtue , in bravery alone  and had been often heard to swear , ` by the Lord , no coward should ever inherit an acre of his estate , which had been all purchased by the sword .
No , d - n me , he may starve for me - 'T is fit the dog should rot , that begins to stink already  ' with such stuff : The young man told me therefore , that he came to throw himself upon my address , to extricate him out of this difficulty , by any possible means I could devise - except fighting .


I confessed that it was really a stroke beyond my genius , to think of any other expedient but challenging the fellow , at least .
Perhaps he may be brought to ask your pardon , said I , and I shall strongly remonstrate to him , that this is the  least he ought to do .
If he is a man of true honour , he certainly will do so .
If not , he is a rascal , believe me , and will take to his heels , at the sight of a pistol .
The die is cast , and there is no retreating .


I grant you , continued I , that duelling is contrary both to reason and religion , but as every one who lives in a community , is obliged to obey the laws of it , so may we hope that heaven may make some allowances for a practice which , though founded originally in barbarism , custom and opinion have long since sanctified almost equal to a law , among more civilized nations .
I clapped him on the shoulder , bid him keep up his spirits till my return , and so quitted the room suddenly , without waiting for an answer .


7 .
CHAP .
CII .


I Crossed the square directly , to the apartment of our antagonist , whom I found at breakfast , with a gentleman commoner from Llangefny .
I told them my errand  but said at the same time , that I should not have taken this disagreeable commission upon me , only with a  view of accommodating the strife , without bloodshed , or dishonour .
That it was plain to every body , Mr. Jones was the aggressor , that the rebuke was too severe for the reply , and that therefore , I hoped -


Hop me no hops , cried out ap Shones , hur was saucy Jack , and hur will teach hur manners to a shentleman .
If hur has mind to fight , let hur fight as fight can , for by St. Taffit , ap Shones will do noting but fight , or break more of hur pones , Jackadandy - Llangefny seconded this gallant resolve , by saying that it was unpecoming of a shentleman to ask pardon , for this was acknowledging hurself to pe in the wrong .
I appointed the park , and the present minute .


At my return , I found my poor-spirited friend in the greatest agitation , both of body and mind .
He asked no question , but looked inquiry .
I really pitied his distress , and was so much affected with it , that I declare I would readily have fought the sulky South Britain , myself , to have rid him of his fears and danger  but that I thought this would be only acting the bravo , and have injured my own character , without redeeming his .


I told him that ap Shones was a bear , that we must take the field on the instant , that matters were unluckily come to that pass at present , there  was no living among men upon any other terms  that as he had been involved in this affair , without any vice of his own , and was prosecuting it without the least malice , but solely in defence of his character and fortune , he might well stand acquitted both to God and man  that therefore , any farther difficulty about the matter , must be cowardice , not scruple , ` Et propter vitam , vivendi perdere causas . '
For shame , said I , shake off this womanish weakness - Arouse - Be a man , c..


During this military oration , he made no manner of reply , but fixing his eyes upon the floor , with a kind of stupid insensibility , as if he was falling into a lethargy , muttered to himself , in allusion to my last expression , Would to heaven that I were either perfect man , or woman !


This extraordinary soliloquy struck my ear with surprise , but I had only time for this reflection , which I spoke aloud , that an hermophrodite had neither body , nor soul , worth saving .
While I said this , I took down a case of pistols , which I had charged the day before , on an idle affair of my own , which happened to pass luckily over , and taking my feeble Epicaene briskly under the arm , hurried it away to the  ground , without permitting time , or power to dissent .


We found the enemy had taken the field before us , had got possession of the heights , were properly stationed , and appointed , with their bright arms glittering in the sun - A terrible show !
As I was leading , or rather dragging my poor-spirited friend up to what I judged to be the due point of distance , and before we could attain it , or that I could put a pistol into his hand , and retire , the hasty Welchman let fly a shot between us , which however , luckily missed us both .


I then thought this act of baseness a justifiable occasion for saving the credit of my friend , and making the quarrel now become my own  so quitting his arm , and desiring him to move off to the left , I rushed up to the station , crying out , Since I find you aim at both , have at you for one .
But before I could form my posture , or present my pistol , I saw the enemy fairly wheel to the right about , and betake himself most nimbly , to his heels .


Llangefny sputtered , cursed , swore , and hollooed after him to stand hur ground like a shentleman , but the winds and ap Shones were equally deaf and swift .
So turning to the second , I just said , a flying enemy is not worth pursuit ,  and a coward below resentment .
Then discharging my pistol in the air , and running up to my now undismayed ally , whom I found chanting out Victoria !
Io Triumphe !
Io Paean !
with martial air and strides we marched off from the field together , returning back directly to my chambers .


8 .
CHAP .
CIII .


AS soon as we arrived , my friend threw himself-into a chair , with an heavy sigh .
I sat up all night , said he faintly - doubts and anxieties distracted me .
I eat nothing all this morning , and my perturbations , with the hurrying to and from the park , have so over-powered me , that I perceive my strength and senses beginning to fail .
Bring me a glass of water quickly .
I saw convulsions seize him , I ran for the bottle , but before I could reach it to him , he fainted , sunk , and died away .


I caught him up in my arms , laid him on my bed , and plenteously bedewed his pale face with water - but in vain .
- I searched his pockets for some eau de luce I had seen him snuff up several  times , in the morning .
The application had no effect , there was no breath to inhale the spirit - his pulse was silent , and his eyes still open , had now lost all speculation in them .


I was distracted - The Welchman 's shot must have taken place - I opened all his cloaths before , and lifted up his shirt to search the wound , but viewed a spotless form .
No , no , the wound was reserved for my heart alone .
Such a polished skin !
such limbs !
such breasts !
such a gender !
I gazed enraptured on the perfect fair .
An age of friendship rushed at once to love !
I besprinkled her lovely body all over , and the water applied to parts unused before to cold , began soon to awaken sense .
My hopes revived , and thinking the transition again from cool to warm , might more quickly compleat the cure , I stript off my cloaths in an instant , sprang into bed , and enfolded her lovely body in my arms .
The roses returned into her cheeks and lips , her eyes began to dawn , her breath expressed itself in murmuring sighs , and her pulse beat tremblingly alive all o'er .


Soon as her bright orbs had twinkled into life , she quick perceived her situation , and endeavoured to disingage herself from my embrace .
I leaped from the bed , threw myself on my knees by the side of it , intreated her forgiveness ,  urged my excess of passion , vowed ten thousand years of love and constancy , then caught her again in my arms , while through a charming mixture of surprise , confusion , gratitude , fear , irresolution , and desire , the yielding fair one


- Chorusque Turpiter obticuit .
- After the usual compliments were passed , as


He .
Thou most angelic fair !
all heaven is in thy eyes , and bliss immortal in thy arms , c..


She .
Oh , my dear undoer !
I would have sustained a thousand martyrdoms , sooner than have yielded to any other man alive , c..


-


I then begged the favour of her to let me into the mistery of her extraordinary metamorphosis - But first , said she , prithee let us have some breakfast .
Agreed - I slipped on my night-gown , and brought the tea-table to the bed-side .
She would have arose , but I would not suffer it .
She had not slept the night before .
After breakfast I returned again into bed .


-


I happened , after some time , to awake from that sweet slumber which the Epicurean philosophers stile the golden nap , while my fair Androgenes  lay still composed in sleep .
I raised myself up gently on my arm , and with looks of cordial love , hung over her enamoured .
When I had viewed her beauties for some minutes , I felt myself offended in delicacy , at her wearing a shirt , in my arms - The idea it conveyed disgusted me .
Hic mulier , haec vir , as Seneca says of equivocal dress .
So resolving to have no more of love in masquerade , I gently stole it off from her arms , then spurned the embracing cloaths aside ,


`` From limbs of such a shape and hue , `` As Titian 's pencil never drew . ''
The motion awaked her .
-


9 .
CHAP .
CIV .


I THEN repeated to my fair chum , the request I had made her before breakfast , and she thus readily began : My father was a clergyman of the diocese of - you 'll excuse  me  and had about three hundred pounds a year in the church , but no other patrimony .
My mother was daughter to captain - you 'll excuse me there again , in a regiment of foot , I forget the number .
She was extremely handsome , but had no fortune , and my father married her for love .
She had a sister , a year younger than herself , a perfect beauty , also , who was , some time after , married upon the same terms , to a gentleman of a considerable estate , in the adjoining county .


Soon after my mother 's marriage , her father was commanded abroad , and happening to be stationed in the East Indies , where in a few years he rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel , returned home with a fortune of near threescore thousand pounds , which he had amassed by spoil and plunder , among the nabobs of that country .


When my grandfather came home , he was presented with two grandchildren , one by my mother , and another by my aunt .
They were both daughters , which disappointed the old soldier extremely .
He settled a thousand pounds apiece , upon each of the children , and laying out the remainder of his acquisitions on the purchase of a considerable estate , declared to his daughters , that he would make the first grandson his heir . '
A pack of piss-kitchens , said he ,  by the Lord , I would rather leave my fortune to the marine society , than among a pracel of retromingents that are incapable of serving either their king , or their country . '
Soon after this proposition , my mother declared a pregnancy , and about a month later , my aunt annonced the same ,


Here I took occasion to observe to my blooming bedfellow , upon the grovelling ideas of an husband and wife manufacturing , as it were , an heir for an estate , when compared to the sublime and disinterested joys of two free lovers , regarding only their own mutual passion .
From hence we launched out into the unbounded field of philosophy and sentiment , in which scamper she acquitted herself with that spirit and refinement , which was natural to her .


-


10 .
CHAP .
CV .
Triglyph loquitur .


 Kate .
WHAT o'clock is it ?
'T is very late , my dear , the watch have just gone eleven .
Well Kate , then I think it full time for us to -


The grammarians , rhetoricians , and annotators have contrived different points , marks , and notes , for distinguishing the several parts of sentences , expressions , interrogations ?
exclamations !
( parenthesis ) references † , c. `` quotations , '' c. as the comma , colon : semicolon  period , [ bracket ] asterisk * , c..
But there was much wanted a further figure of writing , for the quod  factu faedum est , which Mr. Carewe , being a great scholar , has happily introduced to us , from Oxford  and which nearly resembles the aposiopesis , in rhetoric .


This we may stile a figure - not of speech , indeed - but rather , of silence  which may therefore , not improperly be called the silent minute .
This is not the hiatus , or mark of vacancy , which we sometimes meet with in certain broken tracts or imperfect manuscripts  but rather the sign of pleonasm , the full stop  the punctum stans , or conjugate point , of geometry  the punctum criticum , of morals  the punctum generatum , in conics  the punctum saliens , or punctum lachrymale , in anatomy  or the point sensible , in physics , as Mr. Lock terms it .
'T is finally , the dropping of the curtain , and closing of the scene .


This method seems to imitate the antient chorus of the Greek drama , which used to hint what was not thought proper to be brought upon the scene of action .
For it was a rule , in those chaste representations , never to suffer any thing to appear before the audience , which might give offence to decency , or humanity .


- Non tamen intùs Digna geri , promes in scenam .
 Therefore all rapes and murders were intirely excluded from their performances .
So that , then a days , if a reprobate , like some of our modern genius 's , should have had a delight in such spectacles , he was obliged to step behind the scenes , and make sport for himself , of which ever kind he was in the humour for , either by stabbing an actor , or rummaging an actress .


But then , this expression of before the audience , is to be understood literally , that is , before their eyes  for where rapes or murders happened to be any way necessary to the carrying on of the plot , they were always related to the public , by some by-stander , in all the particulars of the action .
I mean the latter , only  for as to the first , whatever diversion there may be , it has really so little diversity in it , that it by no means , affords us variety sufficient for an ingenious description .
What an infinite number of different deaths has Homer introduced in his battles !
No two men are wounded in the same place , nor by the same weapon .
But truly , 't is a dull thing enough to think of , that poor women , whether they will or no , can possibly be done , or undone , but one way .


The English stage indeed , does not confine itself to such restrictions  for there rapes , cuckoldoms , and fornication , are frequently exhibited  to the great delight and edification of the spectators  and men are stabbed , or run through the body , and dying in convulsions for a quarter of an hour together , before the philosophic audience .
But the English , I suppose , are a freer , and a braver people , than ever the Greeks or Romans were , and all representations partake of the genius of a nation .


11 .
CHAP .
CVI .


PRithee where did I leave off , when you interrupted me , thou restless chum , said she ?
The point we were last upon , replied I , was the subject of pregnancy .
I recollect it now , answered she , and thus proceeded in her story :


A little before my mother was delivered , my poor father was seized with a pleuretic fever , which carried him off , in a few days .
About a month after , my mother produced a son , who was christened Henry , after his grandfather , by whom he was immediately declared heir apparent , and the following month my aunt was also safely delivered of a boy .


 Just as these words were pronounced , the college bell tolled three - We arose , dressed , and issued forth to the outward apartment , where I had ordered , when I arose to breakfast , the most elegant repast that expence or the season could provide .
During the entertainment we were attended by dumb waiters , only , to permit the full freedom of conversation  and my lively mess-mate , having now thrown off the embarrasment and restraint of a personated character , shewed her sprightly female soul to be truly Epicurean .


I remember one reflection she made , just as I had finished the flask of champaigne , for she drank but two glasses of it : Were I , said she , an heathen , I should be apt to expostulate thus : If , as the stoics urge , all crimes be equal , why should not every vice shock our nature , as much as murder does ?
and for my part , added she , I can not help imputing it as a sin to the gods , to annex the sensations of pleasure , to any kind of wickedness , whatsoever .
'T is misleading , continued she , those weak persons who are apt to be governed too much by reason and nature , which they unlearnedly take for the most irrefragable revelations .


We walked the park in the evening , the Welch Fuzileers did not appear , and we strutted through  the throng , amidst the applause of all the colleges .
She ingaged me to supper , at her apartments .
I promised to follow her , and stepped aside to a milliners , to buy some night-shifts for her , in order to preserve the decency of appearances , for the future .


The next morning we awakened about eleven o'clock , dressed ourselves , and came out to breakfast , after which she thus continued her narrative :


12 .
CHAP .
CVII .


THIS same Henry , said she , was myself .
My mother , in the extremity of her grief upon my father 's death , resolving , like a chaste matron as she was , to live and die a widow , concluded that she had then but one game to play for the fortune  and determined within herself , that let matters turn out as they might , she would either bring forth a son , or else impose an heir upon her father .
One should shuffle well who deals for an estate .
The nurse and midwife were bribed , and the cheat passed .
For my grandfather was so rejoiced , and my uncle  so mortified , at this event , that the least thought of matriculation , never once entered into either of their heads .


My mother reared me with the greatest circumspection imaginable , hardly ever suffering me to be out of her sight , and keeping my nurse constantly to attend me , till I was fifteen years of age  which so scandalized the old colonel , that I heard him once say to my mother , By Mars , that fellow will soon beget softer brothers for himself , upon that wench there .


This home-bred and feminine kind of education , with the detaining me from a public school , placing me under the private tuition of an old curate of our parish , and never suffering me to mix , or play with boys , used sometimes , to put the old gentleman out of patience .
You 'll spoil that child , he would say , you 'll rear him a nest-cock , a coward  then fare him well , for me , for by the Lord , Madam , if ever he should betray the least symptom of that vice and disgrace to my blood , I will transfer my estate from him to his cousin Tommy , that boxed a great hulk of a barber 's boy so stoutly , before my face , t ` other day .


My mother , upon these occasions , would play him off with pleading the slightness and tenderness of my frame , which rendered it hazardous  to rear me after that careless and robust manner that other boys were treated in .
` It was my grief for his dear father 's death , '' she would cry , `` that has weakened my poor child 's constitution , in the last month - Should I not then endeavour to repair the damage I have myself done him ? '
He was tender-hearted , for he was brave , and such reflections would soften him .


` As for this same precious quality of courage , '' she would at other times say , `` let it be ever so valuable , it must be too dearly purchased at the price of modesty or religion , neither of which are sufficiently taken care of , in the common , or what is stiled the liberal education of young men , in these days .
But you , Sir , need have no manner of apprehension about the boy 's wanting spirit , whenever proper occasions shall call upon him to exert it .
A man may be brave without being forward , and a grandson of yours , Sir , though reared in a nunnery , would , like Achilles , soon betray that he was born a soldier . '
He was vain , and this would effectually stop his mouth .


13 .
CHAP .
CVIII .


 I WAS arrived at the age of fifteen , continued she , before I had been let into the secret of my real sex  and was hitherto kept so totally ignorant of anatomy , that I even knew not the difference of gender  and was at the same time so chastely bred , that the least curiosity or reflection about this matter , had never yet arisen in my mind .


I used sometimes , indeed , after twelve years of age , to be sensible of a remarkable difference between the kiss of cousin Tom , and his sister 's , or my own  which puzzled me to account for , till I had resolved it into our being both lads , of the same age , and such near relations  and upon the whole , fairly concluded , that till the heart has become susceptible of passion , the natural sympathy of human nature , subsisted stronger between those of the same sex .


But this philosophical blunder of mine , was soon after exploded , when I was about thirteen : A young fellow , who taught the guitar , happened to arrive in our neighbourhood .
I had a tolerable voice , and intreated of my mother that I might be suffered to learn this instrument , to  accompany it , which she consented to .
I found a sort of pleasure in looking at the young man , though he was not any way remarkably handsome  but whenever he took hold of my hands , in order to place them properly on the guitar , I used to find myself affected with the very same kind of emotion I had before felt , when cousin Tom used to kiss me .
Certain private intimations , or inward sensations , I knew not what , or why , and which I could not possibly resolve into any manner of sentiment , or philosophy , whatsoever .


This alarmed me extremely , I apprehended that I was contracting some dangerous disorder , and mentioned these unaccountable effects to my mother .
She blushed , cast down her eyes , and seemed to be in the greatest confusion imaginable .
I felt frightened and ashamed , from sympathy and filial tenderness , without being able to guess , or daring to ask the reason .
But the very next day , my music-master was dismissed  and I declare that I felt myself pleased at it , without knowing why .


14 .
CHAP .
CIX .


 SOON after this event , my dear mother began to decline in her health - She had been ill for some time , of a slow fever on her spirits , which terminated in a gradual decay , under which she pined for about two years .
At length , finding herself drawing near her end , she called me to her bed-side , wept , blessed , and embraced me .


Here my fair friend poured forth a torrent of pious tears , to the memory of her mother , which interrupted her story , for that time  nor did I press her to renew it , the rest of the day .
And really , gentlemen , said he , the recollection of her filial concern upon that occasion , is so strongly renewed , at present , in my own mind , that you 'll excuse me now , I hope , as I then did her , from pursuing this subject , till tomorrow evening .


Mr. Andrews and Mr. Beville bowed , Mr. Carewe wiped his eyes , and after taking a silent turn or two , along the shore , they returned home together , supped , conversed , and parted .


15 .
CHAP .
CX .


 THE next evening , the Triumvirate returning to their former station , amidst the clump of elms , Mr. Carewe thus proceeded : That day , said he , I dined and supped with my lovely orphan , but she insisted on my returning home to my own chambers , at night .
Our living so intirely together , both at bed and board , said she , may possibly be taken too much notice of .
I confess too that I begin to feel myself a little frightened at our adventure , since this pause has given me some leisure for reflection .
Besides , I really want sleep and rest .
Farewel , farewel , said she , till the morning , and I will then call upon you to breakfast .


I replied , that I was neither ravisher , nor bravo , that I scorned to take advantage of an accident , or a surprise , and would never claim any other tye over her , than her own inclinations .
But then , my charming Harriot , cried I out , and clasping her in my arms , will you not pass the day natural then with me , to-morrow ?
If , replied she , with a sigh , and a smile , at the same time , and pressing me close to her bosom , grace shall not return in sleep , unsought for , I  will .
I bowed , she bowed , then curtsied - we laughed , and I retired .


I had now , in my turn , some leisure for my own reflections .
I passed part of the night in them .
I pitied her misfortune , and would repair it .
But how ?
On my own part , I examined well my breast , and found I loved her not .
Adventure , frolic , and desire , only , had attached me to her .
That mystic Gordian knot , of two entwined hearts , which time itself can ne'er resolve , but the sheers of Atropos alone must sever , was wanting here .
And on her part , she had seemed to have acquiesced too readily in the intrigue  her conversation , since that event , appeared rather too free  and though she still preserved her modesty , she had , methought , resigned her chastity with too small reluctance .
The veni , vidi , vici , may enrich the spoils of war , but always impoverishes those of love .


However , upon the whole , I firmly resolved , at the hazard , nay the full expence both of life and fortune , to steer her safely through the aukwardness of her present circumstances  to confirm her mind , if not in female , at least in manly virtues  and to be her friend , guide , and champion too , through every incident of life , be her future conduct what it might .
For  from me she could never possibly deserve ill , who had myself , too much undeserved from her , already .
This resolve then , serving me instead of a prayer , I folded my arms , and slept quietly till morning .


16 .
CHAP .
CXI .


SHE came to breakfast , according to her promise , and immediately after , re-assumed her story .
My dear daughter , said my mother - This expression both surprised , and alarmed me .
I thought that she had fallen into a delirium , and was just going to expire .
I threw myself on my knees by the bed-side , and taking hold of her hand , cried out , 't is your son , 't is Henry , dear madam , you are now speaking to .
I know full well , replied she , who you are , but alas !
you little know what you are  and I am now going to unsold a secret to you , that will astonish you much more , but will , at the same time , explain the propriety of that expression , which has just now surprised you .


She then revealed to me the whole mistery of my metamorphose , in the manner I have before  related it to you , and then concluded her speech in these words : ` My dear daughter , said she , for now you will give me leave to call you by that name , behold with fear and caution , the difficult and hazardous course you have for the future , to steer alone !
I would have guided your little bark , and guarded this secret from you , for some years longer , had fate permitted .
But I must now intrust you to yourself , at the most dangerous time of life , without the protection of any other matron , but your own sense and virtue .
'T is however , some consolation to my mind , to think that your present mask will screen you from all outward perils , and I trust that those principles , both of honour and religion , in which I have so carefully educated you , even from your lisping years , have by this time , sufficiently shielded you within . '


I have taught you that religion should be our principal business in this life , as it will certainly become our only concern in the next .
I have instructed you that chastity was a virtue , required even in a man  how much more then , must you think it requisite , in your present sex , when the opinion of the world , and the laws of civil society both , join to demand it !
And for this purpose , believe  me , that modesty is the surest bulwark you can raise  't is the advanced guard , which upon being assaulted , gives timely notice to the citadel , for its defence .


With this great view then , you may have observed that I have all along , bred you up , rather as a woman , than a man  giving you the very same education , both in morals and manners , with your sister  that you might have nothing to unlearn , should you hereafter , at any time , be induced to confess your real sex .
For masculine manners are very incompatible with female morals , as liberty in one way , is apt to extend itself in an other  and the departing from our character , in any part of our conduct , is so apt to lead us astray , that we may not always be able to find our way home again .


I confess that I have sometimes repented me of this stratagem , '' continued she , `` more particularly since I have fallen ill  beginning to think that this world itself , were too dearly purchased , even with the least deceit .
But then I considered again , that my nephew will derive a very good fortune from his father , and that I have done nothing more , by this finesse , than establish my own father 's estate in the eldest branch of his family , where by the  rights of primogeniture , it should naturally remain , were it not for that too partial distinction between the male and female line , which I make little account of , as founded more in law , than nature  that you will , by this means , have it in your power to do more good  and lastly , that to discover the secret now would be to brand my own character with an indelible stain .
The world would then cry , it was wickedness in the first instance , and weakness in the last .


I therefore recommend it to you , my dear child , said she , to continue the masquerade , till you come into possession of the estate  when you may go out of these kingdoms , live abroad , and change your condition , as well as your garb , as you may find yourself inclined hereafter .


She then embraced me , and I parted from her in the utmost astonishment , and difficulty .
I could not believe my senses .
I suspected all this novel to be merely visionary , either in my mother 's mind , or my own comprehension of it .
I ran to my nurse , and examined her about this story , but she confirmed every particular of it  and , to put the matter beyond all dispute , gave me , alas !
too certain demonstrations of my sex .


 The effect of this extraordinary discovery in me , is not to be described .
My spirits sunk suddenly , like those in a thermometer , upon a chilling blast .
I felt a sensation creeping through my veins , like an ague fit , with a sort of timorousness stealing o'er my shoulders , like children left in the dark .
I felt aukward and helpless , like one who had lost a limb  I wept my fall , mourned my imperfect state , and like another Adam , blushed at the discovery of my nakedness .
In short , I was affected all over , rather like a person that had really suffered the metamorphosis , from man to woman , than one who had been but barely informed of it .
And becoming now a woman indeed , I fell from one hysteric fit , into another , and laughed and cryed myself by turns , out of them again .


17 .
CHAP .
CXII .


ABOUT two days after , my dear mother expired in my arms .
I grew inconsolable : A double distress oppressed my mind , to lose her , and to find myself !
My grandfather  came to the house the day she died , just time enough to give her his blessing , and to bid her farewel .
He lamented her , after his manner , ` Poor girl , she was indeed a good creature !
but good or bad , d' ye see me , we must all go , one time or another . '


Then turning to me , cried , Hearkee me , youth , no more of your piping and sniveling now , for though you have lost a mother , d' ye mind , you have got a much better thing , which is a father , child .
You have been too long tied to an apron-string already , but 't is I that shall have the management of you , now .
I design you for the army , d' ye mark me , but you shall go to the colleges first  for though I am not much book-learned myself , look you , I do n't think it absolutely necessary to be a blockhead , to be a good soldier .
No - far from it - I have known several officers fight stoutly enough , though they had both sense and learning to boot .
The king of Prussia , d' ye mind , is not only the bravest general in the world , but the compleatest too , in other matters .
Not that they signify , in the least , believe me , as to the main point  but what I mean , is , that they do n't hinder .
As the renowned Don Quixotte says , The pen blunts not the lance -


 Now there 's an example for you , my boy , fellow me that , I say - And indeed I do n't doubt , but with a little of my instructions , after you have done with your books , for good and all , you may .
I do n't love much bragging about the matter , d' ye mind , but let me tell you , younker , for all that , I know the thing , that 's certain .
Nay , that 's given up to me by all .


You may reasonably conclude , said she , that I was by no means in a temper of mind , to relish all this harangue , especially the fighting part of it  however , I looked submission , called him my father , my only parent now  and promised him that his commands should always be the rule of my obedience .


He lett off the house , brought my sister and me home with him , and in about a year after , disposed of her in marriage , with an additional portion of two thousand pounds , to a gentleman of fortune in the neighbourhood  and placed me at this university , about two years ago .
The rest you know too well , said she , and concluded her narration , with a sigh .


18 .
CHAP .
CXIII .


 I Do n't know how it might have struck my readers , as probably few of them may be philosophers , but I affirm , that from the first , I began to suspect this extraordinary personage to be a woman .
` He was not possessed of any great logical faculties , but had a refined taste , a facility in languages , but in the deeper studies and sciences , dull and slow .
He was fond and curious about experimental philosophy , but never troubled his head about the reasons of them , ' c. * Prithee are not these the characteristics of a woman ?
And need she wear petticoats , to declare her gender .


Epictetus says , that ` attempting to catch weak minds , with study , is like fishing for custard , with an hook . '
Now I confess that this image is a very absurd one , for it conveys no sort of natural idea .
Huswives never throw custards into a river , though the yellowness of the Tiber , upon the banks of which Epictetus lived , or rather starved , might have led him to imagine they did .
But if they had , surely no  alderman of those days , unless they were more stupid than those in the present times , which I think morally impossible , would have ever thought , as well as they love them , of such an instrument to catch custard with .


But your antient philosophers had but slobbering notions of things , in comparison of our modern adepts  and as they are generally interpreted , more by guess , than construction , I suppose the sense of Epictetus , to be , that women have rarely a sufficient depth , for heavy lading  for that the weight which might ballast a ship , would sink a boat .
There may perhaps , have been amazons in literature , as well as in war  but all I contend for here , is , that let the Thracians , or Samothracians , boast what they will , there never was an army of them .


And this natural oeconomy , in the distribution of parts , was certainly , most admirably designed , by Providence .
The eastern allegory conveys the hint to us , in a very ingenious manner .
Woman , 't is said , was formed of the slightest rib of man , on the left side , which embraced the heart .
Now , by a metonymy , let us substitute the heart for the rib  and this we know to be sensible of impression , but incapable of reason .
Women therefore , were given to us , for the sole purposes of feeling , and she who  would pretend to assume an higher character in life , in my opinion well deserves a rib-roasting .


Tacitus says of the English , when the Romans had established an empire among them , Jam domiti ut pareant , nondum ut serviant .
They were so far conquered , as to become subjects , but not slaves .
And this should be the motto of wives .
A man and his wife may be compared to the nominative and genitive cases , in grammar  the first always governs , the second never .
Women have confessedly certain privileges , but they become rebels when they would extend them to prerogatives .
The Salique law - the Salique law .


They were designed , not to harden our morals , but to soften our manners , not to stiffen our philosophy , but to relax our studies .
All subjects of taste then , as Shaftsbury says they may be referred to sensation , fall properly enough within their province .
Music , poetry , painting , dress , entertainments , c. Topics of these kinds , though we should differ about them , can never raise the heat of argument between us , sufficiently high to interrupt that harmony and concord , which should ever subsist among the sexes  for you know the adage , de gustibus non , c..
But should subjects of science once arise , then the argument , then the vindiction , then  the scholastic warfare begins !
For of science , man is proud , and woman vain .


19 .
CHAP .
CXIV .


BUT with regard to the - you know what I mean , methinks our friend Mr. Carewe is a little too severe , upon our heroine , in his late night thoughts * .
But as Noll Bluff says , he was then become as calm as a discharged culverin .
This is the only season for philosophy .
Prithee , what woman in the world , could have behaved otherwise , in her situation ?
Her mother indeed gave her a chaste education , but then she takes and tucks up the poor girl 's catastrophé , in a pair of breeches  and pray did you ever know any woman come to good , that wore them ?
Nay , even drawers are too much - They are symbolical .


Then again , what between her gender , and her garb , she might be deemed to be neither man or woman , but both between  and between two stools - You know the rest of the proverb .


 But she resigned her chastity too easily , you say - Perhaps she could not help it .
A lock never refuses the key , when 't is in order .
This was an adage of Vulcan 's , though some mythologists , with more probability , attribute it to the blacksmith 's wife .
Persons may be burned in their beds , but would it be fair to stile them suicremators , upon that account ?
The flame might be none of theirs , though the combustibles were .
The smell of fire , 't is said , renders the senses lethargic , and 't is too late to fly , when the flames surround us .


Now there are flames , even stronger than those of fire  and whatever inclines , is more powerful still , than that which compels us .
A resisting combatant may wear out his antagonist , but to take away the power of resistance , is a compleat conquest indeed .
Now pray consider the intire circulation of her blood suspended for a quarter of an hour , then set a flowing again by the warmth of a young fellow 's embrace  and the tepid tide rushing from the heart into all parts of the body , at once .
Consider that she had been in a swoon , and that the senses are the first things which awaken .
Chastity might have continued still asleep  for in the most virtuous woman , it may sometimes be taken napping .


 The stoics divide man , into three parts , the body , the animal soul , and the intellectual one .
To the first , belong the senses or notices  to the second , the appetites and passions  and to the third , reason and virtue .
Now as this is the order in which they ripen in our nature , it must certainly be the succession of their awakening from our sleep .
I would have women therefore , be very careful to bolt their chamber-doors at night , so as to receive timely notice  for a world of mischief may be done with two thirds of her , before she may possibly be able to stretch and yawn herself into reason or virtue .


And as for her acquiescing so readily in the affair afterwards , I am sure we have all been told , that whenever a misfortune happens to us , we should always endeavour to make the best of it .


But what will clear up my fair client 's character beyond every blot of censure , is this , that the poor child was but three years old , at the time of her undoing .
For it certainly is not fair to compute her age , but from the date of her metamorphose , which was at fifteen  and she was only eighteen , at the time of her fall .


She compares herself to Adam , in the first crisis * , and we may resemble her to Eve , in the  latter one : For though I am the first divine that ever had charity or duty enough , toward our great grandmother , to make the least manner of apology for her conduct , in a matter which was certainly more her misfortune , than her fault , I , as champion for the sex , must ask you now , what sense or virtue could be expected in a brat of a year old ?
And Eve was really no more , when she first played hell and the devil , with old nick  for from the very best accounts we have , it was the first year after her creation .


And this method of interpreting original sin , accounts for a difficulty which has ever puzzled both philosophers and orthodoxians , with regard to the origin of blacka moors  which in the natural way , say they , must have required another Adam , or second first man  but in the supernatural way , I will be bold to affirm , that they are undoubtedly the progeny of the devil and Eve , in conjunctione copulativo .
And this became farther manifest afterwards , when this globe came to be distinguished into zones , from their naturally taking possession of the torrid one , as being most congenial to the fiery constitution of this hellish breed .


20 .
CHAP .
CXV .


 WE lived together , for some time , in the pleasantest way in the world , by mingling love and books together , till my poor pope Joan began to perceive herself to be with child .
At first she knew not what ailed her , and did not in the least , suspect the truth of the matter .
And indeed how should she ?
She was always considered as a boy , and therefore women never spoke freely before her , as 't is possible they may sometimes do , among themselves  and her mother died , and her nurse was discharged , too soon after the discovery , to instruct her in the nature of those things .


And indeed , she has since declared to me , that she had not the least notion , of any couple 's being capacitated to beget children , except a married one .
That having heard of the mistery of marriage , the wedding ring , the indissoluble knot , that man and wife were thereby rendered one flesh , c. she had carelessly concluded , that there must have been some sort of a free mason 's secret in the matter , which the priest had the sole power of initiating the couple into , when he performed the ceremony .
And that she had imagined  what had passed between us , might have been indeed , the unchaste joys of lovers , but could really never have conceived them to have been the chaste duties of the marriage rites .


But when she was made sensible of her mistake , she grew extremely unhappy , she upbraided me severely , called me seducer , betrayer , c. in one breath , and in another , pressed me to marry her .
I replied with a line in a Scotch song , ' `` Jockey would loo , but he wo ` na marry , '' ' adding , that ceremony among friends , was absurd , but to take up forms , where one should leave them off , ridiculous to the last degree .
That we had really as much matrimony already between us , as might satisfy any two reasonable people , and that a clause of surrender , always raised the value of any tenure .
That marriage would be quite inconsistent with the plot that was carrying on for the estate , that it must expose us to the necessity of making a new confidant , which would certainly be too idle an hazard to run , for a bare punctilio .
That I would take care to extricate her from this difficulty , with sufficient address , and it would be time enough then , to settle plans for future conduct .


 This sort of jest and earnest apology , silenced , though not satisfied her  but served however , to render her seemingly easy , for the present .
She kept intirely within her own apartments , wore a loose bagniane , wrapt about her , and received no visits , except from me , on pretence of studying for a fellowship .


About a month before she was to lye in , the long vacation happened to come on , and I took a private lodging for her , about forty miles from Oxford .
We set out at night in a post-chaise together , and the next morning she assumed an intire female garb , that I had supplied her with long before , at college , for the pleasure and variety of seeing her a woman sometimes , when we used to shut ourselves up intirely in my chambers .


21 .
CHAP .
CXVI .


LADIES , I am much afraid that there is one particular , in this story , which will shock your faith extremely .
A girl of eighteen , not to know how a womon is got with child !
a probable , tale , truly !
And yet I do really think  such a thing may be very possible  first , because she affirms it  next , because her mother and her nurse guarded her equally from the converse of man and woman .
And they were much in the right of it to defend particularly against the latter , for fear of a discovery .
'T is mother 's maids that debauch all boys .
I 'll tell you the story of my first surprise , some time or other , when I am in the humour , and I assure you it will entertain you vastly .
Besides , might she not have read the story of Jupiter and Ganymede , the Formosum pastor Corydon ardebit Alexim , the account of Sappho and the Lesbian maids , the comedy of Love 's Labour lost , or Concubitus sine Lutin , , c.?
And is not a mixture of learning , apt to breed indigested ideas , and lead one into very unphilosophical inferences ?


And in the last place , who could ever imagine , from the mere light of nature alone , or from any manner of à priori reasoning , without the assistance of experimental philosophy , or à posteriori evidence , that a woman could possibly be got with child , so ridiculously ?


I have really known a few instances , myself , of this ignorance , in girls , who have lived very far in the country  and I remember a young lady once , of about seventeen , who upon hearing a gross expression one day , by accident ,  came up to me , and repeating it , asked me , as a scholar , what was the meaning of that hard word ?


I met lately , among some French tracts , with an authentic story of two young peasants , which I will relate to you after my own manner , not having the book by me .
Take it as follows :


21.1 .
The story of Lubin and Annete .


THEIR parents were both poor , and lived in a little village on the river Seine , in France , which consisted only of their two cabbins , and huts for their cattle .
The fathers and mothers , on both sides , happened to die , before Lubin was eighteen , and when Annete was about sixteen .
They were cousin Germans , and both extremely handsome .


As there was no fortune , in either of their families , worth the while of guardians , executors or trustees to pillage them of , each of the heirs took peaceful possession of their respective claims , which consisted of a few cows , some sheep , goats and poultry , with a small vineyard , which their fathers had held in partnership before ,


These young persons had been bred up together , from their infancy , and had contracted a mutual passion for each other , without knowing  it  taking it to be only the usual warmth of friendship .
When the last of their parents died , they joined their stocks , lived in common , and in the true state of innocence , together .


There was a small market town , within two miles of their hamlet , to which one or the other of them used to carry a lamb , a kid , or any thing else to sell , just as they might have them fit to dispose of .
One day , Annete went alone to market , with a basket of chickens on her arm .
The bailiff of the town , took notice of the roundness of her waist , and asked her if any thing ailed her ?
No indeed , Sir , said she , dropping a curtsy , I thank you - I am as well as ever I was in my life , thank God .
What makes your hips swell so of late then , my pretty Annete ?
Indeed Sir , I can not guess the reason , but I find myself growing fat every day , without knowing why , for I labour as hard as ever , and do n't eat , drink , or sleep , a bit more than usual .


You are married then , I suppose , replied the bailiff ?
No indeed , Sir .
You have got a lover , my pretty Annete ?
No indeed , Sir .
I never saw one in all my life .
Pray tell me who sleeps with you a-nights now , my pretty lass ?
Why my cousin Lubin , to be sure , answered the innocent .
Then cousin Lubin is a rogue , said the bailiff , and has got you with child , my pretty  Annete .
Upon this expression she stared , asked how ?
and then clapping her hands for joy , cried out , Je ferai peute être un petit Lubin !


The fair Raravis returned home to her cottage , extremely rejoiced at this news , and chid her Lubin for not letting her into the secret before .
He was as much surprised as she , and declared his equal ignorance of the matter  saying , 't is an odd way truly , of getting children , by romping , and tickling one another !


The priest of the parish , hearing of this extraordinary story , came to the village , and rated them soundly , about living in so criminal a state together .
This surprised them both , still more , than the other .
They replied , like simpletons and illiterates , as they were , that they could not possibly imagine themselves to have been guilty of any manner of crime , in what had passed .
We had neither of us any envy , hatred , or malice , in what we did - we injured no body , and we pleased ourselves .
To which Lubin added , can a sin , and its contrary , be both criminal , at the same time ?
Are we guilty in killing one person , and in bringing another into life , also ?


Tush , tush , cried the priest , you add presumption to your crime , by daring to reason with me .
But is it possible , added he , that you  can be so very ignorant , as to doubt that the bringing a bastard into the world , is a crime ?
The holy father then will kill it , cried out the simple Annete , and leaning on Lubin 's shoulder , wept bitterly .


The honest Lubin then turning to the priest , fell upon his knees , saying , O father !
I ask God 's pardon , and yours , for happening , though by mere accident , to get a child without your consents  but I am most willing to marry my cousin , this instant , in order to prevent such wickedness , for the future .


Son , replied the father , I am as willing as you can be , to stop up the gap of fornication , and lay open the gates of chastity  but 't is proper first , that you acquaint me , what kind of relation you bear to this young woman ?
I think you stiled her cousin , a while ago ?
pray what degree of kindred does she stand in toward you ?


Good father , replied the distressed Lubin , Annete is my first cousin .
What !
cousin German ?
Yes , father , the same .
This is more unlucky still , replied the priest , for it is not now in my power , any way to accommodate your misfortunes  as the church absolutely forbids all such consanguineous unions .


Upon this last sentence , the unhappy innocents retired home , weeping together , to their cottage ,  where from scruples of conscience , they resolved to keep separate beds , for life .
They continued in this state of divorce for some time , pining away , and languishing at each other , till the lord of the manor , having been told their story , sent for them both , and after examining them , and being fully convinced of their real simplicity and innocence , took compassion on them , and obtained a dispensation for them , from pope Benedict the fourteenth , to beget good catholics for the future , according to form .


22 .
CHAP .
CXVII .


THE ingenious Monsieur Marmontel was so struck with this story , that he has worked it up into a pretty novel , and inserted it among his writings , under the title of Histoire Veritable , in order to distinguish it from some others , which were only founded in fiction .
In the preface to it , he speaks thus : ` If it be dangerous , says he , to render young people too knowing , it is , on the other hand , rather more so , to let them remain too ignorant  for there are offences against laws , which do not  appear to be so against nature  and I am here going to afford you one instance how far innocence may err , when the bandage is kept too close upon the eyes . '


You may see , ladies , from these examples , joined to that of mother Eve , that a state of innocence , is a state of fall .
Therefore , as I have ever known you to swallow advice , as the sand does rain , and to keep both ears open to it , that it may go in at one , and out at the other , I would recommend it to you to be always , as to be sure you are already , innocent as doves , but wily as serpents , at the same time .


But in truth , girls , I can not contrive what in the world to do with ye .
Your mothers are quite at a loss , between freedom and restraint , to know how to educate ye .
It really requires a great depth in natural philosophy , for ethics will not do alone , to be able to conduct ye safe through life , considering ye still as free agents .
Therefore women are unequal to the task , and men are improper for it .


What 's to be done then ?
for my part , I prefer the eastern manner of cloystering ye , to any other .
For as women must be slaves , either to opinion , or restraint , I think it much less severity to put their chastity out of danger , than to annex infamy to the lapse of it .
Women are in a pitiaable  condition indeed !
our sex seduce them , and their own preven their reformation !


23 .
CHAP .
CXVIII .


IN our new sojournment we kept ourselves quite retired , nor ventured to stir abroad , except to take a short walk in the evenings , in a walled garden which belonged to the house where we lodged .
We neither of us brought any servants with us , from the university , for fear of a discovery , but I hired a man , and she a maid , in the village where we were situated .


I suffered my share of anxiety , as well as she , during this interval , till one night about ten o'clock , after we had supped , the pains of labour came upon her .
I called up the midwife , nurse , and landlady to her , and then ran up to my own room , which lay just over her 's .
Her groans pierced my ears and heart .
I could not stand them .
I ran down the first flight of the stairs , in order to get out of the house , but as her pains increased , her cries became so shocking , that I had not resolution enough to pass by her door - I ran back again , and locked myself in , like one pursued for a murder .


 I felt like Jaffeir , when he had betrayed his friend to the rack .
I opened the window , with a design of leaping out of it , into the garden , when I heard her screeches subsiding to a moan , and the landlady , soon after , running up stairs , cried out , Your wife is safe , and I wish you joy of a son .
I hastily opened the door , caught her in my arms , and thanked her for the joyful news , but adding , in a generous transport , '' Tis well !
but by Heaven I never will get her with child again , unless she vexes me . '
The good woman cried Tush , you fool , is that the way you 'll reward her labour ?
and ran laughing down stairs .


This happy event much relieved both our minds , and our joy was doubled in our present aukward circumstances , that it was not a daughter .
We congratulated each other upon this occasion , and as we were both of us university lads , we resolved to have all the antient ceremonies performed , in honour of our terrae filius .
Accordingly , on the fifth day , we passed him through the rites of the amphidromia , and appointed the festus nominalis , five days after , for his christening  both of which were executed according to the most exact formalities , of the Greek and Roman antiquities .


 When the curate asked me the name of the child , I answered Hermaphrodite .
The parson , mistaking the name , for the nature of the infant , refused to go on with the ceremony .
It is not orthodox , said he , to give such a creature baptism .
It can never be a good Christian , that 's plain .
How can it make a fair shew in the flesh ?
how serve the Lord with all its members ?
how be fruitful and multiply ?
All which things I do affirm to be required of a perfect Christian .


I laughed at the doctor 's mistake , and told him that this was a patro-matro-nimic , given to the son of Mercury and Venus  and that I looked upon ours also , to be the child of wit and love , alluding to the mother 's beauty , and my being reared in the lap of the muses .


May be so , may be so , replied the doctor .
I have forgot all your heathen stories , intirely - An heap of idle inventions , all of them .
I stick to the Bible - I am sure there are as extraordinary ones there - One need not turn to the Pantheon , to look for them .
And if they read the Bible at Oxford , instead of your Ovid 's Metamorphoses , I am positively sure and certain , that it would do every bit as well - nay better too , for one may learn a great deal of good out of the Bible , moreover .
But Christianity is disregarded  now-a-days , and all our youth are bred up perfect heathens .


In the interim of this discussion , the nurse had slily unpinned the child 's rocket , stripped up its flannels , and presented it , heels foremost , to the doctor .
He then put on his spectacles , which he had been twirling about his thumbs , during the harangue , and after examining the infant , matriculatively , cried , Ay , ay , this will do  this child is within a very few words of becoming an excellent Christian  and then proceeded to the consummation of it .


After the ceremony was over , she smiled at my whim in the nomination of the child , but desired , lest perhaps other people might be led into the same mistake with the doctor , that we should stick to the male part of the derivation , and stile our son Hermes only , for the future .
This I readily agreed to , and the doctor concurred with us , saying , it certainly was a much more Christian name , than the other .


During her confinement here , I never stirred from her bed-side , except when I retired to meals , or that she fell into a slumber  reading to and coversing with her constantly , to keep up her spirits  and as we passed under the character of man and wife , and that I had changed my name , we had this same curate of  the parish to read prayers for us , morning and evening  and when she was able to sit up at meals , I asked him frequently to dinner , which was a great relief to us both , as she was become very reserved and thoughtful , and that I began to grow intolerably uneasy at the confinement .


24 .
CHAP .
CXIX .


ABOUT a fortnight after she was brought to bed , gentlemen , continued Mr. Carewe , an adventure happened to me , which I shall relate to you here , in its proper place .


My landlord took me aside , one evening , and told me that there was a lady just come to his house , who desired to speak with me .
I never staid to inquire who she was , what she was , or what her business ?
My only question was , Where is she ?
He led me down stairs to the parlour , and opening the door , cried , Madam , here is the gentleman you want , and retired .


I walked into the room , and a lady richly dressed , remarkably tall , finely made , and about five and twenty , rose gracefully from her seat , curtsied , and moved forward .
I bowed ,  and we advanced briskly toward each other , I to salute her , and she to shut the door , which she did , and bolted it too , at the same time , taking a kiss en passant .
Then returning to her seat , and placing me close by her , she turned a very handsome face toward me , and thus began :


The freedom I have taken with you , Sir , must certainly surprise a stranger , but the business I have to propose to you , will probably do so much more .
I have been married these seven years , to a gentleman in this neighbourhood  and my husband has really behaved toward me , during all that time , not indeed as well as it was possible , but as well , I suppose , as men generally do to their wives  so that upon that score , I have no manner of complaint against him .


How irksome , dear Sir , must it then be , to a woman who has no charge to bring against an husband , on her own part , to be reduced to the sad necessity of urging one , and of the blackest dye too , against him , on a foreign account  without malice , resentment , or the least manner of provocation , to impel her to it .


Yet such , however , is my unfortunate situation , continued she , applying her handkerchief to her large blue eyes  for my husband has been lately guilty of a most barbarous , cruel , and premeditated murder , which not only cries  aloud to Heaven for vengeance , but to me in a most particular manner , for justice , as I am perhaps the sole person alive , who can detect this villany , as being the only one who knows any thing of the malice praepense , which could have induced a man , in other things tolerably good , to perpetrate so atrocious a crime .


Nothing , you may be assured , dear Sir , continued she , could have induced me to enter into such a prosecution , but the clamorous cries of justice , and of blood , which supersede all other obligations , and make me dread the divine vengeance on myself , as an accomplice , should I suffer my ears to be shut against their urgent calls .


You may think it extraordinary , perhaps , that I should address myself to you , who are a stranger , and a man of no power or authority , in this shire .
But should I have applied to any of the neighbouring justices , I was afraid , as they are all my husband 's friends , lest they might privately convey an hint to him to make his escape , to lock me up , or probably , by some more effectual method , to put it out of my power ever to appear against him .


I bethought myself , therefore , of placing myself and my cause , under your protection  for having seen you several times at church here ,  and taken notice of your respectable appearance , as a young man of fortune and fashion , and being informed , upon inquiry , that you were come to reside , for some time , at this house , I believed that your interfering in this matter , would not only assist me to obtain justice , but also screen me from the violence and resentment of my husband , upon this melancholic occasion .
Here she closed her charge , continuing still to weep , as she had done almost through the whole of her harangue .


I was shocked , astonished , and concerned .
For God 's sake , madam , said I , what are the particulars of this horrid murder ?
what inward consciousness have you to accuse him upon ?
or what outward circumstance , to prove him guilty of the fact ?
Sir , replied she , the body was found murdered , in a pit , and the person 's horse lay killed just by him , to prevent his running home to raise the alarm too soon .
My husband was the last person known to be in his company , and has for some time , suspected him of an intrigue with me , since which surmise he has never suffered him to come within his doors , bearing him constant grudge , and deadly malice .


25 .
CHAP .
CXX .


 I Told her that I did not see sufficient grounds , upon the whole of the story , to take away a man 's life , who had any rank or character in the world  but your internal evidence , madam , said I , which seems the most material , with you , will never sway , nor ought it , with a jury .
I therefore advised her to return home , to say nothing of her intended prosecution , which should for ever be buried in silence with me , to leave the detection of this crime to Providence , and the punishment of it to the laws  for that , if there was any foundation , from facts or circumstances , to charge the murder upon her husband , there would probably , soon arise more natural and unquestionable prosecutors against him , than a suspected , and provoked wife could ever possibly be deemed .


What effect can your evidence probably have , added I , except to fix the indelible stain upon your own character , of two the most abominable and unjustifiable crimes in nature  an offence against an husband 's bed , and an attempt upon his life ?
The first may ever remain problematical , if the latter does not add demonstration to it .
The adultress will hunt for the precious  life .
And with regard to him , continued I , it must rather serve to acquit , than condemn him  for the very cause of your suspicion , may in some sort , be deemed the reason of his excuse .


The highest injury and mortification a man can possibly receive , went I on , is from an offence of this nature - The resentment and provocation must therefore , rise , in proportion to the wrong .
This is so well understood , and admitted of , by legislators , continued I , that there is always an indulgence shewn , in the administration of the laws , upon the fatal effects of any sudden transport of passion , on such an occasion .


But persons may not always be able , or sufciently prepared , to execute their resentment , upon the first discovery  and as the Christian code * has not thought proper to adequate a penalty to the offence - for what are fines or imprisonment , to a man 's own sense of the wrong ?
- I really think that a resentment , shewn upon the first opportunity , as well as upon the first provocation , may be perfectly agreeable to reason , though not , it seems , to law .
He will not regard any ransom , neither will he rest content , though thou givest many gifts .
Nor may this be deemed of the nature of malice praepense , neither ,  while the injury continues still instant to the soul , and that the sense of it may rather gain strength , from reflection .
For jealousy is the rage of a man , therefore he will not spare , in the day of vengeance .


Now , to sum up all , madam , said I , and rising from my seat , give me leave to add , that the justice which you say , and which I shall still preserve charity enough to presume you are actuated by , is much mistaken in this point  for there are , believe me , let the stoics urge what they will , certain duties , within duties , which may render that action , which would be just in one , unjustifiable in another .


26 .
CHAP .
CXXI .


SHE seemed extremely confounded , rose and walked toward the window , wiped her eyes , and then turning about to me , with a constrained composure in her air  So young a preacher , said she , I have never heard before , and you may be an orthodox one too , for aught I know  but this I am sure of , that after the steps I have already taken , this day , in first charging my husband with  the murder , and then eloping from him , it is now too late for me to think of returning home again .
Even should he receive me , how could it be possible for us ever to live on any terms , together , after his having suspected me of adultery , and my accusing him of murder !


I have therefore no resource left me now , said she , with a sigh , and countenance full of distress , but to pursue this point , at least so far , as to frighten him into some terms of separate maintenance  which , after what you have said to me , upon this extraordinary occasion , shall , I assure you , be the utmost of my malice against him .
And surely , Sir , said she , catching hold of my hand , and falling on her knees before me , you will not refuse me your humane and generous assistance , so far at least , as may be requisite to extricate an unfortunate woman , out of so shocking a dilemma .


I raised her up in my arms , and - I am quite ashamed of it , gentlemen , said he , looking at Andrews and Beville - I could not refrain from embracing her .
I had really conceived the most virtuous abhorrence , of her crimes , but - I do n't know how it was , I found the kissing her , most wickedly pleasant .


I then promised to take her person under my protection , though I would not patronize her vice   and telling her that it would not be proper for me to be seen any more in her company , for the remainder of that evening , I left her in the care of my landlady , and retired to see how my fair invalid had rested since I had parted from her .


I found her just awakened from a refreshing slumber , and with that steady calm temper which she had constantly preserved , through the whole course of her confinement in this place .
She was thoughtful , but not grave  easy , though not gay  and had that kind of even chearfulness always about her , which flows rather from a composure of mind , than a mirthfulness of heart .


I did not mention a word of my adventure below stairs , and had given the same caution to the whole house , as I was afraid that the shocking circumstances of the story , might have too much affected the weakness of her spirits , in her present invalid state  and that possibly , it might have alarmed her with a little jealousy , also , as there was sufficient reason to suspect , that the lady 's chief concern about the matter , might have been for the loss of one galant , and her principal end in applying herself to me , be for the compassing another .


I sat and conversed with her , till her nurse-tender dismissed me , and then retired up stairs  to my own apartment , read for an hour or two , and went supperless to bed .


27 .
CHAP .
CXXII .


THE next morning , about eight o'clock , I was awakened by some body coming into my chamber  and as I never shut the windows , at night , in order to rise early , I perceived a gentleman whom I had never seen before , walk into the room , in boots , with a pale , frightened look , and a pistol in each hand .
I called out to him to stand , and declare his business , instantly , or I would fire at him  leaping into the floor , on the opposite side of the bed , and snatching up one of my pistols , which lay on a chair , just by it .


He answered me as quick as I could speak , in these words : Dear Sir , I ask pardon for this abrupt appearance , and be assured that I wear not these arms , to offend you , but to defend myself  and so far from meaning to assault you , Sir , I am rather come hither to require your protection .
I then desired him to lay down his arms , on the table , and take his seat , till I  should have put on my cloaths .
He did so , but while I was dressing myself , proceeded thus :


I am come , Sir , said he , to compleat the adventure you had with a certain lady , yesterday evening .
I am , alas !
the unfortunate husband of that wicked woman , who in revenge for my not having repudiated her , some time since , which I am now convinced she was disappointed in , is at present , endeavouring to set herself free from the marriage chain , by the most diabolical stratagem , imaginable .
She eloped from me , yesterday evening , continued he , after some very warm expressions , on both sides , she quitted the room in a rage , and left me in such astonishment and confusion , that I did not know she had gone away from my house , till the bell rang for supper .


I then sent servants all round the neighbourhood , to inquire after her , and about five o'clock this morning , one of them returned back and informed me , that she had been seen alighting at this house , from behind a tenant of mine , who lives in a little village near me .
I was still sitting up , so mounted my horse , and rode off directly hither .


As soon as I arrived , I inquired from the landlord , what he knew about her , and he told  me that when she came to his house she desired to speak with the gentleman stranger who lodged here , that he immediately introduced you , Sir , to her , and then left you together , in the parlour  that you remained there but about half an hour , and then retired up stairs to your own apartments , for the remainder of the night .


I then desired him to shew me the chamber where she lay , and having left my pistols in his charge , for fear of alarming her , I went softly into the room , opened the window-shutters , and then going to the bed-side , gently put aside the curtain , to see if she was awake .
She opened her eyes , just at the time , looked at me for half a minute , before she could recollect herself , then shrieked out , and hid her head under the cloaths .


I sat down by the bed-side , and desired her to be under no manner of apprehension of any violence from me , that I only came to expostulate with her , calmly , upon her hasty expressions , and precipitate flight  and also desired to know , how far she intended to carry her wickedness and disobedience .


She then uncovered her head , and with a steady countenance , replied , that she really deemed me a murderer , and had therefore fled from my house , in fear of her own life  that , on the  way , her conscience had urged her to a prosecution against me , and that despairing of justice , from any of my own quorum , she had applied to a stranger , for assistance , who had generously promised it to her .


By this time I was dressed , and sitting down by him , repeated to him all the circumstances of the charge his wife had brought against him .
I told him that there was certainly foundation enough , to put him upon his tryal , at least , that guilty , or not , this affair must be attended with considerable scandal , trouble , expence , and hazard .
But that be he criminal , or be he not , taking all circumstances together , I compassionated his unhappy situation , and if he would candidly relate to me the whole truth of the story , I would be his friend , so far , as to put a stop to the iniquitous and unnatural prosecution , on his wife 's part .


Sir , replied he , with an expression of joy and surprise in his countenance , your generosity and humanity have won a secret from me , which I never should , nor indeed ought to have revealed , to any other person breathing  but now , said he , rising , and lifting up his hands and eyes to the ceiling , with the same sincerity with which I intreat of Heaven forgiveness for my offence , I will confess my crime , in this article , fully to  you .
So saying , he returned to his seat , and thus began :


28 .
CHAP .
CXXIII .


MY father died soon after I became of age , and left me , who was his only child , a clear estate , of about a thousand pounds a year .
I lived an idle , debauched life , like other young men , till I was two and thirty .
At that unlucky aera , I first saw this woman , fell in love , and married her , without a fortune .


She was then , about eighteen , and from what she appears to be this day , one may easily judge what a charming person she must have been , at that age .
We lived in perfect harmony together , for near six years , during which interval , she bore me one son , and a daughter .


About a year ago , and near the unhappy end of this too happy period , a gentleman arrived from the university , at his seat about four or five miles distant from me .
As this is a neighbourhood in the country , and that I had been formerly well acquainted with his father , I paid in due course , the first visit to him .


 He was a young man , of about two and twenty , not handsome , but of a genteel person , and had that peculiar easy air about him , which denotes both birth and breeding .
He was hardly endowed with even a moderate share of understanding , but had that kind of liveliness , and nonchalance in his manners , which is too apt to captivate women , because it does not alarm them sufficiently to put themselves upon their guard .


In about a month after , he returned my visit , and staid a week with us .
He was all frolic , and dissipation .
He gave a shift , to be run for by the girls of the village , a hat , to be cudgeled for , a saddle , for a horse-race , and tobacco , to be grinned for by old women .
He made me send for a fiddler , and summon all the young people in the neighbourhood , to a ball  and used to din our ears , in the morning , with the noise of his hounds , and French horns .


He gave us an invitation at parting , and in a few days , we returned his visit .
The same kind of active idleness and extravagance , continued while we staid there .
Strange , giddy creature !
my wife would sometimes say , he is as innocent and undesigning , as an infant - but he will run through his fortune and constitution , as other young heirs do , before he has given himself time  for the enjoyment of either .
A friend , such as you are , she would add , who has so much the advantage of him , in years and sobriety , must be of vast service , to prevent his falling into the hands of harlots , and sharpers .
I thought as she spoke , and therefore incouraged a frequent intercourse between us .


29 .
CHAP .
CXXIV .


I Have seldom known a good end come of inmates , of this kind , in a man 's house .
The husband is sometimes en deshabille , both in temper , and habit .
The friend always decked out , in dress and chearfulness .
The husband careless , the friend attentive - the husband old , and the friend new .
Novelty and comparison give the advantage .
Freedoms increase , and it is never fafe for a woman to be familiar , but with her husband .
There are certain periods in female virtue , which philosophers stile critical minutes , when chastity , by long watching , I suppose , begins to nod , and the  close besieger must , sooner or later , catch her off her guard .


An old and faithful servant , who had been butler to my father , and continued in the same station , with me , came to me , one day , about a month ago , and after a good deal of hesitation and difficulty , gave me some hints of a criminal intercourse , between my wife and my friend .
I caught fire , and in a peremptory tone , commanded him to reveal all his knowledge in that affair , without the least reservation or disguise .


He then told me , that the morning before , as he was going to wind up the clock , on the staircase , he saw him going into his mistress 's bed-chamber .
I was surprised , at first , said the poor old man  but considering his free careless manner , that he might not have known your honour was up , and called in to rouse you , or might have imagined she herself was up , and have gone in to hurry her to breakfast , I did not harbour much suspicion , at that time  especially as I saw you all , soon after , at the tea-table , together , and that I did not perceive the least manner of guilt , in either of their countenances , which I supposed that no wicked persons could ever disguise .


 But , this morning , continued he , as I was coming down from my own room , later than usual , with my shoes in my hand , to avoid making a noise as I passed by your door , I perceived him again coming out of my mistress 's chamber , upon which I turned back , for a while , to let him pass by , as if unnoticed .
I then began to grow uneasy in my mind , said he , and thought it my duty to inform your worship , of such practices .


I was struck dumb for some minutes , and then directed him to lie on the lurch , the next morning , and the moment he should see him go into the room , to come and acquaint me of it .
I went immediately into the closet , and charged my pistols , afresh .
I endeavoured to appear easy and composed , all that day  I did not stir out , indeed , but walked about the parlour , humming a tune , or sat in the window , reading a pamphlet , till dinner .
In the evening , we played parties of picket together , and I took notice of many freedoms between them , both in words and action .
Catching hold of her hand , when she cut the cards , or presented them to him to be dealt .
Free speech ?
and arch looks  with other ribaldry , of the same sort .
Such impertinences might have passed unnoticed , at another time , but trifles light as air , c..
We  supped , and parted , about eleven o'clock , all in seeming harmony .


The anxiety of that night , is not to be imagined .
I doubted , I believed - I hesitated , I resolved - I hoped , and I despaired .
I recollected a thousand circumstances , to think her innocent - a thousand others , to deem her guilty .
Her touch digusted me .
I lay on the stock of the bed , slept little , and waked in a perfect fever .
She slept sound , and did not in the least , perceive my disturbance .


The next morning , I rose early , in order to give iniquity fair play , and retired to my study  where I waited with impatience , till my confident came to tell me , that my wife was come down to breakfast , and he had not observed any thing , of what he had lain in wait for , though he had kept his station , ever since he heard me go down stairs , till that every moment .


O Sir !
cried he out , at this period of his discourse , is it not a shocking thing to say , that I felt myself disappointed , at this report !
but such , however , was my wretched situation .
Delayed revenge is like a late feast , the appetite palls upon it .
This day passed over , in the same manner as the foregoing .


30 .
CHAP .
CXXV .


 THE next morning , the butler came running to me out of breath , and told me he had just then , seen him go into the chamber .
I desired him to remain upon the spot I left him , till I should call him up .
I walked up stairs , directly , went into the room , with a pistol in my hand , and shut the door after me .
'T is too late to hide your baseness now , villain , said I , in a low voice , but I will , notwithstanding , spare your life .
Rise instantly , open the window , and leap out into the garden  then return into the house , call for breakfast , and leave the rest to me .


He flew to obey my commands , and as soon as I had shut down the window after him , I opened the door , and going to the stair-head , called up John .
Friend , said I , I can not find him here , but do you go in and seek for him .
He declined it , till I presented the pistol to his breast .
He then searched the room diligently , and upon his disappointment , looked aghast , and trembled .


Old man , said I , fear nothing  your information has shewn an honest disposition in you ,  but your eyes begin to fail you .
You must have mistaken me , who might have gone in and out , the two former mornings , and this day you must have taken one of the maids for a galant .
The poor fellow then threw himself upon his knees , acknowledged his error , crying , that threescore and ten had rarely eyes to be depended upon , and intreated forgiveness , both of God , and us .


I granted his pardon , said I would intercede with his mistress , bid him never mention a word of the affair , and desired him to go down stairs , and lay the tea-table .
But how was his surprise augmented , and his mistake confirmed , when he met the gentleman in the parlour , and intreating for breakfast , saying that he was obliged to set out for London , that very morning .


I then returned into the chamber , where my wife had lain silent , and motionless , during the whole transaction .
She rose up , on her knees , conjuring me to believe her innocent , the truth of which she offered to certify to me , by the most sacred oath .
She said that the young man had always a giddy free romping way with him , which she had frequently reprimanded him for , and had finally threatened to inform me of it , if he should continue his impertinence .
But that in  thought , word or deed , a vestal was not purer than she , and then burst into a flood of tears .


I replied , that I hoped , for my own sake , and had charity enough to believe , for hers too , that no criminal intercourse had ever passed between them  that her indiscretions had been indeed , almost unpardonable , but that I had given sufficient proof of my having deemed them only such , by my command of temper , upon this trying occasion , with the stratagem I had made use of , in order to screen her character even from a footman 's censure  and that I hoped her conduct would thenceforth , become thoroughly reformed , from a grateful sense , of my behaviour , and a proper condemnation , of her own .


She did not come down to breakfast , but after the table was removed , and the coast clear , the gentleman made me many asseverations , and swore all the usual oaths , of men of honour , upon such occasions .
To which I answered , that my wife 's innocence rested not upon his justification , that I dared not even to think her guilty , though I believed him to be a villain , which I would then resent , more emphatically by deeds , than words , if the regard I had already shewn by my late contrivance , toward her character , had not reprieved him from my vengeance .
He acknowledged  his inhospitality , asked my pardon , and retired with precipitation , and confusion .


31 .
CHAP .
CXXVI .


MY behaviour , upon this occasion , continued he , must appear very extraordinary , to you , and so indeed it was  but my reasons for it , were these : Had I found them together , the first day , as I expected , I should certainly have shot him through the head , and might probably , have dispatched her too , immediately after him .
But the disappointment , and the interval , had given me time for reflection .
My resentment was by no means abated  but my prudence and my pride , had tied down its hands .


I did not think her actually guilty , at that time , though her behaviour since , and at present , has now fully convinced me that she was .
There are a sort of women , who from a shameful neglect in their education , will too freely give , and take , improper liberties  thinking it sufficient virtue to abstain from mere matter of  fact .
I have seen women sometimes , handle and present a pistol , out of a bravo , who would be terrified to death , at the thoughts of letting it off .
I hoped the best , and imagined she might be one of these .
Though , after all , where is the difference , between a wife who is really , or only seemingly guilty ?
If , as the verse says , ' `` She still is virtuous , if she so is deem'd , '' ' the reverse of this maxim has , I am sure , much greater truth in it .


In the next place , the thoughts of my dear children , came across my mind .
I believed them both my own , and loved them , with a true father 's fondness .
Could I then think of exposing their mother , the mother of my daughter more particularly , to infamy ?
for a mother in dishonour , is a reproach to the children .
My own pride also , came in bar , on the apprehension that such misfortunes , from the unreasonable and unaccountable opinions of the world , generally occasion a man to fall into contempt .


All these considerations , joined together , operated upon my mind , and wrought my temper to that calm conduct , which I manifested upon this mortifying occasion .
They governed my behaviour toward her also , for there is certainly no medium , between seeming to think a wife  guilty , and turning her out of doors  and it hurt my pride less , to appear credulous , than tame .


32 .
CHAP .
CXXVII .


MY wife did not , by any means , behave properly , upon this crisis , though possibly she meant to do so  she was very ill-tempered , and insolent , perhaps from imagining that mildness and humility , might argue a sense of guilt  and rendered the poor old butler so uneasy in his service , that he gave me warning , in a week after this adventure  which obliged me to discharge him , and settle an annuity on him , for life .


Thus matters went on , a little aukwardly , between us , for about three weeks , till the day before yesterday  when I happened to go to dine at a neighbour 's , in a free way , without invitation , or knowing who were to be of his company .
There I chanced , most unluckily , to meet the person who is the subject of our present tragedy .
We took no manner of notice of each other , which however , being in a mixed company ,  was not observed .
The bottle went briskly about , and I drank hard , and in an ill temper , which is always a dangerous thing .


When we broke up , and came to mount our horses , this gentleman 's servants were out of the way .
He was pressed to stay , and answered , that he was under an engagement to some company at his own house , that night , but lamented the want of one of his men , whom he called his guide , as he knew the road , across the country , and that it was now late , and dark .
No matter for that , replied our host , follow your friend , there , said he , pointing to me , to his avenue-gate , 't is not half a mile about , and it is strange if you are not able to find the way from thence , which you have been galloping to and fro , both night and day , for these twelve months past .


This unlucky reflection increased my rancour .
I made no manner of reply to the proposition , but mounting my horse , bowed to the gentleman of the house , and rode off .
This absurd person followed me .
I was piqued at it .
It appeared a fresh insult .
It was making too slight of my resentment .
I mended my pace to get rid of him , but he pursued me still .
I had not the least thought of it , the instant before .
I am convinced that this may have been often the case .
People should be particularly careful therefore ,  never to indulge , as we are too apt to do , that malice , or habit of mind , which may temper them for a crime that opportunity , or the devil , may suddenly tempt them to .


Just when we came to a certain pass , I turned into a field , and pulling up my bridle , cried out to him , I have taken the lead from you , long enough - I now resign it to you .
Push away , across this fair field , and we shall recover the road again , at the end of it .
He clapped spurs to his horse , and in an instant I heard them both , in full speed , fall tumbling down the precipice .
I listened for a minute , but heard neither motion or groan , from man or beast .
I was struck with horror - I grew sober in a moment - I repented too late .
And through the awful silence , and horrid darkness of the night , rode home a wretch indeed !


This , Sir , concluded he , is the intire truth , and total circumstance , of my unhappy story  and to shew you that I am not quite guilty , I have been obliged to let you into the secret , how far I am so .
Not guilty , perhaps , according to the laws of man , but too surely criminal , to the full , against those of God !


33 .
CHAP .
CXXVIII .


 HE then told me , that the coroner 's inquest had brought in a verdict , of accidental death , the evening before , as no marks of violence , appeared upon either of the bodies , but what had been occasioned by the fall .
Thus you see , Sir , said he , upon what ground I stand , with regard to any prosecution about this affair  so that nothing but the confidence which your generous deportment , with the kind hint you have dropped of extricating me out of this difficult business , have tempted me to place in you , need have induced me to let you into the secret of my being , in any manner accessory , to this murder , which in all my future prayers and penitence , I shall ever consider , and endeavour to atone for , as one , in all its most horrid and culpable forms .
Amen !


He then claimed my promise , about quashing the indictment : I told him how I had reasoned , and how far prevailed with the lady , the evening before .
That , upon what I had heard , from both parties , I could judge that there was now no possibility of their ever living together , again , and that I thought he would make a prudent  bargain , in giving her a bill of divorce , with two hundred pounds a year , to get quietly rid of this troublesome and unhappy affair .
He embraced me and the proposal , together .


I went down stairs to acquaint my fair client with this negotiation , and she willingly accepted of the terms , on condition that I should be her trustee .
I mentioned this article to the husband , who very readily consented to it .
I see plainly , said he , her further scheme in this : You are an handsome young fellow , and she has no design , I dare say , of retiring into a nunnery .
She would keep up an intercourse with you .
Be it so .
She has now the world before her , where to chuse , and though it is some consolation to my humanity , at the same time , I think she has better fortune than she deserves , to fall into the hands and protection of a gentleman of worth and honour , he was pleased to add , as you , Sir , appear to be .


Immediately upon this , I sent off an express to the next town , for an attorney , who came , and while the gentleman and I were at breakfast , drew up the article for a separate maintenance  we then went into the room , to the lady , for their mutual signing and sealing  which when over , he rose from his seat , made a low bow to her , without saying a word , but  threw a bill of fifty pounds into her lap , and let fall some tears .
Then turning toward me , thanked , embraced me , and retired .


This moving scene affected me , extremely .
It was near half an hour before I could get the better of it .
Had I been twenty years older , I I might possibly not have got rid of it , so soon .
She appeared a good deal discomposed , also .
She wiped away a few tears , cried , ` Dear Sir , am I not extremely to be pitied ?
But 't is past , 't is over now  and 't is a jest to think of resisting destiny . '
This is a fine salvo that some folks have got - They sin away , without remorse , and impute their crimes , to fate .


' `` The stars are more in fault than they . '' '
34 .
CHAP .
CXXIX .


I Then went up stairs to see how my fair prisoner had rested , and found her just done breakfast .
She asked me where I had been truanting , for the hour past , and I replied , that there had happened a small law-suit in the neighbourhood , that I had been appointed umpire ,  on both sides , and had settled the dispute to the intire satisfaction of the parties .
Ay , said she , with a sigh , you can be good , if you please .
I staid with her , reading and talking to her , by turns , till her chicken came upon the table , and then retired to my own meal , as usual , for the flavour of beef or mutton were yet too strong for her .


I went down stairs , paid a visit to my new ward , and joined my dinner to hers .
Our behaviour toward each other , was a good deal constrained .
She thought , perhaps , that a free carriage might have given me too slight an opinion of her character  and I imagined , that a cavalier air , on my part , would seem too much like taking advantage of her present situation .
We drank a bottle of wine together , after dinner , talked of indifferent matters , and I then took my leave , pretending some extraordinary business called me away  for I had given a caution to the family not to acquaint her with my particular engagements in the house , and she seemed a stranger to them herself .
At parting , she invited me to return to supper , which I promised .


I drank tea and played picquet with my first charge , till nine o'clock , and then retired .
I felt myself uneasy , all the evening .
I was dissatisfied  with the disingenuousness of my own conduct , and was alarmed at my entering too far into vice .
I had virtue enough to condemn such courses , but not resolution sufficient to quit them .


After supper , the fair refugee and I appeared a good deal more at our ease together .
We entered into a very galant converse , made a jest of prudes , and ridiculed parsons  deemed matrimony but mere form , and that the unlucky expression , of man and wife becoming one flesh , was apt , from the very idea of homogeneity , to make them consider each other , too much as the legs or arms , of the same body , affording little more enjoyment in the conjugal embrace , than if they were only hugging themselves .
Observed , that David was a man after God 's own heart , without troubling ourselves to fix the aera when he became so .
Preferred the Canticles , in the literal sense , to all the rest of the Bible  and agreed , that Epicurus was the best , of all moral philosophers .


We drank two bottles together during this entertainment  toward the close of which , she began to grow full of sorrow , and lamented her misfortunes - I became full of compassion , and comforted her .
She seemed perfectly pleased with my company , and wished frequently , as  she was so kind to express herself , to be possessed of my sex , sense , and spirit .
They are all at your service , Madam , said I - There is a nation in the world , who think that by killing an enemy , they shall be endowed with all his faculties , and I would die to serve you .
No , no , replied she , you are not my enemy , and I think I could sooner kill myself , than injure you .
The good-natured creature !


Well then , said I , there is another way of compassing your flattering wish .
You have read the Eastern Tales , I presume .
There is a story among them , of a certain dervise , who possessed the faculty of shooting his soul into any dead body he pleased , and re-animating it again , while his own lay a breathless coarse beside it .
This fable , believe me , Madam , is verified among us adepts , at Oxford , now-a-days  and I myself have been thoroughly initiated into the mystery of transmigration .
Take an example now , said I , go stretch yourself , at full length , upon that couch there , in the very posture of a dead person , and counterfeit a trance .
I will then instantly let fly my soul into you , upon the wings of love , and revive you again , to the wonderful delight of all spectators  while my inanimate body shall then lie panting by your side .


 It was now the season which midwives distinguish by the title of gander-month .
A bill of divorce reduces it to simple fornication , and the consent of an husband , absolves even that crime .
However , I did not venture to urge this last argument to her , for fear of making her refractory .
Three reasons must be very insufficient indeed , if they can not furnish out an excuse , among them .
-


An artichoke and a pine-apple have the same shape , but what a difference in the flavour !


The next morning , she hired a post-chaise , and drove off to London .


35 .
CHAP .
CXXX .


HERE 'S a rake for you , ladies , with a witness !
Yea verily , with two .
Two strings to his bow , i ` faith .
But to speak seriously now , prithee whose fault is it , his , or yours ?
The affair with the man-lady , d' ye mind , was none of his seeking , I am sure .
He happened  to meet with it , where no man living would have gone to look for it .
He was searching for a wound , only , when this same hiatus valde ridendus , presented itself to his view .
Obstupuit , steteruntque , c. And , as Falstaff says , Rebellion lay in his way , and he stumbled upon it .


If women will come into young fellows bed-chambers , and then fall into fainting fits there , what in nature , can a man do , but like a quack , apply the panacea , to them ?
His laboratory has no other drops , no other hartshorn , no other cordial , but this .


And as for this here gentlewoman , neither did he seek her either .
Did he stir across the threshold of the door , to meet her ?
Did she not come to the very house , dragooning him ?
Might he not use the se defendendo plea ?
I think 't is all fair , after a man has first tried what effect an exhortation may produce .
Could the parson of the parish , himself , have done more ?
And you must acknowledge , that Mr. Carewe did preach a most excellent sermon , to her .
Though , how he came by so many texts of scripture , without having been bred at Glasgow , I can not conceive .
And in the course of his homily too , he gives a prudent hint to all galants with regard to cuckolds .
Foenum habet in cornu , he says -


 A word more .
With regard to what the husband says , about the nod of chastity , which may be stiled the nod of assent , or critical minute , I am to inform you , that the French phrase for this same expression , is L'heure de berger , or the shepherd 's hour .
Now if the character of a nation , as is reasonably enough affirmed , may be known from its proverbs , I must congratulate my fair country-woman in having the advantage , in point of chastity , over their neighbours , even in the great proportion , of sixty to one .
This frail crisis holds only a minute , with English women , but lasts a full hour , with French females .


36 .
CHAP .
CXXXI .


WHEN I found that my fair academie was perfectly recovered , I began to renew my galantries toward her again .
One night , after we had supped and parted , as usual , I returned back from my apartment , with my nightcap in my pocket , and went into her bed-chamber .
I found her on her knees , and earnest at prayer , I was confounded , and retired into  the ante-chamber  where I stood musing , till I heard her begin to move  but before I could gain the door , she had shot the bolt on the inside , and walked away to the farther end of the room .
I became sensible of a certain inward rebuke , upon this occasion , and immediately returned up stairs , to my own chamber .


The next morning , we met at breakfast  during which we appeared under a mutual constraint and aukwardness , toward each other .
After the tea-table was removed , I attempted to open the conversation , upon the last night 's incident , but faltered in the first sentence  upon which she interrupted me thus - ` Never , never , Mr. Carewe , must we meet again , on any other terms but those of friendship .
A woman may be betrayed into error , by another 's crime , but it must be her own vice that suffers her to continue in it .
I have had , by this time , sufficient leisure for reflection , and have passed severe ones , on my former conduct .
But I rejoice in the smart , which heals whilst it corrodes .
Good God !
cried she out , in a passion of tears , was it not enough , that I should sink , at once , from man to woman , but that I must again fall , even below the only character estimable in her , too ! '


She was going on , but I interrupted her by  catching her in my arms , in a sudden transport of generosity , and fondness , and offering to marry her , that very instant .
`` No , '' she replied , and wresting herself from my embrace , ` you have once denied me that happiness , already - 'T is enough - I will not accept it now : For I shall never receive from your honour , what I can not owe to your love .
Had you ever loved , before , I might perhaps , be led to accept of the present cool terms you offer .
That dangerous crisis once over , I might possibly , be induced to compound for your friendship and esteem  but while I have that hazardous aera to dread , I must always keep a reserve over my own affections toward you , which would be inconsistent with that union , which your generosity alone has challenged you now to proffer * . '


` Ever since that fatal day - or rather happy one , as I may now deem it , '' continued she , when you revealed to me the unfortunate situation I was in , my thoughts have constantly turned inward on myself .
The spring of that religious and virtuous education , with which my dear mother had imbued my mind , reverberated then so strongly on my  heart , that it quickly awakened every pious sense , which avocation , idleness , and pleasure , had till then , lulled to sleep . '


I meditated on the dependency of our earthly state , on the relation , duty , and obedience , we owe to our Creator  I weighed well the worth of all worldly enjoyments , and upon comparing time with eternity , have fixed my soul so firmly , upon higher concerns , that my mind has at length , happily arrived to this just reflection , that nothing here below , but innocence , peace and ease , are worth my care .


I will to-morrow , '' continued she , `` re-assume my former disguise , and still carry on the masquerade , both on account of my dear mother 's commands , and for one of the reasons she gave too  namely , that it will save me from the irksomeness and danger of any farther sollicitation , or attempt  which by that means , I should have escaped from you , also , if so unforeseen and unprovided an accident , had not unfortunately , thrown me too much into your power .


She spoke all this , with a collected spirit , and stoicism , which astonished , and charmed me .
It raised my esteem for her , to the highest pitch , but at the same time , affected me with such a  tenderness and contrition , that I could not possibly refrain from tears  which she perceiving , called out to me in a manly tone , and with a smile at the same time , What , Mr. Carewe , said she , are you going to change your sex , also ?
` For shame , added she , shake off this womanish weakness - Arouse , and be a man .
* ' I recovered myself , but made no reply .


This whole day we spent together , in a general converse , through which I behaved myself with the highest politeness and decorum  both in my deportment toward her , and in avoiding the most oblique hint , which might revive in her mind the remembrance of our former connection .
This charming woman seemed much flattered with the respect and delicacy of my manners  she declared that she sincerely esteemed this day to be the happiest , and most pleasant , we had ever spent together , and I endeavoured to think so .


The next morning , she hired a post-chaise to carry her to her grandfather 's , where she told me she designed to stay during the remainder of the vacation , and then return to the university , to  finish her studies .
She dressed herself , en cavalier , and wrapped herself up in a roclaure , pretending to be afraid of catching cold on her journey , so soon after her lying in .
She made a present of all her femalities , to the daughter of the house , saying to me in a low voice , Farewel , now , for life , to my poor helpless sex .
Then committing the care of our son and nurse , to our host and hostess , we tenderly embraced , and she hurried into the chaise , with a precipitation which betrayed her not to be yet quite mistress of her philosophy .


I remained for some time , at the gate , looking after the carriage while it continued in view , and contemplating upon this virtuous and extraordinary woman  I then returned into the house , discharged my bills , embraced my Hermes , took post-horses , and rode back to college , not so pleasantly indeed , but much more composed in mind , however , than when I left it .


37 .
CHAP .
CXXXII .


 I Passed a very uneasy time of it , there , for a week .
I felt an aukward want of half myself , and if not the most necessary , at least the pleasantest part of me .
I was dull in company , and melancholic , when alone .
I began to suspect I loved her  but this I was sure of , that had she given me time enough for it , I should certainly have done so .


At one while , I was for carrying her off , and ravishing her into matrimony .
Nor was this generous thought at all checked , by reflecting on her large fortune , for that article I was firmly resolved to have made easy to myself : I scorned to accept the portion of fraud , and would have restored it to the rightful heir .


At another time , I had one curiosity already gratified , and another still to satisfy  namely , to try how long a spliced chastity could hold out , and whether this experiment might not be like new wine put into old bottles , or a new piece into an old garment .
At length , time and use , which generally blend all our wants and losses with the common complexion of life , restored my carelesness and spirits to me again .


 On the commencement of our term , my dear Levis Agyeu * returned to college .
As soon as I heard of her arrival , I went to wait on her at her apartments - She received me with great civility and affection , but immediately putting on her hat , said it was a fine morning , and desired the pleasure of my company to take a walk with her in the park , as she wanted a little private conversation with me , which might be interrupted by other visitants .
I approved of , but was dissatisfied at , this caution of hers .


When we were alone in the park , she told me that the old colonel seemed extremely rejoiced at her visit , but much concerned at seeing her look so pale and thin .
You have studied your eyes out , my child , said he , and 't is high time to be done with that same work , now .
You have been chewing upon three years of crabbed learning already , at that same university , as 't is called , besides all you swallowed before , at school , and if you are not as wise as Solomon , by this time , the devil 's in it for me .
But there 's an end of all farther puzzling now , as I have lately procured a cornetcy for you , from my old friend the secretary of war  and I long sadly , to see you strut the parade , in your military uniform , shortly .


 You know , said she to me , that I am no Amazon , and yet this declaration of his did not distress me so much as you might naturally expect - I was prepared for it , from his frequent resolutions , in that way , and had therefore , furnished myself with an answer .
I returned him thanks for this , and all his other kind intentions in my favour , but added , that with regard to the professions of life , it was always both prudent , and reasonable , to grant the party engaging , some liberty of choice , in a matter of so much moment , both to themselves and others .


Zounds , said he , thou is n't afraid , is thee ?
No , Sir , I replied , with an assured countenance , I thank God , that I fear nothing now , but himself and you .
But it is my duty to the first of these most sacred obligations , continued I , which makes me hesitate about too implicit an obedience , to your commands .
Very fine , very fine !
replied the colonel , all this begins very finely indeed , but tell me quickly , now , without any more of your logic , or sophistry , what the devil is all this about ?


38 .
CHAP .
CXXXIII .


 I Thus went on .
When I entered upon the study of natural philosophy , Sir , at the university , I was charmed and surprised at the internal art and contrivance of the almighty artificer , in many subjects , which I had looked upon superficially , before .
Still as I proceeded , still as my knowledge improved , in mathematics , gravitation , attraction , and astronomy , my mind enlarged , and my soul was impressed with a sense of awe and wonder , at the amazing greatness , goodness , and oeconomy of Providence .
Nor needs all this to refute the fool of David * - Shew him but a straw , and when he has accounted for that , let him then dispute a Deity .


Afterwards , Sir , when I had entered into my course of moral philosophy , I quick perceived the duties , the relations , the dependencies , both of civil and religious obligations .
I almost thought the system perfect  but there seemed still to be something yet wanting .
I loved virtue , but feared not vice .
I adored the Deity ,  but feared impiety , in prayer .
I asked for blessings , and yet dreaded them as curses .
There needed two things , yet , absolutely necessary to compleat the scheme .
Certain sanctions for our virtue , and a revelation , to instruct our worship .


These great desiderata then , directed my inquiries toward religion .
I here found all was perfect harmony .
The scene extended , my views enlarged , the concordance , between divine and human things , apparent  virtue encouraged , and vice deterred .
And to sum up all , a form of worship appointed , which abolished idolatry , instructed prayer , and restrained enthusiasm .


What the devil , is all this for , interrupted the old soldier ?
Was this harangue necessary , said he , to let us know you were a Christian ?
I always honoured religion , as much as you , or any scholar of Oxford , or Cambridge , either  ay , by G - , as much as the chaplain of our regiment , himself , who , by the Lord , was as honest , and jolly a fellow , as any of the corps .
But a man may serve God , and his king , and country , too , at the same time , I hope .
Grant me but that , and there 's an end of the argument .


You are certainly in the right of it , Sir , replied I , and your observation is indeed , very just .
 But then , Sir , in return , I hope that you will allow me there may be more ways than one , of doing all three .
How in the name of God , now , is that possible , answered he ?
can we preserve the protestant religion , Hanover , or Old England , any other way , but by fighting ?


Dear Sir , said I , I am far from disputing the necessity of fighting , for as the world is at present constituted , there must be soldiers , as well as other handicraftmen .
But pray , Sir , is not a divine , instructing his congregation , or reforming his parish , more serviceable to God , the king , and his country , than a colonel of horse , or foot , exercising his regiment on the parade ?


Is not the making of good subjects , more necessary , than the training of soldiers ?
One may be hired , the other not - What so fitted to make men brave , as religion ?
And what to regulate the discipline of an army , as morals ?
The divine , then , is necessary , in the first instance - The soldier , only in the second .
The soldier 's profession , is but temporal and temporary .
The divine 's , celestial and eternal !


Preach me no preachments , interrupted old Mars  a parson , indeed , were he such as I am afraid few parsons are , might perhaps , do some service to religion , and his country , in the way you suppose  but never tell me , man , that all  the preaching in the world , can ever be able to defend Hanover .
No , no , Bilbo is the word , there , and right or wrong , nolus , volus , we must all fight for Hanover , that 's a sure thing .


I replied , there was no fear but there would be always people enough found to fight for Hanover , or a castle in the air , if they were paid for it  but as all men were not to be soldiers , we might be left at liberty to chuse our professions  and that , for my own part , I had for some time , been sensible of so strong a propensity toward putting on the gown , that I took it to be an inward call from the spirit , to enter into holy orders .


Call me no calls , replied old Testy , you are a coward , sirrah , I see you are .
You are no man , but an hodmandod * , and would rather fight the devil , than a Frenchman .
Call of the spirit !
No , sneaker , 't is want of spirit that is your call , and like a criminal , flying for his life , you would take sanctuary in a church , would you ?
Yours is no call , I say , 't is proffered service , and you know the proverb , you sh - n a - e fellow you .


Call of the spirit , forsooth !
but 't is necessary that some people should pretend it , or how few  of the pulpits , in England , would be filled , now-a-days !
How many do I know , myself , who were never called by the spirit , nor ever call upon it , either .
But business must be done  and they marry and christen , as well as the best  for a parson 's a parson , and there 's an end o n't .
What the devil need we desire more ?


But here 's another difficulty , continued he , you have brought upon me too , by your strange notions of spirit and pulpit , and such tringum-trangums - What will your quaking spirit help me to do now , with the commission , that I have laid out all my interest to procure for you , and which I must now return so thanklessly , upon my friend 's hands again ?
By no means , Sir , said I , you may dispose of it more properly , than even by giving it to me - My cousin Tom , Sir , will readily accept of it .
It will be looked upon as a kind of present to him , and I would willingly obviate every occasion of jealousy , which might possibly , arise between us .


And so , by G - d , I will , replied he , sharply , and if I should leave him my estate too , what would you say to that , youth !
I should say nothing , Sir , but should think , that as you have made the fortune by your own valour , you have certainly a right to bestow it according to your own favour  and if , Sir , added I , your  opinion or inclinations , should point him out , as the more worthy object , I shall be perfectly resigned , both to the dispensations of Providence , and yours .


Pugh , pugh , said he , you wo n't let me have my own way , in any thing , I see - I am not used to these old-fangled notions , and I do n't know , for the blood of me , how to deal with them .
I wish , with all my soul , that either you , or I , were different sort of people , that we might understand one another , rightly .
But let us have done with it now , child , said he , and go bid them lay the cloth for supper .


39 .
CHAP .
CXXXIV .


YOU may be surprised , perhaps , said she , at the easiness with which I seem to have resigned a fortune in which might be comprehended all the flattering prospects and enjoyments of life .
But , Mr. Carewe , pursued she , with a sigh , I had already shaken hands with this life .
And though I think I have now happily attained to such a pitch of firmness and fortitude of mind , that were it possible to be  either my duty , or obligation , to fight , I could this instant draw the sword , and like another Joan d' Arc , rush into the midmost battle .
But to enter a volunteer in arms , would have been a presumption unbecoming my real character , and therefore I declined it .


And as to the worldly considerations , which might naturally have perplexed me , upon this occasion , continued she , I had already wrought my mind to this determination about them .
I do not think that female virtue consists in chastity alone , though certainly , both prudence and decency require this to be our distinguishing character .
This duty we owe , first to religion , and next to ourselves  but justice is an higher point of virtue , because we owe this , both to God , to ourselves , to our neighbour , and to the rights of civil society .


I had hitherto carried on the deceit , in obedience to my mother 's commands - But ever since I began to consider things in an higher light , and to compare my first and second duty , together , I had resolved to act , in this matter , that equitable , and ingenuous part , which I am certain she would herself direct , were she now to return upon earth , to instruct me .


What then had I to apprehend from my grandfather 's resentment , but that event which I  had before resolved upon in my own mind ?
The virtue of the act , was already perfect in resolve , and the merit of the gift I was willing to resign to another .
I could not imagine that my grandfather would have cast me off to absolute beggary  and any reasonable provision he might have made for me , would have served to support me in that scheme of life which I had already resolved upon : For I am determined , said she , to put on the gown , for one additional reason more than my dear mother gave me for wearing a male habit  which is , that a respect to my profession , may restrain both that prophane , and immodest manner of speaking , before me , which I have already sustained too much of among men .


I was charmed , said Mr. Carewe , at the nobleness of soul , in this virtuous woman , but was somewhat mortified , however , to find that I was not capable myself , of the same refinement of sentiment , in one particular  for I confess that I felt disappointed at her having prevented me from recommending to her the very action , she had already resolved upon  and from offering her three hundred pounds a year , out of my own fortune , in consideration of her resigning the estate to her cousin  which I assure ye , gentlemen ,  said he , had for some time past , been fully my purpose .


I was going once to mention this to her , but thought it might have had a disingenuous air  and in short , said he , I was really , as much puzzled , as old Square Toes , himself , to know how to deal with her old-fangled notions , as he stiled them , and almost wished as he did , that either of us were different sort of people .


However , this not sincerely , for I thought it too soon for myself , to quit the pursuit of pleasure , and indeed , for her too  as the small snack she had got of it , was hardly , in my opinion , worth so much repentance  but as grace comes earlier to some people , than to others , I would not wish to disturb her peace , or attempt to interrupt her course of virtue , but for a moment , to gratify even my warmest desires  for I was resolved , upon all occasions of this kind , to qualify , as much as possible , the sinner , with the saint  and never to mix up a greater potion of vice with my pleasure , than was just necessary as a vehicle to it .
By which means , I ever retained an hank in hand , as the jockeys phrase it , to pull up , before I was got to the brink of the precipice .


40 .
CHAP .
CXXXV .


 WHILE I was revolving these things in my mind , the fair prolocutor thus went on .
The next morning , said she , after breakfast , the old gentleman called me into his apartment , and after some minutes silence , during which time he sat musing and looking at the fire , he lifted up his head , and turning his face toward me , in a good-humoured tone of voice , Mr. Parson , said he , I could not well sleep , last night , for the sermon you preached to me , yesterday evening .


It put me in mind of your poor mother , she was a great reasoner , and would sometimes argufy the case with me , till she used to put me into a passion , for I always hated women 's prate .
But it does well enough in a man , especially a scholar , as you are  for what does people learn for , d' ye see me , if they do n't shew it ?
Therefore , I consent , d' ye mind , that you make yourself a parson , as soon as you will , and though I must say that you have disappointed me hugely , in my first design for you , I do n't doubt , in the least , but you may be a good man yet , for all that  and we will now be as good  friends as ever , said he , and shaking me by the hand at the same time .


I thanked him on my bended knee , but he ordered me to rise quickly , saying , Never kneel , child , but to the king , God bless him , or your prayers - That is my notion , son , and I do n't doubt but I shall see you chaplain to our regiment yet , and you shall be so , believe me , added he , if strong drink can kill a parson , and that I have any interest with some people , and I never say a thing that I do n't mean to do  that 's my way , d' ye mark me ?


You 'll live a roving , jolly life , of it , then , you dog you , and know more of the world , in one year , there , than you would do in seven , in this parish , or the next .
But I have sent for your cousin Tommy , and will give him the commission you know .
No - you shall give it to him , yourself , it shall be your gift , it will make him love you , and I would have families live well together , child , after I am dead and rotten .


He then gave me the secretary of war 's letter , which mentioned that he had procured a cornetcy for him , at his request , in the - regiment of cavalry , and desired him to write the person 's name , at the bottom of that letter , and return it to him immediately , in order to have the commission filled up .
I thanked him  for the pleasing office he had assigned me - For giving , is certainly one of the pleasantest things , in the world .


In the evening , my cousin arrived , equipt perfectly à la militaire  for my aunt , in compliment to the martial enthusiasm of her father , had ever since he was put into breeches , affected to have him dressed like an officer , with cockade , sword , and gambadoes .
He is perfect master of his exercises , which , with a little smattering of French , is the only part of education his parents had ever attended to .
He has an handsome , genteel person , and has that kind of forwardness and air of confidence , which persons who know one thing , a little , and are quite ignorant of every thing else , are apt to assume .
He had lately challenged a young apothecary , in the town where his father lived , for saying , that it was ridiculous to see a chit pretend to strut about , with a sword on , who was only of fit size , to wear a glyster-bag armed And the pistol and the pestle were going to it , ding dong , when some friends happened to interpose , and put an end to this martial strife .


After the mutual salutes were over , I took him aside into another parlour , and shewed him the letter from the secretary of war .
He congratulated me upon my good fortune , but said ,  with a sigh , that he would rather be in possession of that commission , than of the old Don 's estate , for that the army was the only profession for a gentleman , all the rest of the world being divided into paysans , and bourgeois  and that he longed most bloodily , to be at slashing work with the French .


Then cousin , said I , you seem to be a much fitter person for this business , than I am , for upon my word , I bear no manner of malice to any people breathing , not even to my foes .
So saying , I carelessly took up a pen , which lay on the table , and writing down Thomas Irwin at the foot of the letter , presented it to him .


He kissed it , hugged me , and drawing his sword , made several passes at an old Windsor chair , swearing that there should not be a Frenchman in the world , by the end of the campaign  and that he would then gather all the women together into a seraglio , and people the kingdom over again , himself , with good Protestants .


Come along , my gallant soldier , said I , and pay your acknowledgments , where they are more properly due  for the gift is our grandfather 's , though he was so kind as to appoint me the giver .
We then went up stairs to the old gentleman 's room , where the brisk cornet  returned him hasty thanks for his preferment , and instantly begged leave to set out , that evening , for London , to deliver the letter , and expedite the commission .
The good old man cried , There 's a lad for you that is in haste to fight , then gave him his blessing , with a bill of an hundred pounds , and dismissed him .


41 .
CHAP .
CXXXVI .


HERE we were interrupted , by the coming up of three or four of our college acquaintance , with whom we walked a few turns , till the bell struck three o'clock .
I then pressed her to come home , and dine with me , which she refused  upon which I offered to go home with her , that she might be at liberty to finish the rest of her story , if any yet remained , but she replied , that she had nothing prepared at her chambers , and proposed to the rest of the company , that we should all go to the tavern together , which was agreed upon .


After dinner , we entered into a lively conversation , in which she bore her part with great wit and spirit , and seemed to be more chearful and  disingaged in her manner , than I had known her for many months past .
This struck me as a confirmation of her virtue .
The conflict seemed to be over .
My heart exulted with joy .


We drank our friends , in the usual course , and then one of the company , who had been appointed magister bibendi , proposed a round of sentiments , and began himself decently enough , with the joys of friendship , love , and wine .
The next turn fell to me , and I gave the season of May , and the age of fifteen .
But this sort of chaste archness , did not long continue , for the next person called upon , launched out beyond all innuendo , which began to give my delicate friend some uneasiness .
She cast a look of distress , toward me , and I immediately put a stop to the round , by acquainting the company that our friend there , had lately taken the resolution of going into orders , and that such ribaldry must certainly be offensive to him .
She bowed , and the rest were silent ,


I then proposed , as we were all scholars , that we should toast some classical rounds , of memories , beginning with the philosophers , while we were sober , and reserving the poets for our more jovial cups .
The fancy took , because the thought was new , and each person declared his sect , by his toast .
Plato led the way , because  he wore good cloaths , and kept a good table .
Democritus came next , because he was a merry fellow , and taught , long before Copernicus , that the world turned round .
Then followed Zeno , not on account of the severity of his philosophy , but because he had done justice on himself for it , by an halter .


When it came to my turn , I named Aristippus , on account of the character that Horace gives of him , Omnis Aristippum decuit , color ,  status ,  res .
Then my fair philosopher concluded the round with Socrates , as being , in the opinion of Erasmus , a Christian , before Christianity  and then immediately , rose up , and quitted the company .
I offered to attend her home , but she forbad it  saying , that she had her lectures to look over before examinations  and appointed me to meet her , the next morning , in the park , as before , to conclude her story .
I returned to my company , and finished the evening , a la mode .


42 .
CHAP .
CXXXVII .


 THE next day , I met my charming friend , said he , at the time and place appointed , and after a quarter of an hour 's conversation upon general topics , she proceeded with the thread of her narration .
Thus far , said she , had I tolerably well extricated myself , from a very difficult piece of business  but my principal point had not been yet obtained .
There was a matter of much higher consequence , still to be disposed of , which I confess I was so impatient to have adjusted , that I was , one or twice , very near declaring the whole secret of my disguise , to my grandfather , had not a tenderness for my mother 's character , prevented me .


I then determined with myself to keep the matter still a secret , thinking that no accident could disappoint the honest purpose I had already framed  for should I happen to die before my grandfather , the estate would devolve of course , into the right line  and should I outlive him , I might then resign it , with equal advantage to my cousin , as at present .


However , some scruples arose , that justice delayed , was in some sort , justice denied , and that it was always prudent to be honest , while  one may , lest the general frailty of human nature , might perhaps , obstruct the fair intent , when the time may call upon us to perfect it by action .
Besides , said she , the matter lay a dead weight upon my mind , and I was impatient to get rid of it , in order to dedicate my whole soul , to the contemplation and enjoyment of philosophy , and religion .


Upon this resolve , I went up directly , into my grandfather 's chamber , who was much confined by the gout  I took occasion to commend the spirit and accomplishments of my cousin , in which he seemed heartily to join me with a certain martial joy in his countenance , at the same time .
I added , that I imagined he must have been just such a brisk young fellow , himself , at his years , all fire and activity .
The very counterpart , exactly , replied he , with a smile of satisfaction .
I am extremely sorry then , Sir , said I , that you have not such an heir , to represent you  who might serve to perpetuate your fame , and keep your character alive , after you are gone , better than I can possibly do , in my confined scheme of life , who am likely to hide both , under a gown , and bury their memory , in some country cure .


What do ` st mean , boy , replied he , with a good deal of surprise ?
Ha n't I told you already ,  that we are as good friends now , as ever ?
Prithee , what sort of a crotchet hast got in thy noddle , at present , lad ?
Pray explain it quickly , now , without more ifs or ands .
To which I replied , that I was then come to justify my character to him , by giving a convincing proof of the sincerity with which I had made my option of the gown , in preference to the sword , by begging leave to renounce all future pretensions to his favour , with regard to the estate .
That as I did really mean to sequester myself intirely , from the world , firmly resolving never to marry , so great a fortune might be either a temptation , or an incumbrance to me .
For that fortune , titles , rank , and grandeur , are dangerous sophisters , and too often persuade us that the false goods of life , are the true ones .
That his other grandson was more likely to wear it with honour , and being capable of bustling in camps , and shining in courts , and senates , was a fitter person to put foremost in the world , at the head of a family which his own virtue and bravery had so lately brought into respect and notice .
That for my part , I should perfectly acquiesce , in whatever portion his kindness might think proper to allot me , which though ever so small , said I , if I have virtue , will be as much  as I shall want , and if not , will be more than I shall deserve .


The good old man , continued she , at these words , burst into tears , saying , at the same time , in an hurrying manner , Boy , boy , you were born to be my plague , and are still crossing me , in every scheme I have .
But perceiving that my tears fell faster than his own , he cried , Prithee be quiet , child , and do n't distress me any farther - Do n't be angry , I do n't mean what I say , to vex you , all I meant , was - But indeed , I do n't know what to mean , or say , you have made such a fool of me .
We continued both silent , for several minutes , before we could either of us compose ourselves sufficiently , to speak any farther , upon the subject .


We then entered into several expostulations , on both sides , but upon finding me determined in my purpose , he at length , acquiesced in my proposal , and asked me upon what provision I had formed my oeconomy .
Speak , said he , and be it what it will , you shall have it , by G - .
I declined this offer , saying , that it would not be becoming in me , to parcel out his bounty , nor to stipulate conditions , as if I was selling the estate , only thus far I might pretend to prescribe , that I should prefer a sum of money to an annuity ,  in order to have something in my power , to leave , to friendship , or to charity .


Well then , my dear child , said he , I gave your sister three thousand pounds , d' ye mind , and I will give you four , if that will content you .
But , hearky me , cried the worthy soldier , at the same time , do n't be mealy-mouthed about the matter , in the least , for you shall have what you please , as I told you before .
I said 't was ample , bowed , and thanked him .


The next morning , continued she , he sent for me into his chamber , and shewed me the draught of the present will he designed to perfect , by which he had made the provision of four thousand pounds , in my favour , and settled his estate on my cousin , but with a remainder over , to me , in case he should not leave any heirs male behind him - For you deserve it , said he , if I had ten estates , by the Lord , you deserve them all .


I expressed a proper sense of gratitude , upon this occasion , staid with him till he could hobble about the house , received his blessing , and came off hither , to finish my studies , said she , and to take upon me the profession of holy orders , which I have already declared to you .


43 .
CHAP .
CXXXVIII .


 DUring the course of her story , I was affected , and amazed .
I dropped tears , at some parts of it , and would have praised her , in others , but that there appeared a nobleness , and a spirit , in her virtue , which seemed above it , and awed me into silence .
I found myself in a situation , too difficult to be described .
Your own sentiment and delicacy , Gentlemen , said he , must represent it to you .
I could not admire , without lamenting , nor commend her , without condemning myself .


However , there was one part of her discourse , which had dwelt upon my mind ever since the first proposition of it , and which I then laid hold of , to extricate my speech .
I was displeased at her purpose of going into orders .
She was perfect enough , intrinsically , and needed not the cloak of sanctity : and cleric pride , joined to female vanity , methought would be enough to demolish the purest saint , that ever was canonized .
I therefore , took occasion , from this subject , to open my mouth , and gave her the following opinion upon it .


 I told her , that there was something very unorthodox , in her scheme .
Women are ordered to keep silence , in the churches , so that the business of catechising , preaching , or exhorting , can never become any part of their province .
That were there even no offence , in the thing itself , yet the disingenuousness of the act , was unworthy of her .
That the carrying on a deceit , at the foot of the altar , even with the best intent , was dangerous hypocrisy .
Nor was such a pious fraud at all necessary to her purpose , as we may dedicate our services to Heaven , under any character , or in any profession .
And that the world is , at present , so constituted , that the precept , or example , of one virtuous layman , would have more effect , than the preaching of ten parsons .


I added , that should she even be able to preserve the secret , during her life , her death at last , most certainly would reveal it .
That the story of pope Joan , was a disgrace even to that religion , that was before a disgrace to itself  and that this discovery might supply small wits and libertines , with matter of scoff , would bring a reflection upon her memory , and occasion her body to be the object of public view .
I will set thee as a gazing-stock .
I will shew the nations thy nakedness , and the kingdoms thy shame .
Nahum .


 She assured me that she had never considered the matter in any of these lights , before .
That knowing of no salique law , in scripture , to exclude women from the ministry * , she had presumed that nothing but negative custom merely , which establishes no law , stood against it .
But that what I had just hinted to her , had struck her in such a way , as to make her suspect , that she had used somewhat of that kind of ingenious sophistry with herself , which she had already condemned , in her dear mother .
But that at present , she found both her scruples and delicacy sufficiently alarmed , to resolve on laying aside her purpose .
She then thanked me for my advice , and concluded her speech by saying , that she was pleased to owe me any thing .


I snatched her hand , with eagerness , crying out , ` My charming saint , 't is impossible that you should ever be indebted to him whose life and fortunes you have already , so fully purchased .
The pittance you have compounded for , with your grandfather , is too scanty a provision for you , for life - Take half my estate , in addition - I here most ' -  Hold , Mr. Carewe , interrupted she - Keep your fortune , but amend your life .
This would be true generosity to me , indeed  and this the only present , be assured , I shall ever accept of , from your hands .


However , said she , seeing me affected , and confounded , let us still continue friends , for life .
I find a perfect disposition , in myself , toward this chaste connection , and I should hope that your heart , however libertine it may be , is not totally devoid of all Platonics , neither .
Some company appeared in sight , and came strolling up to us just as she had finished this expression , and she retired home , immediately afterwards .


Yes , my cherub , said I to myself , and gazing after her , my friendship , my admiration , my esteem , can never possibly be raised higher , toward any mortal object .
Then why , O nature !
hast thou suffered love to be a passion distinct from these !
I would this moment , sacrifice my life for thy service , and yield my fortune in exchange for love .
But ` twill not be - My fated hour is not yet arrived , and chance , not choice , must fix my destiny !


44 .
CHAP .
CXXXIX .


 THIS reflection of Mr. Carewe , is both natural and mortifying , at the same time .
How must it hurt one 's moral , not to be able to raise , or direct our passion , toward an object , whom reason , honour , virtue , and obligation , even with the addition of youth and beauty , may point out to us , as in this , and frequent other instances , has been the case ?


And , on the other hand , how must it pique our pride , to be reduced to wear the chains of some idiot , of an harlot , or , what is infinitely worse , a shrew , even with beauty and youth , but often , without either ?
of which I could quote you many examples .


A friend of mine , who , though a man of both sense and spirit , had laboured for some years under this predicament , after many fruitless struggles to set himself free , compared himself , aptly enough , to a lion in heraldry , held fast by the lower parts , and pawing to get loose .


Distinct from that charming , and rational union of hearts and minds , which is the general sympathy of the most perfect natures , there arises sometimes , a certain extraordinary and  unaccountable fever in the blood , more a phrenzy , than a passion , and rather an instinct , than a sentiment , which it is said people are , at one time or another of their lives , afflicted with .


Most people are born with the seeds of this passion , as well as of the small-pox , in their constitution , which sooner or later , break out , as the blood , or humours of the body , happen to be apt , or fit , to nourish the distemper .
These two unavoidable incidents are so much alike , in several particulars , that I shall carry on the allusion , the better to illustrate my subject .


One is a disorder in the blood , and the other an impression on the mind , from the first of which , no temperance , or art in physic , and from the latter , not the best sense , or most exercised philosophy , are able to defend us .


I stile this sort of love , an impression on the mind , to distinguish it from all sentimental passion , or any principle in human nature - excluding all manner of desire , admiration , or esteem , inspired by youth , beauty , or merit - As these may be fairly accounted for , from physical , or moral reasons  and may consequently , become effects , as often as these causes shall operate .


But the love I mean , is a mad enthusiasm of the soul , a singular caprice of the affections , that  sometimes , makes us doat on what , at another time , we should fear to look on .
Tis a fancy , that passes beauty , ` Alba ligustra cadunt , vaccinia nigra leguntur  ' 'T is a sense which is enamoured of folly , a sight that blinds us , a thraldom we rejoice in , a plague which we solicit - In fine , a fascination , a crisis , or anomalous effect , which like the operations of witchcraft , proceeds unaccountably , without any apparent cause , deducible either from reason or nature .


`` So by a calenture misled , `` The mariner with rapture sees `` On the smooth ocean 's azure bed , `` Enamelled fields , and verdant trees .
`` With eager haste he longs to rove `` In that fantastic scene , and thinks `` It must be some enchanted grove , `` And in he leaps , and down he sinks . ''
We often escape both infections , where one might naturally , have apprehended the greatest danger , and catch them , perhaps , at a time , when we may have the least reason to imagine any probability of our being affected .
We are  often struck , at first sight , and sometimes , by the most unamiable objects - So that I have known persons to catch one , as well as the other , from a shock .


When people fancy that they have been more than once , affected by this disorder , it must be by mistaking something else for it , as the meazles often may impose itself upon the patient , for the small-pox .


There is one lucky circumstance then , in which they both agree - That we are never attacked by either , more than once in our lives - But , alas !
how slight our triumph , when effects sometimes remain for life , almost as miserable , as the malady !
` Such another victory , as a certain general said , would undo me . '


In love , the struggling for an heart , is like wrestling for an egg  where though you gain the prize , you get it broken .


45 .
CHAP .
CXL .


 THIS term compleated my college course , and my guardian acquainted me , that he had entered my name in the Temple books .
The night before I was to leave the university , I gave a parting supper , to my select friends , among whom I had principally invited my fair Stoic .
But she excused herself , by a billet , in which were only these words : Tender adieus are apt to leave impressions - 'T is easier to fly , than struggle .
Farewel .


Soon after I had gone to the Temple , I became of age , and settled accounts with my trustees .
The ballance in my favour , was but about five thousand pounds , the rest of my income having been expended upon my maintenance and education , and the discharging of some incumbrances which had affected my estate .


As soon as I received this money , I was resolved that he first act of my manhood , should be a deed of justice , and honour .
I therefore immediately laid cut four thousand pounds , in the funds , and inclosed the debentures to my  generous friend , at Oxford , with only these words in the cover : ` For Hermes Carewe . '


46 .
CHAP .
CXLI .


I WAS now entered upon a more enlarged scene of life and action , had an unrestrained dominion over my own fortune , and was not accountable , either for my diligence , or idleness , to any one , but myself - the worst of all masters , let people boast of liberty as much as they please .
My studies were quite of a different nature from any thing I had been used to read before .
It was beginning school again .
I would recommend Coke upon Lyttleton to be always taught , immediately after grammar , while the memory is strong , and before the mind may have imbibed the least tincture of taste , or polite erudition .
For as the study of it is a work of labour , not of genius , it comes to great disadvantage after Virgil , Homer , Cicero , or Demosthenes .


 However , I tugged away at this oar , for some time , till the world began to get hold of me .
I had more presumption than knowledge , and greater spirit than judgment  which naturally , led me into two fatal errors , at once .
I imagined , that my understanding required no farther improvement  and that a thousand pounds a year , needed no oeconomy .
I was naturally full of fire - But , for want of fuel to maintain the flame , I spent myself in a blaze .


` Ut quondam in stipul , magnus sine viribus ignis . '
I set up an equipage , and kept a pack of hounds , about ten miles from London .
I hired a genteel valet de chambre , out of livery .
I employed the most fashionable taylor , and left the rates of every thing , to himself .
I struck myself out of commons , lived in taverns  and - rented private lodgings , near the Temple .


I learned more of life , at this school of the world , in six months , than I had known at Oxford , in the five years that I was stationed there .
For though we had treble the number of students , at the university , yet they were not enough their own masters , to exhibit that infinite variety of characters , with which mankind abound .
If you see one Frenchman , one Spaniard , one Italian ,  you are furnished with specimens of their several nations  but you may be acquainted with an hundred Englishmen , without knowing the English .


It would be an endless task to enumerate , or describe all the various characters I met with in this microcosm  some of which , indeed , exceeded to such extravagance , that they might more properly be stiled caracatura 's , of mankind  while others were so very anomalous to human nature , that you would imagine I was describing the tenants of some other planet , instead of our own species .


This diversity was more apparent among the Templars , than in any other set of men in England  because they live more upon an equality together , and are less restrained by the decorums of mixed societies , where different professions , different ranks , and different sexes , join .
So that Every man in his humour , may be justly stiled The Temple Comedy .
To which may be added one very unhappy cause also , which is , that they are , in general , tied down by no certain mode , or system of religion , theirs being mere philosophic deism , alone .


`` A consequential ill , which freedom draws , `` A bad effect , though from a noble cause . ''
 And here , gentlemen , said Mr. Carewe , as I have spent some years in this society , I think proper to justify myself from certain suspicions , which may possibly , have arisen in your minds , upon this occasion .
And I will now give you a sincere , and ingenuous confession of my faith , with regard to this most dread , and interesting article  and which I shall attempt to explain , upon the simple dictates of reason alone , without the discussing of mysterious systems , or venturing into the inextricable labyrinths of polemic divinity .


47 .
CHAP .
CXLII .
Mr. Carewe 's Confession of Faith .


IN the first place , I take it for granted , that whatever there may have been , in profession and practice , there never was a real atheist , in belief .
Some omnipotent , omniscient monad , some cause of causes , light of light , there must have been , before all worlds , necessarily , independently ,  and self-existing , coeval with eternity .


In the next place , I believe , that this intelligence did , by some supernatural conviction , independent on reason , or philosophy , manifest , or reveal itself , to the first race of mankind .
I draw my argument , from the number of erroneous , absurd , and unnatural systems of religions , and beliefs , which have appeared in the world , from the most early ages of record .


For had religion its rise from the pretence of legislators , or been the result of mere philosophy , the scheme of it would have been contrived more consonant to human reason , like that of the Turks , which is consistent enough in its doctrines , though erroneous in its faith .
But the purest revelation from heaven , handed down by tradition , and interpreted by priests , must necessarily have involved both our belief and worship , in all the impiety and blasphemy , of the heathen rites , and pagan superstitions .


The greatest philosophers , with Socrates at their head , finding the world in so forlorn a state , cried out to Heaven , for a new revelation , to dispel the mists of ignorance , and reduce our wanderings into the right line .
It was reasonable to hope for such a guide , from the goodness and justice of our Creator  and from our knowledge  and experience of the ways of Providence , I firmly believe , that whatever is best to do , it always does perform .


I think that the Christian religion has at length supplied this great desideratum , by conveying to us the most perfect moral , and the purest worship , that ever yet was proposed to man .
If we remain still in error , 't is surely the safest one we can possibly fall into .
For the proofs , both internal , and external , are so consistently framed , that the whole wit and philosophy of mankind , can not defend from the illusion .
We err with saints , we err with wisdom , we err with virtue , we err with piety  we err with infidelity converted , and testifying its conviction through the martyrdom of death and tortures !
Heaven must then , either reward our faith with glory , accept the will in atonement for the deed  or pardon with impunity that error , which itself hath suffered to be with so much plausibility imposed upon us .


I consider then , a deist , who writes , or argues , upon the religion of nature , alone , as he can not possibly be an infidel to Christianity , upon conviction , to be an immoral man , and a dangerous citizen of the world .
We have , alas !
too frequent , and sad experience of the strongest sanctions of rewards and punishments , being  too weak for the lusts and passions of men  and whoever would attempt to set us still more at liberty from the restraints of virtue , must probably , have conceived some mistaken interest in the indulgences of their own vice , or in the tempting of others to the same fatal latitude .


In fine , without ever entering into a religious argument , upon the subject , we may venture to pronounce a professed atheist , or deist , to be either fool , or knave  because they but discourage the good , and set the bad more at liberty .


Fear first made gods , the impious atheist cries , And fear unmade them , the divine replies .
An atheist is certainly , the most credulous fool breathing .
He believes , contrary to all philosophy , that matter produced motion first , and that then , they both laid their heads together , and created intelligence .


We can not conceive thought to be immaterial , say some philosophers  but can they conceive matter to be intelligent ?
We are conscious of our own ideas , therefore we have undoubtedly a conception , of somewhat , distinct from matter .


It is much more philosophic to imagine , with Berkley , an universe of spirit , than with Hobbes , an universe of matter  for it is certainly , more rational to think , that spirit might create , or , according  to Berkley 's metaphysical refinement , impress the idea of matter , than to suppose , that mere matter could ever rouse itself , to thought , or action .


48 .
CHAP .
CXLIII .


I DID not think it proper or decent , to interrupt Mr. Carewe , while he was at confession  for though I sometimes , pretend to be jocular , give me leave to assure the reader , that the greatest heathen of Greece , or Rome , never had an higher respect for virtue , nor the dullest parson in a country cure , a more stedfast faith in the Christian religion , than the person who here assumes the title of Biographer Triglyph .


This being premised , and finding that Mr. Carewe does not chuse to treat you with a description of any of the characters he hints at , as it would lead him into some satyrical strictures , which are , by no means , his turn of wit , I shall here entertain you with one story , out of his budget , which is a most extraordinary , and certain  matter of fact , already known to many of my London readers :


48.1 .
The story of the Weeping Cull .


ONE of Mr. Carewe 's friends was a man of remarkable good sense , and agreeable manners  but of a very grave deportment , and a serious air  which however , did not appear to be natural to him , as he had a lively eye , an healthful state of body , a florid complexion , and seemed to be fond of company .


He had been a resident there , for three years beyond the terms requisite to be called to the bar  and could not be deemed a student , in any sense , at this time , for he neither read law , divinity , humanity , or prophanity .
He used to spend most of his mornings , in riding or walking  and his evenings , in the society of a few friends .
He was a sober man , of good morals , and a constant churchman , twice a day .


Once a week , on every Thursday , he kept a fast , till night , and toward the dusk of the evening , after prayers , used constantly , on that day , to take his station , on the Strand , to see the girls of the town pass in review before him , till he had fixed upon his object , whom he would invite home to his own chambers , to  supper .
He did not generally pitch upon the handsomest wench , for he chose always one of a particular description .
She must be tall and fair , but pale and red-haired .


He would treat her with an elegant collation , and a bottle of wine .
Would sup with her , and make her sing , if she happened to have any manner of voice  he would drink two or three glasses of wine , and then walk musing about the room till she had finished the remainder of the bottle  which if she happened to delay too long , he would grow impatient , and press her to , with all the seeming ardour of a lover .


When she had drank the buzza , he would very politely take her by the hand , and lead her into an inner apartment , which was lighted up with half a dozen large wax tapers .
There was no bed in this room , but a large oak table in the middle of it  upon which was placed a very handsome cedar coffin , lined with white sattin , neatly crimped and quilted , with the foot of it placed directly opposite to the door .


Then taking up a fine pinked shroud , he would put it into the girl 's hand , and a guinea into the other , desiring her to strip herself to her shift , and lie down in the coffin , just like a corpse , with her arms placed cross-wise over her bosom , and her eyes shut  and when she had  composed herself in this manner , to express one heavy moan , and then remain motionless and silent , as the grave .
While this sad office was performing , he would , through decency , retire out of the room , and wait at the door , till he heard the sigh , or signal of admission .


He would then , open the door , softly , as if he apprehended he was going to pay a visit to the sick , and march up slowly , to the foot of the coffin  then start , as if surprized , stand aghast , wring his hands , take out his handkerchief , and move step by step , up to the head of the coffin  sobbing , weeping , and sighing , all the way , as if lamenting over some dear and real loss .
Then , after gazing for some minutes on her face , he would lay his hand gently on the breast of the living corpse , stoop down his head , and give her a parting and a passionate kiss .
This obsequy performed , he would immediately retire out of the room , leaving the girl at leisure to re-dress herself , and walk about her business , in quest of more lively sport .


At first , when he took up this very odd fancy , it was with great difficulty he could get a girl to undergo this dismal ceremony  especially , as the very idea of death , must occasion shocking reflections , to reprobates .
Besides , they were not aware how far the farce might have been  intended to be carried on  so that it used to cost him three , four , sometimes five , or six guineas , to purchase a corpse , to his mind .
But in a short time , he became so well known on the Strand , that he was stiled The Weeping Cull , and whenever he appeared , all the long , ghost-like gingers , used to crowd about him , and offer themselves voluntarily , to perform a scene in his tragedy  which reduced the price , at length , to a supper and a guinea .


His story was this : He had been , for some years , in love with a young lady , of the description in the latter end of the third paragraph , of this chapter .
She returned his passion with a reciprocal flame  but her father , who was a rich citizen of London , opposed their union , because she was his only child , and that he was in hopes of matching her into some decayed noble family , whose arms might want supporters .


The lovers were immediately separated , upon the first overture of the match , and became inconsolable .
But the lady , having a more tender sense of such disappointments , pined for some time , fell afterwards into a decay , and the physicians at length began to despair of her recovery .
Her father was moved at this report , consented  to the marriage , and gave her leave to acquaint her lover with the news .


He was , at this time , near an hundred miles from London , taking possession of his estate , about five hundred pounds a year , upon his father 's death .
The moment he received the joyful summons , he mounted his horse , and rode off , post , to London .
When he arrived , he found the house open , and stole up stairs directly to her apartment , without meeting any body in his way  but when he opened the chamber-door , and was going to rush into the arms of his beloved mistress , he saw her just laid in her coffin .


He grew immediately distracted , fell into a fever , and was confined to his bed and room , for near six months , before he recovered his health and reason .
Some part of the phrenzy still remained with him .
There is a pleasure in indulging gloomy reflections .
He was resolved to enjoy them  and immediately instituted the above funeral rite to her memory , to be performed weekly , on her death-day .
Which extraordinary and funest extravagance , he had continued for above a year , when Mr. Carewe quitted the Temple , and resolved to persevere in , during the remainder of his life .


49 .
CHAP .
CXLIV .


 SOON after I had been settled at the Temple , continued Mr. Carewe , I received a letter from the fair Divorcée , which had been returned to me from Oxford .
It was in these words :


Dear Trustee ,


THE first half year of my alimony , will be due to-morrow .
I am distress'd for money .
I beg the favour of you to discharge it immediately - without advice , which I hate .
I lodge at Mr. Seawell 's , merchant , in Leadenhall-street , London , and am , dear guardian , your dutiful ward , and affectionate humble servant .


This hint rendered me uneasy .
She had betrayed dangerous principles , and I was afraid of entering into any manner of connection with her .
I did not care to have her name joined to mine , on my first setting out in the world .
Men 's characters are generally marked , though very unfairly , by their first steps in life .
'T is hard to judge of persons , at an age when their passions are strongest , their discretion weakest , and their  experience least .
My first adventure with that lady , was naturally unavoidable .
This would have been morally premeditative .


Upon this reflection , I immediately sat down and drew a bill upon her husband , for the half year 's stipend  which received due honour by the return of the post .
The next day , I went to the Royal Exchage , inquired for Mr. Seawell , and paid him the money , for his fair lodger  taking his receipt , in her name .
I desired him to deliver my compliments to the lady , and make an apology for my not waiting on her , at that time  as I was then going out of town , c..


50 .
CHAP .
CXLV .


THE first masquerade that was exhibited in London , after my entrance at the Temple , I prepared myself for , in the gayest , and most superb manner I could devise .
I dressed myself perfectly en Turc , and carried the folly to such extravagance , that the expences of my habit , and appurtenances , amounted to above an hundred pounds .


 The vanity of human nature is unaccountable , in some things .
What possible advantage or enjoyment , could I have purposed to myself , from so magnificent an appearance  unknowing others , and myself unknown ?
To spend money upon passions , or pursuits , is defensible , but 't is really , a sort of suicide in oeconomy , to stab one 's fortune , without having either pleasure or profit in view .


The oddness and variety of the appearances , surprised and diverted me , for some time  but I soon grew tired of the farce  and felt myself offended at seeing human nature so deformed , and so disguised .
I had no rational amusement here , for I could neither enjoy society , nor soliloquy .
At one time , I compared myself to Adam , when he had collected together all the animals of the creation , to call them names .
At another time , a more serious image occurred to me , of the last day , when all the various nations of the earth , shall be gathered into one groupe , for judgment .


Such reflections , with the intolerable warmth of the room , soon began to lower my spirits , and I retired frequently , to the side-boards , to recruit them .
I happened to drink too freely there  and afterwards , ingaged too indiscreetly at play , with a sett of persons whose characters  I was as little acquainted with , as with their masks .


I had the misfortune to have won considerably at first , which excited my passion , and joined to the wine , threw me intirely off my guard .
I pushed away at every thing , accepted all manner of betts , without waiting to compute the odds , and lost and won , by turns , without ever considering how the balance of accounts stood for , or against me  till upon the summing up of the reckoning , at the close of the night , I found myself indebted to sundry unknowns , to the amount of three thousand , five hundred pounds .


I felt myself in a very aukward and distressed situation , at this period , as I had not above three hundred pounds about me , at that time .
I took off my mask , to let my creditors see that I was not afraid to shew my face , though at the same time , I acknowledged to them , that I was ashamed to do it  that I was unused to play , and had ingaged myself , unawares , beyond my present means .
I told them that I was a person of fortune , sufficient to answer their demands , and offered to go with them to a tavern , and pass securities for their respective claims .


They refused me this indulgence , said that play-debts were not recoverable at law , that it was probable a man who could , among perfect strangers ,  accept of betts , beyond his purse , might be likely to plead the statute , when called upon for payment  that they were gentlemen , persons of honour , would be treated as such  and so forth .


While they were , one and all , bullying after this manner , they surrounded me , and seemed to make one common cause of it , as in truth , I believe they were an associated gang  so that I had great reason to apprehend some harsh treatment , or unhappy event , from this foolish adventure  from which I was preparing to defend myself , after the best manner I could , and had just laid my hand to my scymetar , when a little man , in a domino , who had stood close by my side , from the time I had entered into play , and had frequently warned me , unheeded , interposed on my behalf , and addressing himself to the banditti , said that he did not look upon the debt in such a desperate light as they seemed to do  that from my dress , my indiscretion , and my ingenuousness , it was reasonable to suppose me to be a young man of modern fashion .
That , according to the gamester 's phrase , he was ready to back his opinion with his money , and that , if they would but wait his return , for a few minutes , he would bring cash sufficient to satisfy their demands .


 He retired immediately , took a chair , came soon back , with East-India bonds to the amount of my debts , and divided them among the adventurers , in proportion to their claims .
I was affected with a proper sense of gratitude , upon this occasion , and invited the little Domino to a tavern , in order to pass a security to him for his generous loan  but he excused himself , saying , that he was in reality , an usurer , that a simple obligation would not answer his purpose , and he would wait upon me , the next morning , to breakfast , and there propose his terms .
I thanked him , however , and gave him my address - We then shook hands , and parted .


I was extremely happy , at having got so well rid of this unluky adventure , and quitted that grotesque assembly , with a full resolution of never wearing a fool 's coat there , again , during my life .
Just as I was going out , I was accosted by a female mask , in a Grecian habit , and of an engaging figure , who addressed herself to me , in these words - I am in a difficult situation , Seignior , I have missed my company , in the crowd , I am afraid of venturing home alone , and beg leave to place myself under your Highness 's protection , to convey me safe to my lodgings .


Yours , extempore , said I , then taking her by the hand , put her into a chair , desiring her to  lead the way , and followed her in another .
When we stopped at her door , I bad her farewel , and directed my chair to the Temple  but she insisted on my going in to drink a glass of wine , and receive the thanks of her friends , for my politeness and galantry toward her .


I bowed obeisance , handed her into the house , she led me into her own apartments , then shutting the door , let fall her mask , and sprang my fair Divorcée into my arms .
-


51 .
CHAP .
CXLVI .


THE reader , perhaps , may here inquire , how the Divorcée should know Mr. Carewe 's name , and address , or he himself happen to be informed of either of these particulars , relative to her husband  as none of them appear to have been provided for , already .
But it is more than probable , that the trust-deed , between these parties , was drawn up by the attorney ,  with all the usual forms and requisites  among which , the real names of the contractors , with their additions , and abodes , are always fully expressed .


I must confess , however , that my friend , Mr. Carewe , has rather too succinct a manner of telling a story - too little of the narrative , by a great deal .
Witness the close of the last chapter , with many other disappointing instances , of the same kind , in various and sundry places of his memoirs .
He might , perhaps , have been pardonable for omitting those minutiae , at first , because he might not have immediately foreseen that they would be necessary in the prosecution of his story  but here he was certainly inexcusable to neglect it , and should have interrupted himself , with a ` But , Gentlemen , first it is necessary to inform you , that '' - Or , `` I had forgot to mention to ye , in the former part of my adventure with this same lady , how c. '


I would give fifty guineas , with all my heart , that this same laconic Triumvirate had been better read , than they appear to be , in the modern novels and memoirs which are published here every day  and I would ingage to make cent .
per cent .
of my money , by it , too .
For there is certainly , matter sufficient , in their stories , to  have furnished out a third volume to this work , had they been properly skilled in the manner , stile , and conduct , of such performances .
But so far from supplying me with any helps of this kind , I really think that I should hardly have squeezed out more than a single volume , from among this costive Trio , if I had not eked out a second , by the address of introducing myself so often , no matter how impertinently , into the scene , and chorussing it away , chapter after chapter , in the manner I am holding forth at present .


I agree with Mr. Carewe , intirely , that masquerades can never answer any fair purpose , in England .
It might have been a good contrivance enough , in Italy , where they were first contrived , because the only freedom that nation enjoys , is under a vizard .
But , to adopt such a screen in these kingdoms , was really superfluous , And the present age seems to be sensible of this absurdity , at last  for masquerades have been abolished of late , since liberty has become so very bare-faced , as it appears to be in these days .


You see here , another mere casual adventure , of poor Mr. Carewe 's .
He had taken all prudent means , and virtuous resolutions , imaginable , against renewing any manner of commerce with this very dangerous woman - But , he happened to take off his mask , at play , and she immediately  lays violent hands upon him .
Now what security , in this wicked world , for male chastity !
For if men should ever become coy , women will most certainly , ply stratagem against them .


52 .
CHAP .
CXLVII .


THE next morning , said Mr. Carewe , I rose early , my double obligations to my little Domino , both of equity and honour , rendered me uneasy .
The fair Divorcée pressed me to be frequent in my visits , I promised , her maid lent me a riding-hood to conceal my Grand Seigniorship , and led me out through a back door , into a private alley .
I soon met a chair , and returned pleased , and dissatisfied  resolving , and irresolute  home to my chambers in the Temple .


After breakfast , my friend Domino called upon me , and brought a bond , ready filled up , for the money exactly , which he had advanced for me the night before .
I thought it prudent in him not to add the fee of usury , in the obligation , but after I had signed the deed ,  I threw my purse upon the table , and desired him to pay himself whatever gratuity he pleased , out of it .


But he declined my offer , saying , that the expression he had thrown out , the night before , was merely made use of to conceal himself the better - That he never had dealt in usury or extortion  but being cashier to a company of merchants in the city , he usually attended , incog .
at public places of play , in order to pick up securities for money which he could venture to make free with  and which it might be imprudent in him to hazard in trade , or lend out in the offices of notaries , lest it should take wind among the company .


Then putting the bond into his pocket , and rising up from his seat , I hope , Sir , said he , that this transaction , instead of a debt , may become a purchase to you .
A proper reflection upon this marked occasion , may turn your loss to gain .
The entering into play , in your circumstances of fortune , sufficient , but not abounding , is , give me leave to say , unpardonble indiscretion .
'T is risquing what you want , for what you do not need .
'T is Aesop 's fable exactly , hazarding the substance , to grasp the shadow .


 You seem , Sir , continued he , to be a young man , just entering into life , of a liberal , and ingenuous nature , and a few more admonitions , from experience , may , and I hope will , be both useful and necessary to you .
Always leave your purse at home , never carrying more money about you , than the probable expences of the day  for you 'll find more borrowers than lenders , in this world , believe me .
As you should conceal your vices , out of decency , so should you even your very virtues , out of prudence  otherwise , the least worthy objects , being the most forward , will be apt to throw themselves in your way , preventing modest merit .
Seek occasion , rather than suffer it to seek you  and let your liberality be the result of virtue , not of weakness .
This said , he bowed , and retired .


He was a mean-looking , middle-aged man , and mechanically dressed , which made his refusing the praemium , with the officious friendship which he testified toward me upon this occasion , seem the more unaccountable , and extraordinary .
In fine , his words and actions were so much above his appearances , that I could only reconcile them in my mind , by setting the whole of this matter down to the account of character , with which , as I observed before , our nation so peculiarly abounds .


 His exhortation had this good effect upon me , that I immediately put down my equipage , and disposed of my hounds and hunters in the country .


53 .
CHAP .
CXLVIII .


I HAD promised the Divorcée to see her again , and accordingly paid her a visit in a few days after , with a purpose though , of withdrawing myself from any manner of future engagement with her , but without that abruptness which would have been inconsistent with the decorums of galantry .
It was in the evening , I found her at home , and Mrs. Seawell , at whose house she lodged , at tea with her .


Mrs. Seawell was about twenty years old , and had been two years married .
Her husband had been a widower , and appeared to me , when I saw him on the Exchange , to be above sixty .
She was of a middle stature , fair and plump  she had bright dark chesnut-coloured hair , and very white teeth *  but what was extremely  remarkable , they were naturally brilliant cut , so that when she spoke , or smiled , the glittering spangles would catch the eye , and rivet your attention , like the basilisk .


Her other features were nothing extraordinary , except her eyes , which were a dark blue , with more of languishment than spirit in them  but she had a certain riantcy about the lower part of her face , which was extremely captivating .
In fine , the contrasted air of her features , might well be compared to a tragi-comedy , there was such a mixture of mirth and melancholy in them .


She did not appear to have much understanding , but whenever I spoke , she seemed to shew an attention that was flattering  and when I happened occasionally , to throw out any little compliment of galantry toward her , it would instantly diffuse such an air of aukward fondness , o'er all her countenance , as was at once expressive , both of passion , and compliance .


We three played parties of picquette , and supped together .
It was post-night , and Mr. Seawell did not quit his office , while I staid .
Nor indeed , did either of the ladies send any very pressing messages to invite him up stairs .
I divided my addresses as equally as I could , between them , felt my situation difficult and distressing ,  promised that my visits should be frequent , and retired home to the Temple - No - It was to my private lodgings near it - Chanting out Macheath 's song to myself , all the way .


54 .
CHAP .
CXLIX .


THE next day , some young Templars dined with me , we went in the evening , to the play , picked up more company there , and went all together , to supper at a tavern .
Here , gentlemen , said Mr. Carewe , I blush to own , that I was a second time , led into deep play  though without designing , or desiring it .
But resolution was never among my heroics  and I have ever been the slave of my company .
One is too apt to be ashamed of dissenting from their fellows , and false modesty is a pimp to vice .
I lost at first , and pushing away to retrieve myself , was finally involved for four thousand pounds - Purchasing anxiety at the rate of a thousand pounds an hour .


I could not sleep all night  I felt shocked at my own madness  I recollected my good friend Domino 's advice , too late , and eked it out  with more severe reflections of my own .
Gaming is a vice , not a passion .
Passions have bounds , vices none - It should not be called a love , but a lust of play - 'T is not natural , but accidental , to mankind .
What Addison says of swearing , may be here applied  that no one can plead the being born of a gaming constitution .
Ambition is connate  't is emulation  it both excites , and exercises noble and generous faculties  it has , or may have , some great and liberal end in view .
Play is merely selfish  and confines the soul to mean and sordid objects .
No man ever yet ventured his fortune on the die , with a purpose of relieving the poor , assisting the distressed , or rescuing an oppressed people , with his success .
A gamester comprehends the character , both of fool and knave  for he sets out a dupe , and returns a sharper .
But what signify all such reflections !
the world will never be the better for them - For 't is not sober counsel , but sad experience , that will ever make men wise !


55 .
CHAP .
CL .


 THE next morning , I began to meditate upon methods of discharging this most irksome incumbrance , and recollecting that I had some valuable woods on my estate , I wrote directly to my agent , to get them valued , and then come up to London .
He did as I had directed , and told me the purchase was computed at about five thousand pounds  upon which I desired him to publish the sale in the papers  comforting myself after my too careless manner , that those trees , which had been before , but nests for ravens , were likely now , to become habitations for men .


Soon after the advertisement had appeared in print , I received a visit from my extraordinary friend , the little Domino , who , after some short intercourse of civility , asked me what sudden emergency had pressed upon me , since our parting , to sacrifice the honours , as he expressed himself , of my estate ?
Has any public calamity fallen upon the times ?
Is some dear friend , or fond connection , languishing at present , in a gaol ?
Or - I was piqued at his sarcasm , and interrupted him peevishly , with saying , that often  the heaviest circumstance of being in debt , was the rendering oneself liable to the overbearing insolence of purse-proud creditors  that I was not accountable to any person whatsoever , for the exercise of a dominion over my own estate , c..


The Domino collected himself , upon this rebuke , and made an apology for the freedom he had used , by assuring me that he came to wait upon me , merely as a friend , and was prepared to advance whatever sum I might need , upon the present occasion , in order to spare my woods , which he told me he was informed would not be in a condition to fell with advantage , for several years to come .


I felt myself ashamed at the folly and extravagance which had humbled me to such mortifying circumstances  my resentment immediately subsided , I thanked him for his friendly offer , accepted it , passed my bond to him for four thousand pounds , and ran to discharge my notes of honour , on the instant .


56 .
CHAP .
CLI .


 WHEN I had composed myself a little after this disagreeable adventure , I went to amuse myself , one morning to Leadenhall-street .
I found the two ladies sitting together , and Mrs. Seawell attempting to read a French book into English , for the entertainment of her friend , who did not understand a word of the language .


She stopped , on my coming in , but I begged she would proceed for a page or two , that I might be able to judge how far she was a mistress of French .
She read on a little farther , but finding her to be a mere dictionary scholar , like most of our modern translators , I took the book out of her hand , and construed a few pages with an ease and fluency which pleased them both .


It was Le Sopha  and coming to that passage , where the writer , speaking of the proneness to intrigue , in women , imputes it principally , à le de saeuvremnt perpétuel dans lequel elles languissent , I shut the book , crying out in a transport , Deus nobis haec otia fecit !
and putting it into my pocket , asked the ladies to take the air with me a little  way out of town , promising that I would finish the remainder of the novel for them , in the coach .
They accepted the invitation , and we drove off to Ranelagh together .


The day was fine , and after we had walked a turn or two , in the gardens , we sat ourselves down in an arbour , and the ladies claimed my promise of reading the Sopha to them .
To which I replied , that I would first give Mrs. Seawell some instructions in French , as she seemed to need only a few lessons in the auxiliaries , to become a compleat scholar .
The dear pupil appeared pleased at my proposal , the other lady opposed it , but being out-voted , was obliged to sit dully , and impatiently by .


I then began pedantically enough , with the verb avoir , and went very seriously , through the indicative and imperative moods  but when I came to the optative , potential , and subjunctive parts of the conjugation , the very titles hinted an applicable subject to me  so digressing from old grammar , I laid hold of this opportunity , of telling her in French , that the difficulty of separating her from her companion , had reduced me to this ruse d'amour , to frame an occasion of declaring the purest , and warmest passion for her , that I had been struck at first sight , and this so strongly too , that ages could neither increase nor  diminish my flame - That - But here perceiving her countenance falling into some confusion , I quick shifted my discourse to some of the tenses of the verb , and then speaking to her in English , desired her to repeat any speech , psalm , or prayer , she had by heart , in French , in order to try her pronunciation .


She then spoke a stanza or two of Une Chanson à boire  and having by that time , recovered herself a little , concluded it by thanking me for the compliment I had paid her , and assuring me , in a sort of hesitating voice , and embarrassed manner , that while I should preserve the decorums of Platonics , which was all her present circumstances could admit of , she would return my passion with the warmest friendship and esteem .


All this she spoke in a broken and interrupted manner , as if she was only trying to recollect the remainder of her song  then speaking in English , said , with an arch smile , that this was enough for the first lesson , and turning to her friend , cried , Indeed , my dear , you miss a vast pleasure , in not understanding French .
During all this while , the discontented lady sat by , throwing out , every now and then , such interjections as these : Vastly entertaining !
perfectly polite !
Some folks are rude to shew their breeding !
Is this the beau monde !
This what they  call the bon ton !
What !
the gay , the ingenious Mr. Carewe turned school-master , to teach parrots to speak !
c..


57 .
CHAP .
CLII .


AFTER this manner , and in walking , we amused the time , till Mrs. Seawell , looking at her watch , told us it was just three o'clock , and full time to set out toward London .
I was sent off , to order the coach to the door , and returning soon back led the ladies into a little parlour , where a small , but elegant collation had been prepared , by my private directions on our first coming into the house .


I immediately seated myself at the table , intreating the favour of my fair guests to take their places on each side of me , which the Divorcée readily consented to , and placed herself directly on my right hand  but Mrs. Seawell hesitated a little , lest her husband might be displeased at her staying abroad , without notice .
The other laughed at her scruples , saying , My dear friend , 't is good policy sometimes , to act a little irregularly , in innocent and indifferent  matters , so shall you be at liberty in things of higher moment .
Practise swimming , my girl , within your depth , and it may save you at a plunge .
She smiled , and blushed .
She seemed in the most delicate temper imaginable - at once both willing , and afraid .
I arose , took her by the warm , trembling hand , pressed it tenderly , and seated her at the table .


We were each of us extremely lively , drank briskly , exhausted all the modern wit of sentimental toasting , and our whole conversation was supported with spirit and galantry .
The Divorcée spoke her opinions pretty freely , upon this latter subject  and while she meant only to justify her own amour , she was , without perceiving , or intending it , assisting mine .


When we had got into the coach , to return to London , I proposed to my pretty pupil , that we should converse in French together , for a while , upon any common topic , just to try how far she had profited of my lessons , in the morning .
The other lady , who in truth preferred plain English , objected , but was , as before , over-ruled in the question , which left us again at our liberty .


I took advantage of this second favourable crisis , to urge my now increasing passion , with the united warmth of youth and wine  to which she answered , in a tender accent , that if she had  never done so before , she did , at that instant , most cordially wish , that she had never been yet married .
To this objection I quick replied , that hearts were made before vows , and that nature was prior to obligation  adding , that if she would make herself perfect mistress of the language we were then conversing in , she must intirely accommodate herself to the manners of that nation , who are our instructors in it .


To give you an example , now , continued I , all the difference that the polite French make , between matrimony , and intrigue , is , that they term the first menage , and the latter manege - The transposition of a single letter only - So that the strictest moralist can make but a literal error of it , at most .
To youth , and passion , mellowed by champaigne , any sophistry is good logic * .
I kissed her at parting , and in return , she pressed my hand .
I lay at my private lodgings that night , and the next morning discharged them .


58 .
CHAP .
CLIII .


 WHAT Mr. Carewe says , of the Divorcée 's helping forward his intrigue , with Mrs. Seawell , puts me in mind of a note of the Greek scholiast , upon Menander 's Fall of Woman .
It is quoted , in Latin , by one of the commentators upon Ovid , De arte amandi  and my translation must be from this latter , having never seen the original .


` To employ one woman , to inveigle another , is like setting a knave to catch a knave .
A female confidante , or companion , will contribute more to the success of an amour , in one month , than the galant 's own assiduity , for twelve .
Consider the times and seasons , they are together  with the power of example , added to precept .
Another 's courage inspires one 's own * . '


 Here follows an anatomical dissertation on the body female  with a physical account of the effects of passion upon the noble parts , the head , the heart , the c. and the whole is concluded with this quaint expression - ` In short , says he , women undo one another , like cockles . '


This image is really ridiculous enough , but 't is in the strong manner of the antient simile  and I have never been able to see the hinges of two cockles , turned against each other , since , and niggling themselves open , without thinking of the old scholiast on Menander , or The Fall of Woman .


59 .
CHAP .
CLIV .


WE three had frequent parties together in London , at the play , the tavern , and the china-shops , where I laid out a good deal of money , in presents , to both of the ladies  for I thought it necessary to shew some more certain tokens of fondness and galantry to my lovely  Seawell , than mere professions , and caresses * .
And to have neglected the same compliment to the other lady , might have raised both a jealousy and a suspicion , and would not have been either prudent or polite .


However , all my caution did not avail me long  for my attentions , my languishments , on one side , with some unpardonable neglects and omissions , on the other , soon visibly marked the preference .
The forsaken fair had betrayed a good deal of uneasiness and pique , at this , once or twice before  but one night , after supper , at a tavern , when my pupil and I were exchanging a few bons mots , in French , she started up from the table , expressing her resentment , in these words :


Though I do not understand your tongues , said she , I do your eyes .
I have long suspected it  but being slow to censure - or perhaps , to think so meanly of my own age , or person , as to imagine they could , for many years yet to come , be used to cloak another 's amour , I have - But I am trespassing on your patience ,  or rather impatience , I dare swear - Waiter , call me a chair - I shall leave you together , incontinently , ` here to consummate your unfinished loves . '
A chair - a chair - below there -


She was an alarming figure all together .
Her eyes flashed fire , her cheeks flushed blood , her whole frame was convulsed  and her charms became , at the same instant , both heightened and deformed .
Enraged beauty strikes us with a peculiar kind of shock .
It raises a contrasted sensation in our breasts , both of love , and aversion .
We are affected , at once , with horror and compassion .


I attempted all in my power , to soothe her rage - Denied the charge , and in my hurry and confusion , vowed that she , and she alone , was the true object of my real passion - That - But before I could frame , or add another syllable , my ear was assaulted by a dying moan , and turning my eye quick about , I perceived the fainting Seawell falling from her chair .
I fled to her assistance , caught her in my arms , called her my life , my love - In plain English - having quite forgot my French , in this moment of distraction .
I leaned her back , sprinkled water in her face , and kissed it dry again , till she recovered .


 All this while the enraged Roxana went on exclaiming against my disingenuousness and perfidy , and ringing the bell , for a chair .
I ordered a second to be called  she flung herself into one , I placed my poor trembling pupil in the other , and ran along by the side of it , vowing , professing , and stammering , all the way , till we got near her house  then slunk off , for fear of being espied by the jealous termagant , and returned home to the Temple , in the utmost perplexity and confusion .


60 .
CHAP .
CLV .


I Could not compose my spirits sufficiently , that night , to lie down in my bed , and sat up till day-break , musing o'er the taper .
My reflections ran thus : I was apprehensive lest the violence of the disappointed Divorcée , might transport her to expose the fair victim to her husband .
I was resolved to vindicate her actual innocence , and to support her through the consequences of our mutual indiscretion , so far as it had already proceeded  and was so affected with  the dangerous situation to which my libertinism had reduced her , that I resolutely determined never more to re-visit Leadenhall-street again  and compounded for the loss of a fond mistress , by the getting rid of a jealous virago .


Having thus far qualified the difficulty and uneasiness of my mind , I began to turn my thoughts inward on myself - What a life is mine !
without purpose , or end !


- `` As if there was no more behind , `` But such a day to-morrow as to day , `` And to be boy eternal . ''
- * Youth flies , and fortune wastes !
In what a venture am I ingaged , and what a shipwreck must he endanger , whose gale is passion , whose pilot inexperience , and whose port is no where !
Then , upon comparing my Temple , with my college life - That , letters , love , and oeconomy - This , dissipation , debauchery , and extravagance - I started from my chair , crying out , Where is she , my lovely academic , now ?
my virtuous mistress , my disinterested friend , my society alone !
O !
why not sum up all these dear appellations , in one still more dear , and  comprehensive term , my wife !
And she shall be mine , if love , approbation , and selection , can intitle me to her  or that the confessing myself the base Indian , now repentant , may win her from her delicacy and scruples .
But is she not already so ?
Our souls are one , and our bodies have been each other 's .


`` For marriage is a matter of more worth , `` Than to be dealt in by attorneyship . ''
With these reflections , and with this resolve , I laid me down to rest , and awakened with the same .
For sleep , by composing my spirits , and calming my reason , had but the more firmly determined my purpose .
I perceived the vanity of life , the clearer , where nothing stable is , but love and virtue  which when conjoined , stake this world as an earnest of the next .


`` Consideration , like an angel came , `` And whipt the offending Adam out of him  `` Leaving his body as a paradise , `` To envelope , and contain coelestial spirits . ''
61 .
CHAP .
CLVI .


 MY sentiments , with regard to the charming Eloisa , were not , at first , solely the deductions of reason , but rather the inspirations of passion .
This will surprise you , perhaps .
I had parted from her , with tolerable ease to myself , because I had the satisfaction to have no manner of apprehensions subsisting upon her own account .
I had left her safe , both in fortune and in virtue .
So far had I acquitted myself , to the calls of honour , and the claims of justice  and on my own part , I had youth , frolic , and adventure , before me , to keep up my spirits , on the parting .


But , I had never passed a day , since our last adieu , without wishing for her society  nor a night , without longing for her fellowship .
Women and wine had lost their flavour  company became insipid , books dry , and amour wanted zest .
In fine , she was my health , which I had insensibly enjoyed , in the possession , and only lamented , in the loss .


My last night 's shock had , like a burning-glass , collected all these scattered rays of love and virtue together , in an instant , and their vis unita  force was irresistible .
My resolves are sudden , and my action quick .
I took post-horses immediately , and drove down to Oxford .


My inquiry about her , there , was fruitless .
I was informed , that he had lived intirely sequestered , from the time I quitted college , appearing only at the public lectures , and the public service  and that as soon as he had taken his degree , he had struck his name out of the books , and retired , whither unknown , without having taken leave of any body .


I lay that night in the town , and was preparing to pursue my dear fugitive further , the next morning , when some select friends of mine , who had become fellows of the university , and had been informed of my arrival , came to the inn , and arrested my course .
We loved one another , we walked together o'er the classic ground  particularly the park , where my dear chum had related to me all her transactions with her grandfather  and O !
where the action with Ap Shones had happened , which was the prologue to my happiness .


We spent the day together , often speaking of our pretty collegiate , as they called her , and at several times I was in danger of exposing the secret , by the transports that I found it difficult to restrain , upon the mention of her name .
I loitered at  old Alma 's for a week , purposing every morning to depart .
My stronger affections urged me to go , but my more immediate ones induced me to stay .
Such is the nature of man !
*


62 .
CHAP .
CLVII .


FROM Oxford I proceeded to our former sojourn , for the double pleasure of embracing my little Hermes , and hearing , probably , some account of his dear mother .
But in both was I disappointed .
My old landlady informed me that about a month before , a very pretty young gentleman , who called himself my wife 's brother , and was as like her as a twin , had come to his house , brought a maid-servant in the chair with him , and carried away the child , who had been long weaned , and was a fine healthy , lovely boy .


 This additional circumstance sunk my spirits to the lowest ebb .
I felt a double loss at once , a wife , and son - And in the latter , was deprived also , of the only clue I had to trace the mother by .
I was now arrived at the ne plus ultra of my pursuit  for I neither knew her grandfather 's name , or abode .
She had never mentioned him to me , by any other title than the Old Colonel , or Grandsire .


Nor indeed , had I ever asked her any thing about the matter myself , because , from the aukward circumstance of my own family affair , I did not chuse to be communicative in the like particular , myself .
Nay , the same reserve I have still continued to preserve , even toward you , gentlemen , said he to Mr. Andrews and Beville , for Carewe is not my real name , but only one that I have assumed to myself because I did not care to use my own , while my father and I remain upon such unhappy terms .


Thus was I blown out to sea , again - But though I lost my haven , I was resolved to take what care I could of the cargo  and for one instance of it , I immediately wrote a letter to the gentleman with whom I happened to have the adventure at this house , desiring him to make his remittances of alimony through the hands of Mr. Seawell , for the future  telling him that  I found it very inconvenient to act any longer as agent in that business .


I did not , however , resign the office of trustee at the same time - The most worthless person , the greatest criminal , has a right to justice from us , though not to favour  and a breach of confidence is something more than an offence against morals .


63 .
CHAP .
CLVIII .


I FELT myself in the world alone .
I had now no point of view to guide my perspective , no referable object to direct my actions toward .
The mind is active , and like a conjured demon , will rase , or build a church , according to the spell that raised it : ` Tam ficti pravique tenax , quam nuntia veri . '
I returned back , forlorn , to London , to folly , intemperance , and to single joys .
However , I shut myself up in my chambers , at first , and studied law with great application , in order to  keep my attention from wandering upon outward objects , and to attach it to some rational pursuit in life .


About a fortnight after I had thus sequestered myself from the world , I received the followed billet , one morning :


Dear Sir ,


A Certain friend of yours , is at present in a very unhappy situation - If you are a gentleman of honour , you will repair instantly to Leadenhall-street , and there you shall hear the particulars from , dear Sir , your truly afflicted , and most humble servant ,


Jane Seawell .


This note alarmed me .
I concluded that some aukward piece of business must have fallen out , from the jealous resentment of the Divorcée .
But whatever it might be , I was resolved to bear myself through it , like a man  so putting on my sword , I took coach , and drove off directly to the rendezvous appointed .


When I arrived at the house , I was led into the parlour , where I found Mr. and Mrs. Seawell together , and alone .
He was walking in a disturbed manner , about the room , while she sat weeping in the window .
Just as I guessed , said I to myself , Mr. Seawell received me with  a formal and embarrassed air , and his wife , wiping her eyes , rose quickly from her seat , and running toward me , cried out , Oh !
Sir - our poor unhappy friend is lost , ruined , and undone .


I was shocked greatly , at this state of the case , but began soon to grow easier in my mind , than I had felt myself on my entrance , and desiring to be informed of the nature and circumstances of that unfortunate lady 's difficulties , Mr. Seawell gave me the following account :


64 .
CHAP .
CLIX .


A Young merchant Jew , just entered on the ` Change , having had frequent business to transact at my counter , was often invited to my table , where this lady was always one of the company .
She threw out her lure , and incouraged his addresses , extempore .
This was obvious enough on the first interview  but as there may be flirts , who would not be strumpets , I suffered the amour to be carried on before my face , for about a fortnight  till her behaviour at last , her affecting always to sit by him , her laying hold of his hand to fix him in discourse , her fond inclinings , her gloting eyes , c. began to  give me such offence , and alarm too , on account of the example before my wife , that I marked it to both the lovers , the last night they supped together here  and forbore asking him farther than my counting-office , for the future , whenever his business gave him pretence to call upon me .


This difficulty embarrassed the inamorato 's a good deal , and reduced them to the necessity of making appointments elsewhere .
They met in the park , at the play , and other places , which are not material to the story , therefore I shall now pass on to the present crisis of this business .


This morning she was arrested at my house , upon an information for having stolen a diamond ring , value five hundred pounds , from the Jew .
She immediately threw herself at my feet , continued Mr. Seawell , supplicating me not to suffer her to be hurried away to a gaol , before she had an opportunity of speaking a word or two with the merchant , whom she intreated me to go for , in person , and bring to her , on the instant .
My wife joined in the request , I prevailed on the bailiffs to wait my return , and immediately repaired to the Jew 's lodgings .


He told me the whole course of the intrigue , ever since the last evening they had passed together  at my house , till two nights past , when she was prevailed upon to sup with him at his own lodgings .
Here , said he , I happened to amuse her by shewing a parcel of valuable jewels , which had been consigned to me by a correspondent at Venice , and were that evening just come to hand .


Yesterday morning , said he , I missed the ring in question , and wrote her a civil line , to know whether she had taken it way , either in mistake , or jest , to alarm me ?
To which she replied , that she knew nothing at all of the matter , had not even distinguished the ring from the rest of the jewels , and lastly , that I was welcome to her affidavit , if I should be mean and ungenerous enough , to charge her still with so base a fraud .


Her answer confounded me , continued he .
I could no longer suspect her , after this last paragraph - though she is a Christian - Such was the Jew 's expression .
I then looked all through my bureau again , searched my rooms and my pockets , above twenty times  but in vain .
By this time , said he , the day was far spent , so that it was late before I could go about the city , to give notice at all the jewellers shops  but had the mortification to find that my warning came too late , for that the ring had been disposed of  at one of them , early in the morning , by an ordinary woman , who appeared to be a servant-maid .


Upon this I began to challenge the purchaser , for having ventured to buy such a commodity , in so clandestine a manner  but he stopped me short , by acquainting me that , in this particular , he had conducted himself with sufficient mercantile caution  for , upon suspecting the persons who had offered the ring to sale , he had threatened to detain her till she should be able to give him a satisfactory account , both of herself and the jewel .


Upon this , said he , she led me to one Mr. Seawell 's house , in Leadenhall-street , where a lady , of a very responsible appearance , who , it seems , lodges there , vouched the property to be her own .
Upon which I returned with the wench , back again to my shop , and paid her , before witnesses , what I hope may be deemed pretty near the value of the ring .


After this , continued the Jew , I thought I had no other measure to keep , but that of justice .
I immediately gave in examinations before a magistrate , and have now delivered the wretched woman over into the hands of the law , where she shall abide her doom , for me .
I pressed him to come along with me to see her , at  least , as she had so earnestly requested , but he peremptorily refused .
For to what purpose , said he ?
I would not forgive the debt , even to a Jew  much less the theft , to a Christian .


I then returned home , concluded Mr. Seawell , and delivered the prisoner up to the bailiffs , who carried her immediately away , and lodged her in the Poultry-compter .
That foolish chicken-hearted woman there , added he , fell into distraction , at the merited distress of her hopeful friend , and wrote you the note which has brought you , Sir , hither , and given you a trouble that I apprehend can possibly answer no manner of purpose , in the world .


The lovely Seawell then falling on her knees before me , implored my assistance toward rescuing our poor unhappy friend , from her miserable situation .
I would snatch her from the ground , but she was immoveable in her suit .
I promised every thing in my power , said that it was not easy to frame any manner of device , on the instant , but I would fly to comfort her , and consult together all possible means of saving her life , at least .
Justice forbids it , added I , but humanity intercedes , even for vice .
I then raised the suppliant fair  but in the midst of my moral , found myself , e'er I was aware , pressing her hand , somewhat too tenderly .


65 .
CHAP .
CLX .


 WHEN I entered the gaol , I felt myself affected with a crowd of sensations and reflections  the noisome scents , the sallow complexions , the squalid garments , shocked my sight and smell .
But I found myself much more disturbed at the boisterous merriment I heard among the prisoners  which made their wretchedness appear still more wretched  and added Bedlam to the Mint .


I spied the unhappy woman sitting in a corner of the common hall , her face all pale with guilt and dread , her arms crossed over her breast , and eyes turned up to Heaven  while a parcel of raggamuffins , male and female , were rifling her pockets for garnish .
The oppressed oppressing !


How I felt , is not to be described .
Her beauty , her vice - her situation , her sex - That form which I had once folded in my arms , with fondness and desire !
her jealousy , my vanity - her distress , and my compassion !
I scattered money among the contending mob , seized her arm , and hurried her into an inner room , before she could perceive who I was .
Then taking her gently by the hand , and beginning to  speak I know not what , my tongue stood still , and my eyes o'erflowed .


The moment she observed me , she gave a loud shriek , her strength failed her , and she sunk down upon the floor , murmuring to herself , ` This is too much , O justice !
to be confronted with the person who knows so many vices in me !
loaded as I am with guilt , this added shame reaches beyond my powers ! '
It gave me extreme satisfaction to find her susceptible of any spark of virtue , of humility , or contrition .
I raised her up , embraced her , bid her repent , hope , and depend upon my utmost exertion in her defence .


She then confessed the felony to me , pretending that had I been constant to her , this misfortune could never have happened  that love alone , with me , would have satisfied all her desires  but finding herself disappointed in that fond wish , she had resolved to make all her future amours subservient to her interest .


She told me that with this view , she had engaged in an intrigue with the Jew , because he was reckoned rich .
That she had endeavoured to get money from him , once or twice , on pretence of being considerably in debt , but sound him to be a mean-spirited fellow  and that she was tempted to slip the ring into her bosom ,  in order to pay herself  imagining that perhaps he might not have readily missed it from among so large a parcel of jewels  or that if he should , she might possibly not have been suspected  might wheedle him out of it  or finally , compound the matter with him , by restoring it again .
But - having once obtained the quiet possession of the prize , said she , my avarice began to lay violent hands upon it  and the temptation proved , alas !
too strong for my weakness .


Thus , continued she , did I sap the foundations of my honesty , as I had done before of my chastity , by salvo 's .
My first failure - I may deem it my only one - For one breach in virtue , renders a woman bankrupt for life .
Honour is our true virginity - Dishonour never strikes us twice - My affair with the unfortunate young man that is dead , said she , with a sigh and a tear , was never intended , or the consequences even apprehended , by me .
He was forward , and took freedoms , which I permitted , rather for want of breeding , than of modesty  and I finding still my purpose honest , indulged too great a latitude to my actions  determining however , most resolutely , to oppose the last attack .


But alas !
he had gained ground on me , so gradually and insensibly , that the last favour , being but little more than what he had obtained  the day before , I was ruined , e'er I perceived my danger .
She then concluded her account of that adventure , with this very just and prudent reflection  Women , said she , who do not take up arms , against the first attempt , will scarce become heroines , upon the last .


66 .
CHAP .
CLXI .


I Staid to dinner with her , in this wretched scene , endeavouring to support her spirits by frequent assurances of my friendship and compassion , which I promised to exert for her service , to the utmost shilling of my fortune  but at the same time , strongly recommending to her an unfeigned penitence , and a thorough reformation of life .
Prepare yourself for death , added I , not through despair , but by the only preparation that is fit for life .
Hope , and virtue .
She wept , vowed , and prayed .


At parting , I desired her to give me the money she had received on the sale of the ring , that I might carry it to the Jew , and endeavour to bribe him into a composition of the felony , with  it .
Here she fell into tears again , exclaiming out , Oh , Sir !
too surely is folly the natural concomitant of vice !
I thought I should have screened myself , by employing another person , and one unknown , to dispose of the jewel  and I imagined I might have safely intrusted my own maid , who had lived with me since we were both of us children - but she has never returned to me , since she received the money .


No matter , I replied , the expedient I intended , shall be supplied out of my own purse - So promising to return the next morning , I retired , without taking any other leave of her , than by a bow , and adieu .
A gaol is no scene of galantry , and after my first transport of humanity toward her , was over , I kept quite clear of all manner of dalliance , for the remainder of the day - both upon her account , and my own .
Vice is contagious , as well as distemper  and I was resolved to hold no farther connection with it , than what was barely necessary for its cure .


However , I felt myself extremely uneasy at leaving the unhappy woman in such a place , and circumstance , alone , and would have given bail for her myself , but I was told by the gaoler , that a positive felony would not admit it .
I then gave him five guineas , to treat the lady with the utmost humanity and respect , had her placed in  the best apartment of the house , and calling in at the first bookseller 's , in my way home , sent her a present of a Bible , a Prayer-book , and Sherlock 's two discourses upon Death and Resurrection .


67 .
CHAP .
CLXII .


I WAS impatient , Mr. Reader , till Mr. Carewe had finished the last chapter , that I might indulge myself in the opportunity of saying a few words , upon a subject which he touches a little at , in the beginning of it .
Namely , a gaol .


Every person 's humanity , though ever so universal , still selects to itself one favourite object of compassion .
Some , the lunatic - others the beggar - some , the slave  and others , the criminal .
Mine is the Marshalsea prisoner .


The lunatic is a sad object , indeed !
Swift said that this was a sight which he could never look on , without an inward shock .
I am , myself - God preserve my senses !
as much affected at this appearance , as he could be , though I have not so much wit to lose - Sed miserum est  perdere naulum - But then , this is considering the madman as an object , merely - for , as a subject , he is frequently an happy creature - and fools bid fairest for that character !


The mendicant enjoys freedom , air , and charity - Turkish captives , or galley-slaves , have exercise , and its sweet lacquey , rest .
And even these , or mine , or row , in hopes of redemption - For such is the mistaken charity of Christians , that they often pass by the moans of Southwark , and the Fleet , to set slaves free in Barbary !
The Culprit !
why he is not a prisoner for life - but for death , only .
His confinement is but short - Aut cita mors , aut victoria laeta !


The confined debtor is a wretch , who vexed with all their griefs , has not a single solace of their reliefs .
He has the Bedlamite 's restraint , without the ignorance of his misery !
he is a beggar , without freedom , air , or charity !
a slave , without the wholesome vicissitudes of labour and rest !
a prisoner , without the permutatio foelix , of death or liberty !
The criminal may have some hope , from the favour of a jury , or the mercy of a judge - but the harsh creditor is , at once , both judge , jury , and executioner too , to the extremest letter of the law .
The Jew of Venice was tender-hearted - he would have a pound of flesh only , and let the rest go free -  the Christian gaoler skeletons the whole body with pining want , manacles the limbs to noisome dungeons , and wastes the mind in repinings and despair !


I speak not here , of common cases , for I trust in my Redeemer , that there are but few like this  for many debtors have substance , and some creditors want not humanity - but I speak only of those wretches , who can not pay , and those greater ones , who can not forgive * .
Under these mutual circumstances , I know some who feel , and others who fear , a gaol , from those who calling themselves Christians , know no other text in scripture but this , there shalt thou remain , till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing .


The legislature would certainly interpose , in such hard cases as these , but upon the presumption that no human creature can be totally devoid of humanity .
The bankruptcy act does not reach it .
This respects only failures in trade .
Acts of grace come nearest to the remedy  but these are rare , and partial  passed only upon extraordinary occasions , and extending but to prisoners , and exiles , under certain restrained descriptions .


A standing act , of this kind , comprehending every person , and at all times , who was willing to take the relief of it , would be necessary to abrogate this summum jus , this tyranny within the  law , would be - a turn upon the word is unavoidable here - the most gracious act of power , that could be well devised , and most becoming of that government , the principles and spirit of which are founded in liberty .


68 .
CHAP .
CLXIII .


AS soon as I returned home , said Mr. Carewe , I sent a note to my good old friend Domino , addressed for him at the compting-house , where he had directed me to pay the interest of my bonds , as it should become due  begging the favour of him to let me have five hundred pounds , if possible , the next morning , upon a very pressing occasion .


He came to me the next day , before ten o'clock , and brought the money along with him , telling me , while he was filling up the bond , that this was the last shilling he had , at present , or might perhaps , for ever have it in his power to lend .
No matter for that , replied I , so far as relates to myself , for I have had a sufficient surfeit of extravagance already , and I promise you , that as soon as I shall have got rid  of a certain difficult business , which I am just now engaged in , I will retire from the world , to books , and oeconomy , till love and matrimony , which I am now in quest of , added I , with a sigh , shall engross me sole .
Little Domino much commended both of these prudent and virtuous resolutions , and took his leave .


I flew immediately to Leadenhall-street , to request the favour of Mr. Seawell to carry this five hundred pounds to his friend the Jew , and tempt him to withdraw the prosecution  as I thought that a collusion of this kind , might be more successfully managed in privacy between themselves , than by the negotiation of any third person .
It was with great difficulty I could prevail on him to transact this affair , but by the assistance of his wife 's tears and intreaties , we at length got him out of the house .


Mrs. Seawell remained in the parlour with me , till her husband 's return , expressing great apprehensions and concern for her friend , one minute , and begging of me , the next , to tell her the whole story of our amour , for that she loved to hear little novels , vastly .
I defended myself , by replying that the present occasion was too serious a time , to amuse with such light tales as this , while the life of the unhappy subject of it , remained still under suspence  and  that memoirs , of the kind she seemed to imagine ours to have been , were very improper and dangerous recitals for wives to listen to .


Lord bless me , how you talk , now !
replied she , how differently from what you used to do !
but the extremity of your grief for the fair prisoner - though she is much fallen off , in my opinion , in that particular , of late - has , I believe , made a swaddler of you .
Prithee now , could your telling an arch story of our friend , among ourselves here , have any manner of effect upon her tryal ?
And for my own part , I really can not see why any wife in the world might not read an intrigue this hour , and say her prayers the next .
Nay , the warmer perhaps , for that reason , as it might afford her a hint to pray more earnestly against the temptation - I hope this last reflection , Mr. Methodist , said she , with a smile , will please you .


I laughed at her giddy liveliness , but must confess that I was once or twice , very near forgetting myself , on this tête à tête party .
Her morning deshabille had something extremely elegant and familiar in it  her robe was loose , and made of a French lutestring , azure ground , clouded with pale pink : she had no stays on , but a fine ticken vest , which suffered all the pliancies of an easy , well-turned shape , to appear through  it .
Her bright glossy hair , which had a natural curl in it , flowed carelessly over her shoulders , and was interwoven before , with ribbon , like a victim dressed for the sacrifice .
The few drops of pity she had just shed , added another water to the brilliancy of her eyes .
Her neck was uncovered , excepting a slight black gauze handkerchief , which was crossed before , and folded in between her breasts , to mark the parted snow .
She appeared to be finely limbed , her slippers were of light blue Persian , with a silver fringe , her stockings white silk , and her petticoats so short , that the tassels of her garters were to be seen , as she sat leaning on the couch with one leg hanging over the cushion , and the other reaching to the floor .


Her toute ensemble was so very alluring , that a more perfect saint than I was , might perhaps have fallen into the temptation  but virtue had for me , the counter-charms of a new mistress .
I reflected on the late danger to which she had herself been exposed , from the rivalship of the Divorcée  I ruminated upon the depth of vice which the other had fallen into , from perfect innocence , through one unguarded step - and could I think of exposing her to the same sin !
The place too , warned my virtue - Scipio , a Pagan , forewent the rights of conquest , from a  principle of honour , alone - and should I , a Christian , dare profane the sacred laws of hospitality !
But more , in aid , to my exalted sense appeared the lovely academic , like an angel heavenly bright !
she firmed my footsteps , like a fixed point of view , which guides the equilibrist safely o'er the precipice , upon a single plank .


I preserved the spirit of these reflections , through my whole conversation with her  softening however , the austerity of them , with a guarded mixture of gaiety and politeness  and endeavoured to recommend virtue , as libertines do vice , by setting forth the pleasures of it , till Mr. Seawell returned to us , with an account of his having happily concluded a treaty with the Jew  who had been prevailed upon to accept the money , and engaged not to appear upon the tryal .


69 .
CHAP .
CLXIV .


 I WAS transported at this event , and so appeared the lovely Seawell too , at the first - But - female friendship !
her joy began to flatten  which upon perceiving , I took notice of to her .
She replied , that it really did afford her great pleasure , to find that the poor woman 's life was safe , but feared , at the same time , for her wretched soul 's sake , that she would never die so well prepared , as she had a chance of doing upon this lucky warning .
To which she added , that she apprehended still farther , upon my account , lest her beauty - what remained of it - her wickedness and arts , might hereafter lead me into some more expensive or dangerous mishap , than I had hitherto sustained from her .


I returned her thanks for her friendly concern about me , but assured her that all such fears for me , were groundless  for that vice , or even beauty , must assail my heart in vain , whose affections were already fixed upon an adamantine rock , of love , and virtue .
And that besides , with regard to the lady in question , I was resolved , as soon as the tryal should be over , to make use of all my influence to persuade her to quit  the kingdom immediately , and leave her shame behind her .
She seemed to rejoice both in my security , and in my scheme , and immediately offered to accompany me to the gaol , to carry the happy news to her dear friend .


I declined going myself , at that time , saying that I should not chuse to see the unhappy woman , till after her first emotions were over  and that the acknowledgements her gratitude might prompt her to make , would render me aukward and uneasy  but said , that I should be much pleased , if she would carry the good news herself , and prepare her to receive me , agreeably to my own sentiments of this matter .
That if she would stay to dinner there , I would remain with Mr Seawell till evening , and by the time that I might imagine the lady 's spirits to be a little composed , he and I should wait upon them to supper .
Her husband consented to this proposal , and she went off directly in a chair .


My purpose , in thus putting myself upon Mr. Seawell , was with a design of cultivating an intimacy and friendship with him , in order to strengthen my virtue , by an alliance with my honour .
I had a farther view also , of becoming a watchful guardian over his wife 's behaviour  as the galantries I had practised toward her , having seemed to have had some little effect upon  her mind , rendered me answerable for her future conduct .


70 .
CHAP .
CLXV .


I Spent the remainder of the day pleasantly enough , with Mr. Seawell , and a very sensible , good sort of elderly country gentleman , who was his near relation , and happened to dine with us .
Our host was a plain , rational man , without either wit or learning  but one who appeared to know the world sufficiently , and to understand mercantile business extremely well .
I was with him for some time in his compting-house , before dinner  and after he had finished his letters for the post , and that his friend had taken his leave , we took coach , and went to wait upon our ladies together .


We found them both very properly employed  the prisoner was reading one of the volumes of Sherlock , while Mrs. Seawell was attending , and sprigging a flower in the border of an handkerchief .
The fair Confined , upon seeing me enter the room , fell on her knees  I ran to take her up , and vowed I would quit the place  instantly , if she should attempt to distress me after this manner , any more .


She rose immediately , and asked my pardon , for having forgot the generous injunction , as she termed it , which I had sent her by Mrs. Seawell  adding , that it was increasing the obligation to do so , as it must have been impossible for her to have found words strong enough to express the grateful sentiments she bore toward her kind deliverer .


Her compliment threw me into some confusion - from what principle in human nature does this coyness arise ?
To call it modesty , does not satisfy my philosophy * - I replied , that the amending of her life , would over-pay the gift , and that her prayers and thanksgivings were fitter to be addressed to him who can redeem from sin , than to one who has saved from death only .


 We all supped together  and at parting , promised to pass most of our time with her , by turns , till the day of tryal should be over , which was to come on in about ten days .
While she was returning us thanks for our humanity and compassion toward her wretched situation , Mrs. Seawell was hinting to me with a low voice , and in French , that this would be a favourable opportunity for proposing the scheme I had mentioned in the morning , of her quitting the kingdom  because , said she , it will be an easier matter to make terms with her , while she may consider herself as still in your power , than after her safety shall become past dispute .
I made no reply , and felt myself much offended at her meanness .
The ladies exchanged tears , embraces , and adieu 's , with each other , and we retired .


71 .
CHAP .
CLXVI .


 I Passed great part of every day , during her confinement , with the fair reformed  and in reality , she appeared to be a truly penitent one .
I acted as her ordinary , and was highly sensible of the transcendent joy of ministering to a mind diseased .
I used to carry a variety of books in my pocket , and read select passages out of them , to her , fitted to alleviate her distress .


Sometimes she would throw herself on her knees , and pray  at others , in a female expression of gratitude , catch me in her arms , and weep .
Then , with joined hands , and uplifted eyes , walk across the room , crying out , ` How happy was it for me to have felt this severe , yet healing affliction !
Had not Divine Providence , in its great mercy , thus awakened my soul to attention , I might have still gone on , from bad to worse , to worst .
Is there in sensuality an age of joy , equal in poignancy , or degree , to one hour of that horror and anxiety I have endured , since my committal hither !
and yet , these terrors are what even the most fortunate sinners must soon , or late ,  sustain  for though they should escape a scaffold , a death-bed has no reprieve ! '


At other moments , she would start up from her seat , with wildness and despair in her looks , crying , ` Where is my husband !
where my children !
where is that generous hand , which raised me from indigence to affluence !
and where those lovely babes , that doubly blessed my fortunes !
you have - you have , she would add , suborned the evidence against my life - but oh !
who shall bribe off these bitter testimonies against my soul ! '


Such sad reflections , and self-expostulations as these , used to throw her into swoonings almost to convulsions , which I endeavoured to relieve , in vain , till after a shower of contrite tears , had asswaged the tempest in her breast , and recovered her , but rather to a torpid , than a calm state of mind .


I became quite charmed with my fair penitent .
She seemed sometimes inspired .
She talked above her reason , and often exerted an energy , beyond her native force .
I contributed every argument in my power , to strengthen and confirm these good sentiments in her .
She only wrought herself into these extasies , when we were alone together , but she diffused the spirit of them , through all her converse with Mrs. Seawell ,  who always spent every evening with her  and thus helped to second the fair intentions , which I had before conceived , toward that very pretty , but very weak young woman .


On the post-evenings , Mr. Seawell never paid us a visit , and I used to walk home with my fair pupil , to Leadenhall-street , and deliver up my charge , at the door .
She told me , one night , as I was conducting her , with a no-thanks to me , that the Divorcée had related her whole story to her , at some interval she happened to be with her alone , not by way of narrative , but confession  and gave me such warning , and counsel , upon several passages of it , said she , that I hope , and believe I shall be the better for , all my life .


At another time , she said that she really imagined our friend to be perfectly sincere in her reformation  which had rendered her a truly edifying example - And yours also , said she , turning to me , greatly confirms the strength of it  for it proves that virtue may subsist , even in the midst of passion .
To tell you the truth , went she on , what had put me almost out of conceit with goodness , before - I mean , said she , catching herself up , the appearances of it , was that one seldom sees it preached , or practised , but by certain old folk , who seem to grow  good , merely when they are become good for nothing  and poorly think to heal example , by precept .


I agreed with my fair moralist , that this was too generally the case , especially with women  who once entered into vice , rarely quit the sin , till the sinner forsakes them .
And as their affections , being naturally strong , must be occupied , and their fond hearts engaged , they then become devotées , and enter into a course of Platonics with Heaven .
The object only changed , the passion still the same .


Upon the whole , then , replied she , we had better remain as we are , for women , it seems , are scandalous , in sin , and become ridiculous , when they would put on the appearances of growing good again .
Your scheme , said I , is certainly the best  for 't is the easiest , the safest , and upon experience , will be found to be the pleasantest , also .


72 .
CHAP .
CLXVII .


 AT length , the irksome day of tryal arrived  a crisis , which even to the innocent , or the secure , must occasion great matter of perturbation .
My penitent did not appear to be the least disturbed at its approach .
She assured me that virtue and religion had , even within so short an interval , so perfectly calmed every passion in her mind , that she was very certain , had not the prosecution been purchased off , I should have seen her upon this occasion , rather more composed than she confessed she was at the present  for she owned that there lay one concern heavy on her mind , now , which she would not much have attended to , then .
This was her being exposed a public spectacle in a court , upon an indictment for so mean a crime .


This thought pleased me extremely .
It gave me assurance of her virtue .
Modesty is the great bulwark of that sex  and the surest sign of a returning grace in them , is its being accompanied with a sense of shame .
I was resolved therefore , to extricate her from this difficulty  and immediately calling in the gaoler , I told him how the case stood , with regard to his prisoner  that  there was to be no manner of prosecution  and therefore , as there was nothing more than mere matter of form to pass through , I would give him ten guineas to procure any ordinary woman to stand in the dock , and hold up her hand at the bar , in this lady 's name .


The money tempted him , he stept out of the room , and returning back again in about five minutes , told us he had bribed his own maid-servant , to put on her riding-hood , and act the culprit part for the prisoner .
But at the same time , he insisted upon locking the lady up safe , lest the prosecution might unexpectedly go on , and he be obliged then , to plead a mistake , and produce the real person , whose name was upon his calendar .


We submitted to this caution  and I consented , at her request , to be confined along with her  having retained some eminent lawyers to attend the tryal , and placed Mr. Seawell as a guard upon the Jew .
When we were left alone , tears burst from her eyes , and turning them to me , You can not bear acknowledgements , said she , therefore I shall only still continue to oblige , by asking further favours from you .
Will you then , in this sad scene , and at this dread hour , join your voice with mine , in fervent prayer ?
I kneeled down by her , at the word , and we  both continued in that posture , till we heard the door unlocked  when Mr. Seawell came running into the room , to wish her joy .


She behaved with her new temper , upon this occasion  and with a composed countenance , and steady voice , replied , I heartily thank my friends , both for their kindness and generous assistance , during my distress , but O !
far above all do I acknowledge my eternal obligations to the Most Highest , for his infinite goodness and mercy , in having thus tried and proved me , by this happy affliction .


We immediately took coach , and went off together to Leadenhall-street , where we found Mrs. Seawell in the fondest anxiety and impatience , as she expressed herself , to receive her dear friend safe into her arms  and both she and I had already set forth the reformation of the Divorcée , in such a light , that Mr. Seawell was prevailed upon , at my request , to accept of her as a lodger in his house again .


I staid to dine with them  in the evening the two ladies went to prayers , and at their return , I read Amana to them , a new dramatic poem , which had been just published that day .
They appeared to be both charmed with the spirit , style , and sentiments of the writing , and said  they were flattered by it also , as it was written by a woman .


We supped together  and when I was taking my leave , I paid the reclaimed Divorcée all due compliments , upon her proper sense and merit on the late occasion  and concluded with this injunction to the rest , that on account of this consideration , no part of her past conduct , or private history , should ever be repeated out of our little society , nor even remembered in it .
The Seawells made a solemn vow of confidence , to the purport of my proposition , and I retired , leaving the retrieved fair dissolved in tears of tenderest gratitude .


73 .
CHAP .
CLXVIII .


I Returned home with the most exulting heart imaginable .
I had rescued one woman , and prevented another , from ruin .
So far well - for them .
But , for myself , I had another woman , more precious than the whole sex besides , still to recover .
This acquisition was necessary to  confirm my virtue , and compleat my happiness at the same time .


But , where to find her - by what clue to trace her out !
London was neither a probable place to expect , nor a possible one to search for her in  and to what part of England she might have retired , with her little Hermes , then about three years old , it must have been impossible for me , even to have guessed .


The next morning , I sent a card to Leadenhall-street , to inquire how the ladies did , but did not pay them a visit for several days , which I passed retired in my chambers , in a very low-spirited way , arising from the despondent reflection just mentioned  praying and hoping that either her friendship for me , or natural curiosity at least , to know what scheme , or course of life , I was pursuing , or some lucky accident or other , might restore me to the happiness of seeing her once more  and resolving , upon a trust in this fond hope , to hold both my heart and hand at liberty to dedicate to her .


The last evening of my retirement , Mr. Seawell called to see me .
He told me that his ladies had gone to morning and evening prayers , at six and six , every day since we parted  and that his wife had objected to the early service , at first , but had been persuaded to it by her friend ,  as answering a double purpose at once , both of health and devotion .
He added that he owed great obligations to this extraordinary woman , who kept his wife almost constantly in her company , read to her , and endeavoured all in her power , to improve her mind , and regulate her conduct .


He concluded his visit , with telling me that the ladies were much surprised at my long absence , and had sent him to inquire whether any accident , or disgust , had happened to deprive them the pleasure of my company .
I returned my compliments to the fair querists , and assured him that I had purposed to wait upon upon them the next morning , before he had called upon me .


74 .
CHAP .
CLXIX .


THE day following , I went to Leadenhall-street , about twelve o'clock  and after a few minutes conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Seawell , below stairs , I walked up to pay a visit to my now esteemed friend  who received me  with great chearfulness in her manner , and pleasure in her looks .


She asked me , in a friendly way , why I had absented myself so long , from friends who had so well-grounded an esteem for me ?
But I recollect your delicacy , said she , you were afraid of acknowledgements , and knowing the world tolerably well , might very justly have concluded that a few days interval would have supplied a bumper of Lethé to obligation .
No , Mr. Carewe , added she , though my speech may be condemned to silence , my actions shall ever bear an higher testimony of my gratitude toward you .


I hope , continued she , with a smile , that my behaviour for some time past , may not be understood as any contradiction to my present professions  but the innocent , yet frail Mrs. Seawell , has candidly confessed her weakness , with regard to you  she has translated to me all your French conversations together , and has owned the dangerous preference , which it was too natural for a young galant to have obtained over an old husband .


But my exhortations , my remonstrances , said she , with the prevalence of my own sad example , who with - I may without presumption add - better sense , and less temptation to err , had  merely through indiscretion , been led from one step to another , into the very gulph of destruction , have been so strongly urged by me , as a warning to her conduct , that I think I may , as far as female sincerity can be depended upon , give assurance of her conduct for the future .


To this I replied , in the same style with which she had accosted me , that she had infringed one article of her covenant , for so far from restraining her speech , she had testified her obligations to me in the highest manner , in thus employing it to co-operate by her advice and counsel , with my own honest intentions toward the person she mentioned .
And if the lady has done me justice , added I , you must be already convinced of this assertion , from my conversation and manners with regard to her , for some time past .


I must confess , she replied , that my friend has not made me a confidant , in this particular , you are not to expect such ingenuousness in our sex - and to tell you the truth , said she , I think it would not be prudent in either of us , to take any notice of it to her .
Women are naturally weak , and vain  and 't is the best philosophy always to oppose these foibles against each other .
Now should her virtue appear to have arisen from any other principle but her own native force , believe  me it would much weaken the incitement to it .


Just at this instant the door opened , and a lovely boy of about eight years of age , walked into the room - she looked , she doubted - she blushed , she started - then giving a loud shriek , sprang forward , caught him up in her arms , and would have stifled him with her embrace , if a most beautiful girl , about a year younger , had not appeared immediately after - she let her son drop , and had not power to advance toward her daughter - but when her husband entered the room , she swooned away on the floor , before he could run up to sustain her .


The scene was beyond my powers - I ran instantly down stairs , to rejoice with my friends below , upon this happy event , which I had already prepared them for .


75 .
CHAP .
CLXX .


 YOU were kinder to them , than you have been to us , interrupted Mr. Andrews and Beville , with one voice , for this was indeed a crisis , which no part of your recital could in any manner have warned us of .
I was so impatient to obtain this favourite point , replied Mr. Carewe , that I neglected the usual course of narrative , to arrive at it .
The story , in short , is this :


When I perceived the fair Penitent rising into virtue , by such degrees as gave assurance of stability  her repentance  her resignation  her grateful sentiments of her obligations to her husband  her reflection about her children  her sense of shame  and finally , the receiving , and rejoicing in her affliction , as a mercy and a blessing from the hands of Providence  I thought her now become a fit object for the most interesting connections of life , either as a friend , a mother , or a wife .


Upon this not unphilosophic sentiment , I wrote a letter to her husband , the very night of her acquittal , saying that I had something to communicate to him , of consequence to his children  and himself , and requesting the favour of him to bring them up to London immediately , for that I should not explain myself any farther , by letter .
Curiosity hurried him up express , and the morning before I carried him to Leadenhall-street , he came to my apartments in the Temple .


I then told him that the business I had summoned him about , was to acquaint him with an event , which must naturally afford the extremest satisfaction , to an humane mind  namely , the most compleat reformation in his wife , both in mind and manners , that ever Grace had yet vouchsafed to a sinner .


I then gave him an account of her behaviour and expressions , since her arrest , as far as I could do so without revealing any part of her story , which would have been to her disadvantage  but affected to speak of her amendment , as commencing immediately , upon the separation .


I said that her actions and conduct had now ceased to be a scandal to her husband , or a reproach to her children  and that her sense and virtue were sufficient to recommend her , at present , both as a companion to the one , and a guide to the other .
For my part , said I , were she free , and my own heart disingaged , from the thorough conviction I have conceived of her  firmness in morals and religion , I should not have the least manner of scruple about accepting her myself , into the nicest and most honourable connections of life  regarding her former vice and errors , be they what they may , but as the spots of pestilence , or deliriums of a fever , unimputable now to her restored health and reason .


Then , said I , taking hold of him by the hand , whom Heaven hath forgiven , let not man forsake !
receive her , dear Sir , again into your favour and protection , at once to reward and to confirm her virtue  and be assured that you will find the exercise of this kindness , this charity , this humanity , most extremely pleasing on the experiment , for perhaps , there may be few things , more grateful to a generous mind , than to have something to forgive .


I perceived the workings of his mind rising by degrees , and aiding my purpose , still as I went on , but when I came to this last expression , he burst silence with these words : `` Forgive ! ''
said he , and leaning his hand upon my shoulder , `` I have , alas !
nothing to forgive !
my crime has been greater than her 's , even supposing her to have been guilty  and we have nothing now to do , but to commute forgiveness .
And as I hope that my contrition  has already earned full pardon for my sin , we meet now upon equal terms of penitence - why not then , of love ?
O !
lead me to her , thou excellent young man , that I may shew the strength of that passion , with which I first embraced her , by its subsisting still in force , after a separation of three years , and one so strongly marked as ours . ''


I listened with pleasure , and embraced him with transport - I then appointed the next morning for the completion of their re-union  and told him that I would not suffer her to receive the least notice of her approaching happiness , in order to have their meeting as strongly marked , as was their parting .


76 .
CHAP .
CLXXI .


I SAT below with Mrs. Seawell , who was praising and blessing me for my goodness , till dinner was served  when I went up stairs to summon this little happy united family .
I embraced them all , not without tears  and taking her by the hand , led her down into the parlour .


 The remainder of that day passed off in the pleasantest manner imaginable , to us all - but the exultations of my mind , upon this occasion , are not to be expressed .
Your own virtue , gentlemen , must conceive them .
The behaviour of the reconciled pair to each other , so polite , so attentive , and so fond !
each striving to prevent the other , in shews of love , and mutual amity -


The next morning early , they left London , and returned to their own seat , in the country  where they have lived in perfect harmony together , ever since , as frequent letters , and pressing invitations from them both , have happily informed me .
I have never yet paid them a visit - their desiring one , pleased me , because it shewed the true humility of virtue  but my nicety prevented me  because persons , be their reformation ever so sincere , can never enjoy perfect ease or freedom , in company with those , who have once had certain knowledge of their vices .


77 .
CHAP .
CLXXII .


 HAVING now rid my mind of all difficulties with regard to others , my own uneasiness pressed more heavily upon me .
I owed a treble obligation , to honour , to virtue , and to love  but was deprived of the charming means of acquitting myself to them all , at once .
Reflection upon this scheme the more confirmed my purpose  and disappointment augmented still my ardour .


I helped to relieve my spirits , by reading , and seeing the fair Seawell often , at her own house , or by invitation with her husband , at my chambers  and our behaviour toward each other , was ever perfectly polite , and platonic .
We used all the freedom of a brother and sister together , preserving , at the same time , the purest innocence of such correlatives .


In this situation had I continued for some time , when one evening I received this letter by the penny-post , gentlemen , said Mr. Carewe , taking out his pocket-book , and presenting them with a paper to read , the contents of which were in the following words :


 SIR ,


AS you may be deemed , in some sort , accountable for my conduct in life , perhaps it may pass for a kind of duty in me , to acquaint you with every particular of it , since we last parted  a faithful relation of which , shall be the subject of this letter .


As soon as I had taken my degree at Oxford , I struck my name out of the books , and returned home to my grandfather 's .
He was rejoiced to see me , said a great many fond and flattering things to me , and pressed me several times in his arms .
I felt myself extremely unhappy , on this interview , as his kindnesses appeared so much unmerited , on my part  first , from the equivocation of my sex  and next , from that ultimate misfortune , which had rendered me so very unworthy of my real one .


He told me that he hoped I had come home , with a resolution of remaining with him during the short remnant of his life  and I had indeed really purposed to do so .
But I soon found it very disagreeable , and sometimes inconvenient to myself , to live intirely in his house .


He was too fond of my company , and never afforded me the least opportunity for reading , or reflection , except the few hours which I used to  steal to myself in the mornings , by rising so much earlier than he  and during the short siesto 's , or evening naps he took every day , after dinner .


I loved him for his good-nature , I respected him for his virtues , and I honoured him as a parent - but notwithstanding these regards , his conversation soon became tedious to me .
He would tell old stories , and his memory , or fresh topics failing him , would repeat them over again .
He would also tire me with asking a number of frivolous questions , which one moment 's reflection might have either answered to himself , or shewn him the insignificancy of .
But this is after the manner of old people , who find it easier to talk , than think .


There were some other particulars , which rendered my abode with him difficult and uneasy to me .
He lived hospitably , and saw more company than was agreeable , either to my inclinations , or circumstances .
He would be sometimes peevish , if I did not drink a bottle with my friends - who cared not whether I was drunk , or sick with it , or no - and that I would not dishonour myself , to do the honours of his house .


When young ladies happened to be of the company , he would distress me greatly , by pressing me to exert my galantries toward them .
I  used sometimes to attempt it , in complaisance to him , but my address was always too much embarrassed .
I could neither assume the assurance of my apparent character , nor divest myself of the bashfulness of my real one  and this aukwardness appeared so very ridiculous , that it has frequently set the girls a laughing at me .


But there was one difficulty , which distressed me more than any of the rest .
When his house was crouded with guests at nights , he would desire me to offer share of my bed , to some of the jolly fox-hunters of the company .
The first time that this happened , I feigned a sudden illness , as soon as the old colonel had retired  and sat up , taking an emetic , till the early horn sounded , which summoned my chum to the chace , and left me the bed to myself .
A second time , upon foreseeing the like circumstance , I pretended a vast impatience of paying my duty to my aunt , and accordingly ordered the post-chaise , and drove off to her house , immediately after dinner .


Upon a consideration of all these circumstances , I resolved to retreat some-where or other , where I might pass my life in a manner more retired and agreeable , to myself , and to my real character .
I told the good old man that I required the conversation and assistance of some eminent divines ,  to settle my orthodoxy  that I had a mind to see a little more of the world , before I sequestered myself from it  and that therefore I should be infinitely obliged to him , if he would let me have the portion he had been so good as to allot me , and suffer me to seek my fortunes in the world , at large .


This most excellent parent received my proposal with regret  but after some pause , Thou hast so much sense and virtue , he was so kind to say , that I do not think I shall fail in the duty of a guardian , in trusting you with your own conduct in life .
And as to the portion you have chosen to stint yourself to - remember it was all your own doing - I think , d' ye mind , that you have been too fair a purchaser , to have that little modicum with-held from you , upon demand - so God bless you , boy - you 'll come , d' ye hear , and see your old father , often .
God Almighty guide and protect my child !


The next morning he gave me an order on his banker for four thousand pounds , and opening his bureau , made me a present of two hundred guineas , also .
We both of us wept sincerely , and the next day I borrowed his equipage , to set me down in London .
I placed the four thousand pounds , along with the same sum , which you had been so generous as to remit to me at Oxford , in the funds .
I hired a  small house there , and sent for my nurse and foster-father to come up , and attend me in it .


My reason for selecting these two persons , was , that as she was the only confidant of my metamorphose , from whom I apprehended any discovery , I thought it prudent to retain her , both in my friendship , and my service  and , as her husband was a very rational discreet man , who had been my father 's parish-clerk , had kept a Latin school in the village , was a good Christian , and tolerably well read in morality and history , I thought he might be useful toward assisting me in the first parts of my dear child 's education  whom , at the proper age for beginning instruction , I have since brought home to me .


I shall here ask pardon of you , for this theft  but fearing lest you might not have had the generosity to bestow him to me , had I made the request  and being likewise offended , at the apprehension of his ever coming to discover what kind of relationship he bears to you , I ventured to steal him from you .
Besides , what is , at present , my sole happiness , might have been , perhaps , rather an incumbrance to you .
He is lovely , lively , healthy , and intelligent .
I will be responsible for his education and morals .


My reason for chusing London , as an asylum from the world , was , that I thought I might  live there more disingaged and unknown , than I could possibly have done in any village or country-seat in England .
One is best hid in a croud .
Another inducement to this choice , was that I might sometimes enjoy the pleasure , though an uneasy one , of seeing you , at a distance , of attending to your conduct , of watching over you , like a guardian-angel , unseen , and of doing you , perhaps , some little friendly offices , which your too giddy and dissipated life might possibly , sooner or later , afford me an opportunity of exerting towards you .


I have seen you often at church , and at the play  and having directed some private inquiries about your conduct , character , and manner of life , I was informed that you had prepared a most expensive habit , to appear in at the first masquerade of last season , which dress I received a particular description of .


I was struck with the whim of seeing you and this fantastic scene , together .
I went there , dressed in a domino .
The rest of that night 's adventure , perhaps , may occur to your own recollection , now .
I employed my foster-father to carry on the masquerade with you the next morning , and twice since , by personating a merchant 's clerk .


 I had determined to have remained in London , quite disingaged from any manner of connection , suffering our dear son to pass for my ward , till he should be fit to enter into college , when I purposed to carry him to Cambridge , and reside with him there .
But some expressions which you happened to let drop , the last morning my agent was with you , have quite altered my scheme of life .
You hinted , with a fond sigh , that you were then in pursuit of love and matrimony .
May all the success and happiness , that your merit shall intitle you to , attend you in every ingagement and connection of life !
To wish more were impious -


But , notwithstanding the sincerity of this prayer , notwithstanding the religion , the philosophy , and the resignation , with which I flattered myself that I had sufficiently armed my mind , I find I can not - I confess my weakness - think of remaining in the same city , or even in the same kingdom , with you , after such an event .
Some unlucky chance might possibly , hereafter , occasion you and I to meet - and I would spare us both the difficulty and disturbance of such an interview .


I deferred sending you this letter , which has been written for some time , till I was on shipboard ,  where I am at present - whither bound , no matter - May prosperous gales breathe on us both !
Amen , and adieu !


Domino .


78 .
CHAP .
CLXXIII .


WHAT must have been my situation , when I had come to the conclusion of this letter !
what a fate had befallen me , that those very expressions of love and honour , which the overflowings of my fond heart had occasionally poured out toward herself , should have been the sole cause of her being banished from my hopes for ever !
I began to grow superstitious , and dread lest some evil contingency might possibly have been interwoven with my destiny , and fell into a kind of despondency and despair , which I continued under for some days .


At length I was roused out of my reverie , by Mr. Seawell 's calling on me one morning , and shewing me an invitation to spend some days in the country , which had been addressed to him , his wife , and to me , from the gentleman , mentioned  before , with whom I had dined one day , in Leadenhall-street , and who lived about five miles from London .


It was about the middle of May , and the weather fine .
I thought that company and country air might assist me to relieve my spirits , and at least alleviate , in some sort , my present disappointment .
I accordingly accepted of the invitation , and the next morning took a coach , called on my two friends , and drove down to the country , with a design of spending a week there together .


Our host entertained us with great chearfulness and hospitality  but finding that wine rather depressed , than raised my spirits , I retired to the ladies , soon after dinner - I drank a dish of coffee with them , and perceiving that my melancholy damped the spirit of their conversation , I stole out of the room , and went to saunter in the gardens alone .


I had walked there about half an hour , when crossing one of the alleys , I met Mrs. Seawell , who told me she had made some pretence to quit her company , and had followed me into the garden out of a friendly curiosity and concern , to inquire what sudden or extraordinary misfortune had affected me so very remarkably ,  the whole day , both in looks , appetite , and manners ?


When the mind is full , and the heart softened , sollicitation and sympathy are apt to induce a confidence .
'T is a relief besides , to the o'er-burdened soul , to find a friendly prop to rest its load upon  and in love peculiarly , it is some solace , even to make the object of our affections , a subject of our conversation .
I treated her then , to the little novel * of my amour  but with such reserve , as still preserved both the lady 's character , and secret .


I told her that I had formerly paid my addresses to a very amiable young lady , without any design but general galantry  that I had happened unluckily , to have won her heart , before I perceived that I had lost my own .
That after I had parted from her , and passed through some dangerous and extravagant scenes of idle and debauched life , I found that my attachments had been already fixed upon this dear object , without my own consciousness of the matter .
That upon this conviction , I had gone to search for her , at her former residence  and upon missing , and not being able to gather any account of her , or her family , there , I had been in quest of her ever since , in vain .


 I then concluded my story , with telling her that about a week past , I had received a letter from this lady , dated from on ship-board , and taking leave of me , for life .
I added also , the circumstance which had , through mistake , been the unlucky occasion of our ultimate separation .
I stopt , I sighed , and shed a tear - she took me by the hand , pressed it , and dropt a tear also .
Through all her features was strongly marked the charming morbidezza , or tender languish .
She wished herself the happy fair  or that fortune might throw it in her way to discover , and present her to my arms .


79 .
CHAP .
CLXXIV .


THIS conversation had led us a considerable distance from the house , when happening to pass by an apiary , just as one of the hives began to swarm , she started at the hum , and sprang over a border , into the opposite alley .
But on her alighting at the other side , she had missed her footing , and fell quite prostrate on the grass-walk  doing herself , at the same  time , an accidental piece of justice , by revealing the most beautiful limbs , even above her garters , that I had ever yet beheld .


I walked over the border , to her assistance  pleased , though surprised , at her remaining motionless on the ground , in such a posture , and deshabille , as if waiting till I should come to raise her up  but it seemed that she had sprained her left ancle , and wrenched both her wrists , which had rendered her quite unable to stir , without assistance .


I took her in my arms , and carried her out of the sun , into a little green arbour that I spied at some paces off , where I set her down on the grass , as there was neither chair , or bench , in the place .
She moaned greatly , through pain , and both her hands being disabled , she could not rub , or foment her leg herself  but perceiving the ancle beginning to swell , I kneeled down before her , and performed that piece of surgery for her , as we were too far from the house , to provide her with more decent assistance .


I kept down the swelling , and by degrees she found herself able to move her ancle sufficiently to limp home .
She then returned me thanks for my obliging care , expressed great concern at the trouble she had given me , and seemed extremely  impatient to be gone from that suspicious place .


I gave her my hand to raise her  but when she attempted to stir , she was obliged to scream out , from an excess of sudden pain , and remained still on the ground .
This second distress proceeded intirely from her over-scrupulous modesty  for , that she might expose no more of her leg than was just necessary to be chafed , she had contracted the sinews of it so much , that it occasioned a violent cramp in the calf of that limb .


I had now an higher operation to perform , upon my too lovely patient .
I began instantly to rub the gasterocnemium * , till the convulsion , rising by degrees into the biceps femoris † , and the gemini á , I was tempted to pursue the retreating enemy too far , till at length , I had fallen my self into the ambush .
-


80 .
CHAP .
CLXXV .


 POOR Carewe !
you see , ladies , that he can not peep his nose abroad , but temptation and opportunity stare him full in the face .
But in truth , he had for some time , most unphysically mistaken an ague for virtue , and the hot fit had now , very naturally succeeded the cold one .
Consider his situation .
What constitution can stand unmoved , point blank under the line ?
He had presumed too much upon his new-fledged pinions - pennis non homini datis , and like another Icarus , by soaring into the region of temptation , the wax was melted before the flame of desire .


The unfortunate Seawell too !
her accident seems to have been intirely owing to her total ignorance in natural philosophy .
Familiarity with men , though upon the chastest principles imaginable , is always dangerous .
The jockeys have a phrase , that a foal , well handled , is half broke  and the Spaniards have also a proverb - That is - ( If you ask me , I 'll tell you . )


In short , take my word for it , ladies , those few of you who have had no experience in this  matter , that Platonics are a mere farce .
'T is as dull and uninteresting , as hunting a drag , without any quarry at the end of it .
They are the devil 's features , under an angel 's mask .
In general , they are but pretended , in order to indulge a vice , under the cloak of virtue  but even where they are sincere , as in innocent and unexperienced minds they sometimes may be , yet let such still beware , that refined passions , like dried gunpowder , are thereby but rendered the more susceptible of a spark  and whether the flame be caught from an earthly fire , or a coelestial ray , it equally raises the combustible to an explosion .


There happened to be another science too , which the fair , but illiterate Seawell seems to have been totally ignorant of , upon this crisis  namely , anatomy .
Mr. Carewe appears to be perfectly skilled in the muscles gasterocnemium , the biceps femoris , and the O gemini !
but the poor lady had unfortunately , never learned the use of the tendon , stiled Sartorius * .
Though philosophers generally agree , that this same sinew was originally so weakened by the fall , that it has not recovered its spring ever since .


 There is another piece of natural knowledge also , which Mr. Carewe hints this lady to have been most shamefully unacquainted with , till then .
But let old Seawell take it for his pains - When a person happens to have been bound apprentice to an insufficient master , it can not certainly be deemed any breach of indentures , to pick up the trade from a more able instructor .


81 .
CHAP .
CLXXVI .


WHEN we had recovered from our trance , said Mr. Carewe , for such it might be truly called , where we were both of us rather patients than agents , she wept and trembled - I blushed and started - she immediately forgot her lameness , and rushed out of the arbour .
I remained behind , calling myself villain , betrayer , perfidious lover , treacherous friend , inhospitable guest , hypocrite , apostate , c. not one of which vile appellations had I in reality merited for an involuntary deed of phrenzy , without or purpose , or reflection .
But such was my concern , such my contrition , that in my  extravagance I charged myself with the seemings , as with realities .


I pursued her into the garden , and soon overtook her labouring toward the house , in pain and distraction .
I took hold of her hand , threw myself at her feet , implored her forgiveness , pleaded surprise , passion , madness , nature , c..
She still continued to weep , and remained some time silent while I was supporting her under the arm , till I led her near the house , when she made use of this expression : ' I neither blame you , Sir , nor myself , said she , but wish sincerely , that my death , this morning , had been as sudden , and unexpected , as your crime . '


The accident of her fall , the marks of which became now very visible in her leg and wrists , accounted for her confusion and tears , and my walking off abruptly , as I did , to London , as soon as I had seated Mrs. Seawell in the drawing-room , was apologized for , by her telling the company the story I had made her a confidant of , in the garden  and which also made an excuse for my gloomy reserve , and avoidance of society , all the day .


I did indeed fly precipitately from the house , the moment I had disingaged myself , being ashamed to look some of the company in the face ,  and afraid also of embarrassing the unfortunate fair one , with my presence .
I pitied her , and condemned myself - but there are contingencies which baffle foresight , and disgrace philosophy .
All that is left for poor virtue to do , is to repair those evils which it ca n't prevent .
And this I was resolved to do , by every possible means in my power .


82 .
CHAP .
CLXXVII .


I Remained at home , for about a week , spending my time between musings and books  often kissing and reading over my dear Domino 's letter , till I am very certain that I could repeat every syllable of it by heart .
I found that I owed her eight thousand pounds  which though an heavy debt , gave me this satisfaction , that by this means I might possibly have the happiness of soon finding her out  for as it was the whole of her fortune , she must be obliged to draw bills upon me for the interest  and I was in hopes that I should then be able to discover the place of her residence , from the date of her first advice .


 I thought it prudent , during this avocation and leisure , to look a little into my own affairs , and make some calculation about my other debts and expences  and upon this inquiry had the surprise to find , that besides this eight thousand pounds , I owed in sundry sums , each of which was too small in itself to alarm me , to the amount of two thousand pounds , more .


Thus had I the shame and mortification of reflecting that almost half my fortune had been the prey of vanity and extravagance , without having purchased me any one responsible pleasure , even a transitory one , except the five hundred pounds which I had bestowed upon the Divorcée , and which will ever remain a solid and permanent one , to me .
For all the joys I had ever yet experienced , had been contingencies merely , without having been either my purchase , or pursuit .


The cheapest thing a man can possibly do , is to pay his debts  and 't is cheaper still to sell , than borrow .
I applied immediately to a land-jobber , for this purpose , and marked out a distinct portion of my estate to him , which I was resolved to dispose of .
We soon agreed upon the terms , but when he came to look into the title , I was discovered to have been made but  bare tenant for life , with remainder over , to some distant relation of the testator .


This was the first knowledge I ever had received , of the restriction which my fortune was tied down to .
My honour was extremely shocked , upon this information , on account of the danger to which my unfortunate creditors , but principally my dear wife and child , were exposed , upon the precariousness of my life .


I held a frequent correspondence with my dear mother , during her life , and had several interviews with her , by her appointments , at a relation 's house of her 's , about a day 's journey from my father 's - From her I learned that he was , at this time , but just entering into his fiftieth year , and was of a robust , hale , fox-hunter 's constitution .


In these circumstances , I thought it would be extremely idle in me , to live on upon contingency , and very dishonest too , to refer my creditors to so insufficient a security .
I therefore , for the safety of all parties , immediately resolved upon a scheme of oeconomy , which I accordingly put in practice the very next day .


I found that though I had been made tenant for life , by the will , yet I was left dispunishable for waste , so I disposed of my woods , to a person who had been in treaty with me for them ,  upon my advertisement , for the sum of five thousand pounds .
I might perhaps have raised more money , upon this sale , had I given notice of it in the public papers  but I transacted the matter clandestinely , as it were , lest it might possibly have come to the knowledge of my dear wife , and have given her an alarm , with regard to her own fortune , or rendered her generous mind uneasy , about mine .


I laid out this money in the funds , with a resolution to confine my expences to the income of it .
I also vested the rents of my estate , in the hands of a trustee , a bencher of the Inner Temple , and a friend of mine  giving him a schedule of my debts , directing principally , that the interest of the eight thousand pounds should be kept sacred , against all half-yearly demands , and three thousand pounds of the principal provided for likewise , out of the first receipts , the wood-money being deposited as a security for the remainder  and that the rest of my creditors should be paid off in course , with a preference still , in favour of the most needy .


83 .
CHAP .
CLXXVIII .


 ONE morning , about a fortnight after my adventure in the arbour , as I was reading in my chambers , Mr. Seawell came into the room , after a very abrupt manner , shut the door hastily , and turning the bolt of the lock , ` You 'll excuse my manners , Sir , said he , but my business with you , at present , requires privacy . '


He appeared to be much disturbed , and you must imagine , gentlemen , said Mr. Carewe , that I could not have been perfectly at ease myself , upon this extraordinary interview .
O what a powerful thing is guilt !
That spirit of youth and nature , which but a minute before dared have braved a lion , now trembled at a man .


This affair , my dear Andrews , said he , had like to have ended very fatally , both to you and me , for it was that very five hundred pounds , which the unfortunate man 's difficulties then called upon me to join him in a bond for , that some time after involved your generosity , in so much distress and danger .
But this relief happened not to be at all effectual to the poor man , for his disappointments and losses in trade , fell so  quick upon him , that he was obliged to quit the kingdom soon after , and absconded with his wife , into Holland .


When the honest man found that he could not stand his ground , he sent me private notice to lay on an execution , in order to secure myself in a debt which he had contracted solely with a view of preserving his credit , on the ` Change .
I did as he directed , and received the five hundred pounds , upon the sale of his effects .


The next day I paid a visit to the Jew merchant , already spoken of , and deposited this sum in his hands , with directions to remit it over to his friend in Holland , as a support to these poor unhappy fugitives .
He executed this commission with punctuality , and I had the satisfaction , some time after , to hear that by this help , joined to the assistance of some Dutch merchants , who had been his correspondents at London , he had been enabled to establish himself very comfortably in trade again , at Amsterdam .


This debt , now becoming my own , I immediately added to the schedule which I had already given in to my trustee .


84 .
CHAP .
CLXXIX .


 HAVING now prudently contracted my expences to the bare interest of five thousand pounds , I thought it proper to quit the Temple , and retire from among a sett of cotemporaries , with whom I had been used to spend a much larger income .


I took lodgings at a milliner 's , a widow , in London , and kept myself pretty much retired there , seldom stirring abroad , except to sup , now and then , with my friend and trustee  or sometimes spending a night or two with him , at a little villa he had near town .


Some evenings when I happened to be tired of reading , or not in a fit disposition of mind to sit down to it , I would invite my landlady and her daughter up stairs , to drink tea , or sup with me .
The mother used to entertain me with mistaking one word for another that had a similar sound , and would really have been a treasure to Fielding , when he was drawing the character of his Slip-Slop .


Her daughter was young , handsome , and forward .
The mother would frequently leave us together , when she was called down stairs , about  the business of her shop .
These are hazardous experiments .
I had before experienced male chastity to be a jest , and am apt to believe too , that opportunity is generally an over-match for female virtue , also .
The Parthian exercise is their best discipline * .
This adventure soon added another five hundred pounds , to my schedule .


A batchelor 's life , who has any principles of honour , is a very aukward and distressing one .
I have often wished that philosophy could point out some way or other , to reconcile morals with nature , and strike every thing out of the catalogue of vices , which is not entered in the list of reason .
I would marry , but could not .
The person upon whom my virtue and affections had been fixed , was snatched from my arms  and while even the most distant hope of recovering her , remained , it would have been dishonourable in me to have entered into engagements , with any other woman .
Quoi faire , donc ?


It was here I lodged , my dear Andrews , said Mr. Carewe , when your bravery and generosity rescued me on Ludgate-hill  and from the day of our parting at Islington , I retired into the country of England , without remaining long in  any one place , in order to avoid fixing my affections on any woman , who might , during the uncertain and fluctuating state of my mind , have possibly attached them too much , either for my honour , or repose .


The interval of my life , between that day and this , continued Mr. Carewe , has been chiefly employed in reading , or amused with a very few desultory adventures , without connection , or consequence , and therefore not worth relating  excepting one , which being equally whimsical and ridiculous , I shall entertain you with , at present .


85 .
CHAP .
CLXXX .


HOLD , Mr. Carewe - You see , reader , that he is at one of his short catches , here again * .
Just touch , and go - Give you hints , and then leave you to guess .
Perhaps he scorned to descend into a detail of Mrs. Benson 's bons mots , before the refined Messieurs Andrews and  Beville  and to say the truth , I should be as nice myself , were I to perform before such audiences only  but pit , box , and gallery must be regarded , now-a-days , by every writer who honestly means to pay his bookseller * .
Besides , you may see by the list of my subscribers , what a farrago of readers I am bound down to  and I am now going to fulfil my engagements , to the last class of them .


I knew this Mrs. Benson extremely well , and have spent many an hour with the mother , below stairs , for the mere pleasure of hearing her knock words out of joint , while Charles Carewe perhaps , was spelling , and putting together with the daughter , above stairs .
I did not know Mr. Carewe , at that time , and only visited Mrs. Benson in order to compleat a Slip-Slop dictionary I was then framing , which I have since compleated , and shall be soon published , for the benefit of the many persons who are apt to catch words by ear , and repeat them by rote , without knowing either the meaning , or derivation of them .


In this very useful dictionary , it may be necessary , in order to prevent mistakes , to acquaint the belles and beau 's that the wrong word is placed first , and the right word opposite to it  as for example : Disgest - digest .
Ingenious ( for sincere ) ingenuous .
Male ( joined with ocean ) main .
Twilight ( for a dressing-table ) toilet .
Concubine ( for a quilt ) counter-pane .
Metrolopus - metropolis .
Separation ( for the ripening of a wound ) suppuration .
Regiment ( for health ) regimen .
Crazy ( for lunatic ) crazed .
Cruds - curds .
Cleopatra ( for the doxology ) Gloria Patri .
Harpsicol - harpsichord .
Dissolute ( for lonely ) desolate .
Contagious ( for proximity ) contiguous .
Immediantly - immediately .
Sermont - sermon .
Laudable ( for loud ) audible .
Cock-getting - coquetting .
And so forth .
But to return to mother Benson .
She complained to me one day , that a woman in the neighbourhood , upon some quarrel that happened between them , had given her very unproarious language .


Another time , she expressed great pity for a poor gentleman who lived over the way , because his fortune , she said , was much produced of late .


 I was going to Norwich once , and she advised me to set up at a particular inn , which she had been well entertained at , because she said I might depend on good commendation there .


She asked my advice , one day , about a law-suit she was going to commence , on her brother 's dying attested .


She missed some tea and sugar , one morning , and calling her maid to account for it , said she would forgive her , if she would own the truth , for that open confusion was good for the soul .


Speaking once of two young women of her acquaintance , who were sisters , Pray observe , said she , the difference of natures , in the same family , and under the very same education too .
There 's Sally now , imports herself with perfect modesty , and that vile Nancy has turned out an arrant proselyte .


But to return again to my dictionary - I dare say that this work can not fail of encouragement , in such a dictionary age as the present .
To what sublimated pitch of learning have some of our great chemists in literature arrived , in the current century , who deal out science in essence , without the difficulty of study , as empirics do health in phials , without the restraint of regimen .
Both of which quintessences of refinement , may be well compared to our late invented spring post-chaises ,  which so expeditiously convey the modern youth of Britain , from stage to stage , without the fatigue of exercise .
But the dictionary library must still remain imperfect , till the publication of my Slip-Slop Expositor , for the rest only teach you what you are to say , but this will inform you also , what you are not to say , which is absolutely necessary to render the circle of arts and sciences , full and compleat .


86 .
CHAP .
CLXXXI .


IN one of the villages where I lodged , said Mr. Carewe , I happened to become acquainted with a gentleman in the neighbourhood , by his dining sometimes with my landlord , with whom I boarded .
He had great fund of entertainment in him , not indeed derived from any extraordinary sense , wit , or learning  but he was an humourist , had a peculiar cast of character , and was what the French stile un diseur des bons mots , but seasoned high with sarcasm , which rendered him , at once , the delight , and terror , of all his acquaintance  for he was very free of speech , and his descriptions of the principal personages ,  male and female , of that country , which he usually made the topics of his conversation , were doubly pointed , both critical and severe .


One evening he invited me , along with a good deal of company , to supper at his house .
His wife was a pretty kind of woman , handsome , lively , good-humoured , and about thirty years of age .
He was himself an hale man , somewhat above forty .
They had been just seven years married , that day , without ever having had a child  or the least alarm about one .


We spent the night very chearfully and agreeably together , some in dancing , and others in playing cards , till supper was served  which was a very elegant one , in honour , as he told us , of his wedding-day .
About twelve o'clock , the company divided , the ladies retired up-stairs , with his wife , and the men staid below with our landlord , to finish what wine was upon the table , and to escort the ladies home .


In about a quarter of an hour , a bell was rung , and our host immediately rising up from his chair , Gentlemen , said he , ye were most of you present , this very night seven years , at the ceremony of throwing the stocking , and I have invited you all , this evening , in order to be spectators of a rite , which I design to introduce , of  casting the night-cap .
We smiled at the expression , though without thoroughly comprehending the meaning of it , and followed him up stairs into his wife 's apartment .


We found her in bed , with the rest of the ladies standing round it .
As soon as her husband entered the room , he took up his night-cap , which had been placed upon his own pillow , and with an audible voice , repeated the following lines :


Vainly I 've in the vineyard plied , Seven years of fruitless love have tried , An hard apprenticeship , alack !
When e'er 't is served the trade grows slack !
With equal wish tho ' toiled my dame , Love 's labour lost was all our game .
What folly ` twere then , to repeat it , So thus I cast my night-cap at it .
When he had finished his rhimes , he raised up the cloaths with one hand , and with the other slung his brown beaver into the middle of the bed .
The whole company laughed heartily , and seemed highly pleased with the humour .
For my part , I confess that I could not much relish the indecency of the action , in itself , though his being a sort of privileged person , and this frolick  a stroke in character , did in some measure , take off a good deal from the impropriety of it .


When I was taking my leave , I stooped down , and saluted the fair prostrate  then turning about to the husband , ` Issue , Sir , said I , is more the gift of Providence , than of nature  and those from whom this blessing is with-held , would do well to think that in the dispensations of Heaven , some parents may be left without children , because some children are left destitute of parents . '


He seemed to be struck with my expression .
Your hint shall not be thrown away upon me , replied he .
We shook hands , and parted .
In a few days after , I had the pleasure to hear that he had adopted two orphans in the parish , a boy and a girl , whom he cloathed , and put to school , with a declared , and provided purpose , of apprenticing and portioning them , hereafter .


87 .
CHAP .
CLXXXII .


 THIS Mr. Carewe seems really to be a most excellent young man .
You 'll pardon him , ladies , the few snacks of wenching he takes , now and then , as you see that this is not his purpose , and that he would do better , if he could .
His sentiment in this place , is extremely beautiful .
The reflection is fine , and the thought intirely new .
But in truth , it were a shame if a Christian had not been able to have expressed himself in such a manner , when a Pagan , Epictetus , was capable of saying , that there were no orphans , for Jupiter , the parent of mankind , liveth for ever .


I wish I could persuade your old maids to pick up a little moral , out of this sentiment of Mr. Carewe : It would be much better for their poor souls , than peevishness , envy , and scandal .
It might possibly , also recommend them sometimes to widowers  and after they were past the hopes of being ever made mothers , themselves , give them a chance of becoming step-mothers to others , at least .


Where women of this class in life , happen to be well disposed , they may frequently be very useful members of society  for having no connections ,  or vocations of their own , they might be ready , upon occasion , to supply the places of those who had .
Insomuch , that I really think no large family in the country , can well be without one or two familiars , or led-cousins , of this sort , who should be maintained at the subscriptional expence of all their married male relations , to the third degree , inclusive .


And in towns , I would have one , two , or or three women , past their teemings , established in every parish , according to the size of it , who should be ready to be summoned , in aid , to prevent husbands from gandering away their health , and squandering their substance , when wives lie in  and when they die , to take upon them the government of the house and family , in order to keep widowers from injuring their children , by second marriages .


These succedaneums to matrimony , should be always lodged at the apothecary 's , ready to be administered , as occasion may require  and ought to be supported by a parish cess , to be levied along with the poor-house rates , and watch-money .
And with regard to the moral of the matter , in polity , as well as war , may it not be sometimes necessary to appoint des enfans perduës , or a forlorn-hope , to be sacrificed , for the good of the community ?


 I think proper , in this place , to explain and vindicate myself , upon a passage , in my subscription-list , where I make a distinction between old maids and old virgins , which it seems , has given great offence to a very respectable society , as I have been informed by a letter I received lately , from a lady who stiles herself president to an academy of old maidens , in the city  and who concludes her epistle in these words : '' Tis very hard truly , Sir , that you will not allow us even the virtue of necessity  nor leave us the merit of chastity , to make us some small amends , for the mortification of it . '


But these ladies have misapprehended me greatly , if they imagine that I meant to cast any manner of reflection upon their purity , by this distinction - far from it : but my philosophy about the matter , is really this : Let maidens guard their virginity , ever so vigilantly , from man , that sly , slow ravisher , which besieges them , both night and day , time will , at length , steal it imperceptibly away , in despite of chastity , even while they are at their last prayers , or wrangling at quadrille .


For virginity , like other flowers , though you should not pluck it , falls off itself , when ripe , leaving a dry and sterile stalk behind it .
Milton says , '  It withers on the stalk , with languish'd head  ' And Shakespear ,


But earthlier happier is the rose distilled , Than that which withering on the virgin thorn , Grows , lives , and dies , in single blessedness .
So that old maids , be they never so chaste , can not , with any manner of propriety , be stiled virgins - but the haums of virginity , only .
Old maids and batchelors may be compared to ram-pikes , which remain solitary in the woodland , after their fellows have been made into utensils for the use and services of society .


88 .
CHAP .
CLXXXIII .


I Passed the tedious interval since our parting , in this sort of vagrant life , in the country of England , except several half-yearly excursions , which I took to France , Italy , Germany , and Holland , in pursuit of my dear Domino , upon receiving her bills from any of those places .
 But all my search was vain , for it seems she had provided herself with a letter of credit , upon going abroad , by depositing my bonds in the hands of her banker , which enabled her to receive value for her bill , at the time of signing it .
However , she never did this , till she was just setting out upon her purposed tour  and I found it impossible to trace her course by any inquiries I could make at her banker 's , or even at her lodgings , which I had sometimes hit upon .


About a month ago , I was summoned up to London , upon the death of my worthy friend and trustee , in order to settle accounts with his executor , and to transfer the trust .
Just as I had finished this business , I received a foreign letter , directed to my former apartments at the Temple .


I knew the hand , kissed it , and trembled .
But when I turned it about to tear open the seal , finding the wax black , and the edges of the paper mourning , my heart gave one loud throb , and ceased all motion .
My stomach grew instantly sick , and my voice was just able to falter out , My Hermes is no more .


In this opinion I was but too much confirmed , after I had had resolution enough to open the letter , by seeing , at the top of it , an order to her banker , to cancel my first bond of four thousand  pounds , which was the very provision I had allotted as a portion for my dear child .


The letter dropt from my hands , and I walked about the room , for some time , before I had power to take it up again .
For to the loss of my son , upon whose honours was built my whole ambition , was added the despair of ever recovering his dear mother again  all tender , all natural , all virtuous connection , thus at once cut off !


Mr. Carewe then presented the letter to Mr. Andrews , who read as follows :


SIR ,


I TAKE the liberty of returning you the portion you had conferred upon our dear Hermes , as he has now no longer any occasion for your maintenance , and that perhaps it may , at present , be necessary to your own .


My life has been pursued by losses and misfortunes , since I left England .
Last year , my dear grandfather died , of the gout in his stomach  and about a month ago , my gallant cousin , who had by his bravery raised himself to the rank of major , was killed in the late action in Germany .
I have most sincerely lamented their deaths , though an estate of two thousand pounds a year has , by these losses , devolved to me .


 I shall continue the same course of life I have hitherto pursued abroad , by spending my time in reading , prayer , and travel .
I shall never love again , for your sake  nor marry , for my own .
I have however , at length brought my mind to be able to think of you without perturbation , though not without regret  and thanks to religion , have now the power of subscribing myself , my still too dear Abelard , yours Eloisa - but without her conflicts .


Our charming Hermes continues to improve in every amiable quality of face , person , sense , and disposition .
His fondness and attention toward me , surpass those of a child  for ignorant as he is of my being his parent , even his young mind seems already to impute an higher merit than duty , to my love and attachment towards him .


Adieu .


The last part of this letter , said Mr. Carewe , revived my spirits .
It cancelled my fears indeed , but the former part of it , had before bereft me of my hopes .
I lamented my forlorn condition , I considered myself as her husband , or rather her mournful widower , and put on black for her relations , as if they had been my own .
At the same time I directed one thousand pounds , out  of my adventitious fortune , to be given to the trustees for the Magdalen-Hoúse , in aid of that great and two-fold charity , toward both soul and body .


The very day I got to London I had inquired for you , my dear friend , at your house , said he to Mr. Andrews , and being there referred to your attorney , had the satisfaction of hearing that you were settled in this country  and the moment I had finished my business in town , I flew down hither , to throw myself into the arms of friendship and philosophy , with a determined purpose of taking some lodge near you , and spending the remainder of my days in study , contemplation , resignation , and retirement .


89 .
CHAP .
CLXXXIV .


MR. Andrews and Mr. Beville were extremely charmed and entertained with Mr. Carewe 's account of himself .
The adventures he had related , both of his own , and those of others , were uncommon , interesting , and extraordinary  and the generous and virtuous tenor of conduct he had preserved throughout ,  though interrupted now and then , by the natural lapses of human frailty , had stamped a character for him , as perfect , I am afraid , as flesh , male flesh at least , is capable of .


They highly approved and commended the honour and virtue of his design , in marrying the most amiable and excellent Eloisa  and joined cordially in condoling with him , on account of the unlucky disappointments he had met with , in so honest and proper a pursuit .
They rejoiced extremely at his purpose of taking a house in their neighbourhood , and that declaration had now rendered this friendly Triumvirate as happy , as it was possible for them to be , in their present respective circumstances .


They lived together in perfect harmony , at the farm , during the remainder of the summer  but there was one particular , with regard to Mr. Carewe , that puzzled and surprised his two friends extremely .
He had related his memoirs to them , with all the appearance of frankness and confidence imaginable , so as that no person who had heard him , could possibly have suspected that any one secret , or anecdote , even of the most trifling consequence , had still remained behind .
And yet , they had seen him frequently receive letters , the superscription a sair and female hand , which he never communicated the least  of , to either of them  and whatever answers he wrote , he always used the reserve of carrying to the post-office himself .


There was another circumstance , with regard to this correspondence , that joined to raise their surprise still higher  which was , that these letters were written on mourning paper , and sealed with black wax .
This particular inclined them to suspect that they had come from the fair fugitive , or mistaken exile  and what further article , relative to her , need now remain a mystery between them , was both their curiosity and wonder .
However , it was too delicate a point to touch upon - We have no right over other people 's secrets  so let this continue one , till he may himself think proper to reveal it .


The three friends remained together on these terms , till about the middle of September , when Mr. Carewe , on the receipt of one of these uncommunicated epistles , told Mr. Andrews that he should be obliged to take leave of him for a short time , upon business of some consequence , which was not then ripe enough to communicate with his good friends at the farm .


Mr. Beville who was present , joined with Mr. Andrews in wishing him a good journey , a successful event to his new adventure , and a quick return into his present society .
Mr. Carewe  thanked them , and appeared for the rest of that day , more chearful and disengaged in his conversation and manners , than he had been at any time during his residence among them .
The next morning he rose before day , and rode off from the farm , without disturbing his friends .


90 .
CHAP .
CLXXXV .


ABOUT a fortnight after their separation , Mr. Andrews received the following most extraordinary letter from Mr. Carewe , dated from Condisciple-Hall :


My dear friend ,


AFTER so unreserved and voluntary a relation of the various incidents of my life , it must certainly appear a great instance of disingenuousness in me , to have secreted any one particular of my private history from you .
But your having mentioned the name of Ethelinda , with Mr. Bevill 's unfortunate passion for her , was the reason of my not informing you sooner , that my connections with that lady , were of a  much ealier date , than his acquaintance with her .


I happened to be out of the kingdom , when she was married  she too easily submitted to the arbitrary commands of a father , and yielded to duty , without approbation , or choice .
I became acquainted with this misfortune , time enough only to lament , but not prevent the too discordant union .


She was however , soon released from her heavy bondage  for your friend died in a few days after your departure from hence , of the disorder you had left him labouring under , last Christmas  and leaving her a childless widow , has , in consideration of her merit and behaviour towards him , endowed her with his whole fortune , amounting to fifteen hundred pounds a year .


I shall not detain you longer , on a subject which must be extremely uneasy to Mr. Beville , consequently to you , and am in haste to inform you that in a sort of clandestine correspondence which I held with this lady , while I was at your house , I have had the fortune to prevail on her to adventure upon the state of matrimony again  and I must now beg leave to intreat the pleasure of your 's and Mr. Beville 's company to spend the honey-moon with us , at this place , from the  beginning of next month .
I should not have had the presumption to make this request , if the fair Ethelinda did not join me in it .
Ye were both present at her first marriage , at another 's fuit , and ye are now invited to her second , at her own .


Let not my sincerity be at all impeached , upon this occasion .
I do still love the dear Eloisa , with all that warmth of passion I have so lately expressed before you , and declare that were she within my grasp , I would this instant , kneel down with her , before the altar .
But even hope is fled !
this lady then , holds only the second rank in my affections - but I sincerely wish her happy , and may perhaps , without vanity , pronounce that I have it in my power to render her so .
The fond lover wishes his own happiness  the generous one that of his mistress .
This for Mr. Beville .
Adieu .


Charles Carewe .


91 .
CHAP .
CLXXXVI .


 MR. Andrews was both astonished and perplexed , upon reading this letter .
He did not know how to reconcile the purport of it , to honour  nor yet could he say upon what punctilio of moral , to reprehend it .
Mr. Carewe 's having entered into an engagement with one woman , while he was riding post after another  his supplanting a man , with whom he had appeared voluntarily to have linked himself in a league of friendship  and his rivalling a real lover , without even pleading passion for an excuse  seemed all perfectly inconsistent with the ingenuousness and generosity of his character .


And yet , on the other hand , might he not have engaged himself in this amour , at some interval before his honour and virtue had been awakened toward the amiable Eloisa ?
Might not the interposition of parents have snatched this fair one from his arms , when he had just won her affections ?
Might not the despair of ever being able to recover his first object , have suffered the second to take place ?
like mercantile bills , Pay this my second of exchange , the first not paid .
Whenever a question can admit of a favourable  construction , charity should ever adopt it  as in the English laws , every person is supposed to be innocent , till the contrary is proved .


After these reflections , Mr. Andrews ventured to communicate the letter to his friend .
He received it like a man - with resentment and resolution .
He lamented his having never heard of the Condisciple 's death , till it was too late to profit of it .
And yet what a mortification and disappointment had he escaped , by his ignorance of it !
he regretted his death , which had afforded him at least the hope of possibility , merely to shut it out for ever .


He then seemed generously to rejoice in an event , which had yielded his adored Ethelinda so fair a prospect of happiness for life .
He had himself sustained no wrong , had suffered no injustice .
The injury he had received was from fate alone , and he was resolved to disappoint its malice , by shewing himself , through resignation , unworthy of the infliction .


Mr. Andrews seconded his philosophy , by adding the latter part of his own reflections , mentioned above , in order to reconcile him to Mr. Carewe , and prevail on him to accept of his invitation to the wedding .
This however , he obstinately refused , for some time .
But  Mr. Andrews urging Ethelinda 's request , whose knowledge of his passion he had never been informed of , and which intirely screened the impropriety of her invitation , at length prevailed upon him to exert a bravery which Mr. Andrews was charmed with  for after that effort should be over , he was in hopes of retrieving his dear friend back again into the world , once more .


These two philosophic friends then immediately began to prepare themselves for the ungrateful journey  but were prevented by Mr. Beville 's falling ill of a slow fever , which had been creeping on him for several days , and at last confined him to his room , the very day that had been fixed on for their departure .
His feelings were too strong for his philosophy , and though the mind had triumphed , its victory was over the body .


Mr. Andrews sent directly for a physician , and wrote an apology to Mr. Carewe , wishing him and the fair Ethelinda compleat happiness , both in his own name , and Mr. Beville 's also , who had generously desired his compliments to be added , upon this occasion .
Mr. Andrews was extremely alarmed at his friend 's danger , and a good deal puzzled also , with regard to the widow 's character .
From Mr. Carewe 's letter did it not appear that there had been an engagement  between them , before her marriage  and yet , at the time she was made acquainted with Mr. Beville 's unfortunate passion , did she not speak , though with a becoming prudence and modesty , yet in such a manner , as might have inspired the fondest hopes , should her hand have ever been again at her own disposal ?
and yet - but woman is woman - varium et mutabile !
and love has its own laws  arbitrary , and capricious !


92 .
CHAP .
CLXXXVII .


MR : Beville declined every day , notwithstanding all the aid of physic , and his life was almost despaired of , when to poor Mr. Andrews 's great satisfaction , he saw his worthy friend , the clergyman , alight at the door .
This visit had an happy effect upon our patient , his conversation soothed his spirits , the society of a friend ranks high among the Materiae Medicae , and his prescription soon restored his health .
He administered James 's powders to him , and his fever quitted him the next day .


 The re-union of these three friends , was such a pleasure , as the reader , who has either virtue or sentiment , must suppose to himself , better than I can express it  and if he wants sense or feeling , no words can convey an idea of it to him .
Mr. Beville continued for some days confined to his bed , which left Mr. Andrews an opportunity of communicating to his friend the clergyman , when they were alone , Mr. Carewe 's letter , with just so much of his story , and of Beville 's , as was necessary to explain , and render it unaccountable , at the same time .


The morning that Mr. Beville found himself able to quit his chamber , and while they were walking about the parlour , and conversing together in a more free and disingaged manner than usual , they perceived a coach and six , with a large retinue , driving toward the house .
They all looked out at the window , without being able to guess what new adventure was going to occur , when the equipage stopt at the door , and they saw Mr. Carewe alight , leading forth the fair mourning bride , by the hand .


Mr. Andrews and the clergyman were much embarrassed , upon this occasion , on account of poor Mr. Beville , who changed colour at the sight , and walked instantly away from the window  but quickly recollecting himself , he turned about  briskly again , saying , My friends , fear me not - I have already paid the fine of disappointment , and am henceforth free of misfortune , for life .


93 .
CHAP .
CLXXXVIII .


MR. Andrews was in such confusion , that he suffered his new guests to come into the room before he could step forward to meet them .
Welcomes , embracings , and wishing of joy , were given , and received , with equal stiffness 


`` And Venus to the loves around , `` Remark'd how ill they all dissembled . ''
It must have been a greater painter of the passions than Le Brun , who could have drawn this groupe of persons up to the life .
For though our new guests might have been ever so capable of justifying their own conduct , upon logical principles , yet beyond the fixed and settled rules , there is an undefinable moral  and in the slightest appearance of disingenuousness , something highly offensive to liberal minds .
 The beauty of the lovely widow transcended her wedding charms , which had then wanted a year of their perfection .
Her person was now compleatly formed , her carriage easier , and more free her air .
A lively spirit had informed her eyes - not by supplanting modesty , but correcting bashfulness .
The roses in her cheeks were fuller blown , the cherries became more ripened in her lips , and the pearly whiteness of her skin , shone with superior lustre set in weeds .


This garb declared her still to be a widow , which added to the distress of the three friends , who were in hopes the marriage-ceremony had been over , without their being obliged to be the mournful witnesses of it .
After about two hours constrained conversation , among four of the company , Mr. Beville doing nothing all the while , but gaze and sigh , dinner was served  which did not hold them long at table , for Mr. Andrews had not been sufficiently prepared for a wedding feast .


After tea and coffee was over , and that Ethelinda had retired to the library , Mr. Carewe , turning to the clergyman , said that he looked upon it as a fortunate circumstance , to meet him at the farm , upon this occasion , as the character he had been taught to conceive of him , from Mr. Andrews 's representation , might promise  an happy event to any business he should become a party in  he therefore requested the favour of him to tye the indissoluble , or death-resolving knot , the next morning  for which , said he , taking a license out of his pocket , and presenting it to him , this shall be your sufficient warrant .


It is now full time for me , continued Mr. Carewe , to reveal to you the only memoir of my life , that has hitherto been kept a secret from you , and which I shall do in as few words as possible , by informing you that my acquaintance with your fair guest within here , commenced even so early as her birth  for about three years before I had been exiled from my father 's house , my dear mother groaned her into the world .


The surprise and astonishment of the rest of the company , is not to be described  they stood mute , near a minute , staring at each other , before they could recollect themselves , or be able to form any manner of conclusion from such unexpected premisses , till the clergyman , upon looking into the license , pronounced aloud the name of William Beville  who , at the sound , cried out , Too much , too much , too - and sunk back again into his chair , after he had raised himself out of it , to fly into Carewe 's arms .


 Mr. Carewe ran up to embrace , and wish him joy , and the mutual happiness of these four friends was inexpressible , but by tears .
Mr. Carewe then took his brother under the arm , and led him alone into the library , where the fair widow sat reading , reclined upon a sopha .
She blushed at seeing them come together into the room , and rose to receive them .
Carewe joined their hands , and retired .


Beville still holding his grasp , threw himself instantly at her feet , unable to speak to her , but with his eyes .
She cast a regard toward him , of tenderness and modesty , and raising him up , the contract was sealed by a mutual and fond embrace .


94 .
CHAP .
CLXXXIX .


THE next day the lovely Ethelinda 's nuptials were celebrated , with all the decency and decorum imaginable .
No common-place jests , no arch innuendo 's , no privileged manners .
One might have imagined themselves present at the initiating of a vestal , rather than a modern  marriage .
The morning after Mr. Beville taking Mr. Andrews aside , addressed him thus :


My dear brother and benefactor , my unhappy sister brought you no fortune , and her worth needed no addition  but as her loss wants much repair , you 'll give me leave to present you with this bill , which Providence seems to have kept detached from the rest of its unmerited bounties to me , in order to inable me to pay my debts , both of obligation and of honour .


So saying , he laid a paper on the table , and quitted the room .
It was a bill of exchange , on a banker in London , for five thousand pounds  which his friend the Condisciple had received as a marriage-portion with Ethelinda , and which happened to have remained unexchanged , at the time of his death .


This amiable society enjoyed the seraphic harmony of love , friendship , and halcyon skies , together , for about a fortnight , till Mr. and Mrs. Beville took their leave , and were just setting out one morning , for Condisciple-Hall , when their journey was interrupted by the threatening of a storm  which rising by degrees , to the extremest height , seemed as if Tempest was collecting its forces together , from all the elements , to shake the earth 's foundation to the center :


 The air grew sudden dark , the clouds quick blend Their floating waters in one troubled mass , O'ershadowing the gloomy face of nature .
The rumorous winds moan'd through the trembling woods , And the earth 's caverns eccho'd back the groan .
The multitudinous sea soon grew convuls'd , The waves came riding o'er each other 's heads , Like roaring lions hunger-driven abroad , Or foaming boars slipt by unbridled hell , Against its victim weak defenceless man .
While he upon the beach stands unappall'd , In wonder only , and religion lost , Still resting sure on that coercive word , Which taught the insensate surge to know its bound .
The lurid flashes of the lightning 's glare , Added new horror to factitious night  The rolling thunders seem'd in adverse war , From East to West in clamorous opposition .
The rains descend in torrents through the plain , And swelling rivers rushing to the sea , Repell'd , run back affrighted to their source .
The tempest rag'd , and o'er the boisterous deep , Gigantic terror scowl'd , and mute despair .
While th ' elements at civil strife , proclaim'd  Creation 's wreck , this globe to atoms hurl'd , And restauration of old Chaos ' reign .
95 .
CHAP .
CXC .


THE storm commenced at ten o'clock in the morning , was at the height at five in the evening , and continued without abatement , till twelve at night .
It then began to subside , and about four the next morning , the wind seemed to cease , as being out of breath  when Mr. Andrews was awakened by his servants coming into his chamber , to tell him that one of the neighbouring villagers had just then run up to the house , to acquaint him that a ship had been stranded and beat to pieces , near the farm  that the few passengers who had escaped the waves , were in the highest distress , and that the country was hastening down upon the shore , to make a wreck of the vessel .


Mr. Andrews , whose whole soul had received the inspiration of public virtue , had taken out a commission of the peace for the shire of York , as soon as his house was built  which with the character he had established , even in the short  time of his residence in that country , intitled and encouraged the inhabitants within his district , to call upon him , preferably , on any occasion where an extraordinary exertion of spirit , humanity , or justice , was deemed necessary .


He arose instantly , and sent to Mr. Carewe and the clergyman , to do the same .
They all dressed with the utmost dispatch , armed themselves , their servants , and the labourers , without disturbing Mr. Beville , for fear of alarming the bride  mounted their horses , and galloped down to the shore .
At about a mile 's distance , they saw the ship , in a shattered condition , lying on its side , in shallow water , on the tide 's ebb .


They perceived many bodies floating , several persons wading through the sea , some standing still , with imploring arms extended toward the strand , others fainting through weakness , and thrown often on their faces by the slightest wind or wave .
The populace that had lined the shore , awed by authority , and arms , dispersed immediately upon the appearance of Mr. Andrews , who with Mr. Carewe rode through the tide , attended by their party , to the succour of this poor ship-wrecked crew , and soon brought them all , the dead , the dying , and the surviving , to a little village near the shore .


 Here they were distributed among the several cabbins , where every manner of hospitable assistance was administered , to recover the seeming dead , revive the drooping , and refresh the strong .
The three friends divided the charge equally  and separating themselves , took different portions of the village under their respective care .


Mr. Andrews dispatched horsemen up to his house , for garments of all kinds , both male and female  for there were some women among the distressed , who by their appearances and apparel , even under the strong disguise of their misfortune , seemed to be persons of some distinction .
The messengers soon returned , and in a short time after , followed Mr. and Mrs. Beville , who having been awakened by the hurry in the house , and informed of this distressful adventure , arose and ran down to the village , in order to join their ready assistance , in so humane an office .


96 .
CHAP .
CXCI .


 MR. Carewe , in visiting one of the hospitals in his department , was told by the woman of the house , that a beautiful young lady had been given into her charge , who appeared to be dead , but that on holding her up by the heels , for some time , till a great quantity of water had run off from her stomach , then putting on a warm shift , and placing her in an aired bed , she had seemed to afford some tokens of returning life , and might probably be saved , if any one could be got to bleed her instantly .


Mr. Carewe quick ran through the streets , crying out for a surgeon , a barber , or even a lance  when the clergyman hearing him , came out of a cottage , with a bloody lancet in his hand , and offered his assistance  saying that he had just then performed an operation with success , on a young gentleman who was mourned as dead , by his weeping servants .
Mr. Carewe ran back with him to his fair patient .
The clergyman pierced her arm , and some blood flowed slowly for about half a minute , toward the end of which she seemed to breathe , and at length her eyes opened .


 During this interval , Mr. Carewe leaned over the bed , examining the features of the patient , with a look of earnestness , of doubt , and inquiry  but on her opening her eyes , he threw himself on his knees , and catching her in his arms , cried out , My lost , my recovered love , my constancy 's reward , my virtue 's praemium !
O turn , and behold your friend , your lover , your husband , a penitent at your feet !
O let - He was going on , when at the sound of these last expressions , she interrupted him with a sudden start , and turning her languid eyes upon him , endeavoured to utter something , when her arm stopped bleeding , and she , without a figh or struggle , instantly expired in his arms .


The wretched Carewe stared wildly on the corpse for a time , without drawing his breath , or speaking a word  then clasped its cold bosom close to his breast , endeavouring , but in vain , to weep  when after holding it there for a minute , with his eyes fixed , as in death , he cast it suddenly from him , and springing upon his feet , cried out , I am damned - she is gone , Heaven 's messenger , to send the furies for me !
Infinite justice must have atonement for innocence defiled !
No salvo 's here !
I have but one life to pay , but give it freely - O may it be accepted  like the widow 's mite , and wipe from out my score , the multitude of my offences !


At these words he snatched up the lance , which the clergyman , through his astonishment and terror at this extraordinary and affecting scene , had left neglected on the table , and would have destroyed himself with it , if he had not , on the instant , recovered presence of mind enough to spring forward with a brisk action , and catch hold of his arm .
The poor distracted Carewe struggled for a while , till wasting his strength in exclamation , and dropping the lance on the floor , he sunk into a chair .


Just at this moment the door opened , and the young man who had been recovered by bleeding , walked slowly into the room , leaning on Mr. Beville , with his arm tied up , his air languid , and his face sicklied o'er with weakness , fatigue , and grief .
But under all these disadvantages , it was easy to perceive a most beautiful composition of features , a fine proportioned shape , with a most graceful figure .
He was led toward the bed , but upon viewing the corpse , expressed an heavy moan , and fainted on the body .


97 .
CHAP .
CXCII .


 MR. Carewe , whose chair had been turned from this scene , being roused by the noise , started hastily up , and beholding the dying embrace , cried out , What , a rival in death , also !
O hapless youth - O happy rather - no more the object of my jealousy , but envy - whose grief equalling thy love , hath forbid thy life one moment to survive thy loss !


In the mean time , Mr. Beville and the clergyman did every thing in their power to recover the young man from his swoon  and after they had raised him up , sprinkled water in his face , and applied salts to his nose , they had the pleasure to find him coming a little to his senses  upon which they placed him in a chair , and spread a covering over the corpse , to hide it from the view of the distracted corrivals .


Mr. Carewe stood all this while in the middle of the room , with his arms folded across , his eyes fixed on the ground , and his soul labouring with the most dismal reflections  when upon hearing the young man 's voice , who had now begun to make acknowledgments to his kind assistants , he stared , he listened , he started , and  extending wide his arms , Gracious Heaven !
cried he out , what will the fates do with me ?
What !
dead , and alive , at once !
does Providence then make sport of torments !
't is impossible - and yet 't is certain - 'T is she , my Harriot lives !
O let me catch her in these arms , once more , though the extreme of bliss should prove too strong for life itself to bear !


He sprung forward at these words , fell kneeling at her feet , grasped her hand with rapture , and gazed upon her face with fondness , surprise , and joy .
Her astonishment was likewise great , and her difficulties no less  though Mr. Beville , upon the first alarm of this discovery , was so polite as to remove some of them , by quitting the room , and taking the clergyman along with him .


Eloisa trembled all over , and could not resist the first transports , her own passion sympathising with his  but recollecting herself soon , and forcing herself from his hold , Mr. Carewe , said she , with a blush , the surprise of this adventure , has thrown us both too much off our guard - there is one , I presume , to whom these professions , these regards , more properly belong  and I intreat that you may no longer injure your own honour , nor attempt to disturb my peace , again .


 Oh !
my lamented , far-sought love , my ever-esteemed , and long-purposed wife , cried he out with impatience , your mistake in this particular , has been the fatal cause of our tedious and unhappy separation .
The expression I made use of to your steward , was fondly meant toward you  and I had before then been for some time in quest of you , and have ever since , with constant ardour , pursued your flight in vain , through most of the countries in Europe .


I do confess my truant youth had been too insensible of the love I bore you , at our parting  but upon comparing my sentiments of you , with the transient and unsatisfactory passions , with which all other objects had been capable of inspiring me since , I soon perceived my happiness wound up in yours  your love alone the means , and your alliance the sole end of all my future bliss .


As he pronounced these last words , a sudden burst of triumphant tears flowed down her lovely cheeks , and she sunk into his arms , supporting herself from falling , by a close embrace  while the o'erpowered Carewe could answer only with his arms , his looks , and sighs .
Shakespear is dead , nor is there now alive one capable of language or feelings , able to describe a scene of such contrasted passions  of love , of gratitude   of honour , of contrition  of surprise , of joy  of silence , and expression !


98 .
CHAP .
CXCIII .


MR. Carewe , as soon as he could recollect any thing which did not immediately relate to his passion , led his Eloisa out of the room where the corpse lay , into one adjoining it , on pretence that she might remain more private here to change her dress , and commence a woman now for life .
In order to which transformation , he sent into the next cottage , where the farm-wardrobe had been deposited , and obtained for her a compleat suit of female cloaths and linen .


He was extremely unhappy about his son , whom he apprehended to have been swallowed up in the waves , but was too tender to make any inquiry concerning him , which might awaken his Eloisa to distraction .
However , upon finding her , without either lamentation or inquiry after him , returning again to tears and exclamations , on the death of the lady in the next room , he stopt her short , by crying out , But first my  Hermes , O what of him ?
Thanks to all-protecting Heaven , replied she , in a transport , I left him behind at Thoulouse , when my dear sister , who has just expired , called on me there with her husband , in their route from Montpelier to Portugal .


I loved her , said she , renewing her tears , with the fondness of a sister enlivened by the warmth of a friend .
It was some years since we had parted last , I found myself unhappy at the thought of her quitting me so soon , and resolved to accompany her on her tour  so leaving our dear child in the care of my faithful steward , I proceeded on the journey along with my sister and brother , and arrived safe at Lisbon .


This most amiable pair , continued she , about a year before , had lost two lovely children , their whole stock , in the small-pox .
The grief of the parents was immoderate , and in a short time affected both their healths .
My poor sister had got the addition of a severe cold , by sitting up day and night with her children .
Her disorder fell upon her lungs , and soon shewed certain symptoms of a decay .


My dear brother , who loved her passionately , had a consultation of physicians upon her case  who after having practised on her , without effect , advised her going to Spa  from thence she was  sent to Aix , thence to Montpelier , and then to Lisbon .
This course , which we may better style a tour , had it been capable of answering any other end than mere amusement , was as necessary to her husband , as to herself .


Men 's minds , they say , are stronger than ours , and I believe it  but then , I am of opinion also , that their strength serves them better to resist , than to endure misfortune .
Throw them but a moment off their guard , till calamity shall have slipt into their breasts , their resentments and struggles being greater , the sooner weaken their force .
The convulsions of a giant are an earthquake to those of a dwarf .


Whether such was the case , or no , with regard to this worthy man , or whether his unhappiness infinitely exceeded her 's , by foreseeing her early death , I can not determine , but about a month ago , after we had been at Lisbon near a quarter of a year , he was attacked by a fever on his spirits , which put an end to his life in ten days .


What a wretch did he leave behind him !
she was deprived of reason for three days , and the moment she recovered it , she resolved upon quitting the kingdom instantly .
She was reduced now to a weaker state than ever , and I  would have deferred her voyage till the spring , but she was inflexible .


I asked the physicians there , what climate they would now recommend to my dear sister , to breathe in  but they replied , that Lisbon was the ne plus ultra of health , and that since it had not done her any service , they feared no other region on the globe would avail , except the returning again to her native air , might produce some salutary effect  and which was a thing frequently recommended , by the college .


We then began to prepare for our voyage , for I was resolved to accompany her into England , and retire with her to some private country scene , where she had never seen either her children , or her husband , or any thing which might remind her particularly of either .


There would I have remained with her , till she should be either released from a sickly and unhappy life , or so far restored to health , as to be able to accompany me in my scheme of travelling , and purpose of living abroad .
We waited some time for a ship , at last we embarked , the wind changed and shifted us out of our course , and after some days sailing to and fro , drove us at length , amidst this perilous storm .
The rest you know .


 Mr. Carewe embraced her at this period , wiping away her tender tears with kisses  then leaving her to change her dress , went out to inquire after some of the passengers , whom she said were persons she had lately become acquainted with , and conceived a friendship for  and whose safety therefore , she was sincerely interested in .


When he got into the street , he met Mr. Beville coming from visiting one of the cottages , and taking him by the arm , You see , my dear brother , said he , that Providence has at length , thought fit to bless my wishes with the possession of the amiable Eloisa again  but I must insist upon it that you never reveal the secret history of our love , to any person whatsoever , not excepting my sister - Had I retained the least glimpse of hope , of ever recovering her again , I should not have been so unguarded , even to my dearest friends .
But though there is nothing in her most private memoirs , so circumstanced , and so uninformed as she really was , at a certain aera , which ought to affect her character , in the opinion of philosophy or candour , yet women or the world are apt to censure failings , which their own feelings should incline them to excuse .


Enough , replied Mr. Beville , and more than was necessary to me , my most excellent friend - may  she make you as happy , as you have rendered me  and if confirmed virtue , on one side , and approved honour , on the other , can render you so , your union must be blest .
They then walked down together to Mr. Andrews 's quarters , and met Mrs. Beville at one of the doors , having just stept out to refresh herself , after the fatigue of administring cordials to two ladies , who had been among the wretched passengers , and helping them to put on dry cloaths , which she had provided for them .


99 .
CHAP .
CXCIV .


DURING all these transactions , Mr. Andrews was extremely active in his department , supplying wine which he had ordered down from his own house , and raiment which he purchased from the inhabitants , to the sailors , and poor passengers who had escaped the wreck , and came half naked to the shore .


The captain of the vessel too , was one of the objects which fell under his attention  but he refused any kind of help , except brandy  nor did he afford the least manner of assistance to any  one of the crew , though well enough able to have done it , as he had escaped free from all damage , but wetting .
He sat by a cabbin fire , drying the cloaths , on his back , smoaking a pipe , quaffing off half pints of brandy at a draught , and swearing at the storm so loud and impiously , as were enough to have provoked a second tempest .


Mr. Andrews , having now finished his circuit , and provided for every thing in his rounds , came at length to the house where we are at present , to rest himself , and pay his particular compliments to the ladies whom he had before left under the care of Mrs. Beville .
He arrived just at the time that Beville and Carewe came to the door , and they all walked into the parlour together  where they were hardly seated , when the clergyman , who had been active in his office of visiting , praying by , and exhorting of the sick , came in , and took his seat among them .


Mr. Carewe , impatient to communicate his joy , taking Mr. Andrews by the hand , cried out , in a transport , O my dear friend , my Eloisa is found among the wreck , is recovered to life , and has this moment accepted my hand .
Mr. Andrews , overcome both with pleasure and surprise , had power to express himself no other  way , than by catching him in his arms , and shedding silent , speaking tears .


As soon as Mr. Carewe could disengage himself , he turned toward Mrs. Beville and the clergyman , who though one of them knowing nothing at all , and the other nothing material of his story , were both most heartily wishing him joy , and immediately related to them a short extempore novel of his love , which satisfied their curiosity , as well as the real adventure would have done .


The greatest difficulty his invention had to struggle with here , was how to account for his Harriot 's appearance in men 's cloaths  but the turn he gave to it at last , was , that being resolved to inform herself of every thing worth seeing or knowing , while she was in Portugal , she had disguised her sex under a male habit , that attended by her brother-in-law , she might enjoy a freedom which by the manners of that country , women are restrained from .


Mr. Andrews quick perceived the delicacy of Mr. Carewe 's intention , and was highly pleased with his address and readiness of invention - Splendide mendax - He then sent up his compliments to the two ladies above stairs , to inquire how they were  and being answered that they were not yet prepared to admit a visit , he with  the rest of his company , went out together to pay their compliments to their new and fair ally - They found her compleatly dressed , in Ethelinda 's first wedding suit , and rivalling the beauties of her bridal day .


A roral blush , which had diffused itself over all her features , on seeing this unexpected company come into the room , enriched her charms , and banished from her face all traces of fatigue or grief .
They became enamoured of her , at first sight  and Mr. Carewe also confessed improved beauties , and acquired graces , both in her ripened features , and now finished form .


He performed the office of gentleman-usher , and introduced the company to the bride , mentioning the relation , connection , or character , of each person , respectively .
She received them all with the polite address of new acquaintances , joined to the generous warmth of old friendships  and after the usual congratulations , and occasional civilities had been passed and repassed among them , Mr. Andrews took Eloisa by the hand , and led the way back to the house he had just come from , as it was the largest in the village , and that he had some further hospitalities to offer to the two distressed ladies who were lodged there .


100 .
CHAP .
CXCV .


 SOON after they had come into the house , a message was delivered to Mr. Andrews , from the ladies above stairs , that they would be glad of his company , along with his friends , to return them all thanks for the humane and charitable assistance afforded them , in this great article of distress and danger .
They obeyed the summons , and went up together .
They found a lady alone in the room , of a genteel person , and about fifty years of age , sitting on the side of a bed , who upon their entrance , rose up to receive them , and addressed them thus :


My generous friends , I have the extremest gratitude to acknowledge to you all , for your timely and necessary aid , in this our great calamity  but my thanks are more particularly due to you , Sir , said she , turning herself toward Mr. Andrews , who I have the pleasure to learn has been the first mover , and chief instrument , under Providence , upon this occasion .
As soon as I was capable , continued she , of inquiring upon what coast of England I had been thrown , and had heard your name sounded from below , it afforded me a singular joy , to find that we  had owed our lives to a person , for whom , though but little known , I had been taught by others , to conceive so true a friendship and esteem .


Mr. Andrews was equally surprised and confounded at so partial a compliment , but moving up slowly toward her , and beginning by degrees , to recollect her person , cried out at length , Thou generous parent of my lost Fanny !
welcome from death , and to these arms again !
O !
since thy kindness could not save her precious life , yet let it be some alleviation of my grief , that I have had the fortune to rescue yours .


After they had tenderly embraced each other , the lady begging leave to sit down , and intreating all the company to do the same , applied herself again to Mr. Andrews , saying , with great emotion , O my dear nephew , urge not a subject o'er again , which is now past lamenting for you , and but revives a fruitless grief in me  who if I feel it less , at present , am weaker still , to bear it !
speak to me rather of yourself , your children , and your fortunes .
These be our only cares now , say what of these ?


Mr. Andrews then gave her as short an account of himself and his family , as possible , by saying that he was rich , and they were well  being impatient to inquire about her daughter 's  health , which he pleaded his emotion and surprise , for not having done sooner .
She answered , with the fondness of a mother , My dear and only child , thank Heaven and you , is in the room within there , and out of danger  but both her mind and body , being more easily affected than mine , have prevented her from being able yet to appear , and join in my acknowledgments .


101 .
CHAP .
CXCVI .


JUST then , Mr. Andrews 's steward , who had been appointed to land the passengers effects from the ship , came into the room to inform him , that he had brought all the luggage safe ashore , and lodged them in the parlour below .
The aunt , upon hearing this , immediately ordered a large deal box to be brought up stairs .


She then told Mr. Andrews that she had two presents to make him , on condition that he would summon his philosophy , in aid , and arm the whole man within him , to abide the test .
O !
madam , exclaimed he , and clasping his hands together , Losses which can be e'er forgot , may have their sense renewed  but in me  what monument can awaken griefs , which never yet have slept !


When the box was opened , she took out a picture , and placed it on a chair before him .
It was the horrid spectacle of his wife , ghost-like , and slow expiring , on a death-bed .
He started at first , though prepared  then standing mute , and motionless , before it , with uplifted hands , and head reclined , gazed at the portrait , till it almost became his own .
Fond Beville wept , the rest joined too , in silent grief  and even the aunt , to whom notwithstanding this object had now grown familiar , here dropt her sympathetic tear .


After she had suffered them for a while , to indulge in this ` sad luxury , to vulgar minds unknown , ' she took out another picture , and placed it on the same chair , before the first .
This object surprised the whole company , more than the last  because it puzzled them , with regard to the order of its succession .


It was the portrait of Mrs. Andrews , drawn in perfect health , and beauty 's bloom .
The astonished husband viewed it o'er with rapture , crying aloud , Just such she was , just such she is again , an angel heavenly bright !
but where the crown of glory , where the seraph 's plumes , which should have marked her spirit for the skies !
 He was continuing thus to rave , when his extasy was suddenly interrupted , by the original rushing into the room , and flying into his arms .


102 .
CHAP .
CXCVII .


IN imitation of the great Timanthes , in his famous picture upon the sacrifice of Iphigenia , I must here let fall the curtain , to hide those features , which no painting can express .
O reader , there is no describing of this scene !
the wonder , the joy , the emotion !


I was present at this interview , and so I happened to be on the late execution at Lisbon .
But this affected me much more .
In the criminal case , one goes prepared with resolution , a reflection on the crime , abates compassion , and justice acquiesces in the rack .
Philosophy besides , informs us , that pain is tolerable , only to a certain degree , beyond which , it ceases , with life together .
But here , the spectator is first taken by surprise , and then a willing captive , surrenders himself up , bound hand and foot , to a transport of pleasure , exceeding into pain .


 After the first effects of amazement and joy , had a little subsided , the clergyman stepping forward , begged , that before any one should call for an explanation of this miracle , the whole company should join him in worship , to that Almighty Being , who is the worker of all miracles , ` who stilleth the raging of the sea , and the noise of his waves , and the madness of the people .
* '


The proposal was readily embraced , and the rest of the house being called together , they all kneeled down to prayer .
In the midst of it he introduced part of the 107th Psalm , from the 19th to the 32d verses , both inclusive  which was so extremely applicable to the present occasion , that the whole congregation repeated it after him , with as much fervency of devotion , as if it had been an extempore hymn .


When this pious duty to Providence , was ended , and that proper instructions had been given , about the unfortunate widow 's funeral , they all prepared to set out for the farm .
The gentlemen subscribed a purse among them , for the relief of the crew , and to reward the villagers .
Eloisa , Mrs. Andrews , and her aunt , having suspended their votive garments , were taken  by Mrs. Beville , into her equipage  and the gentlemen attended them on horseback .


As soon as the coach arrived at the farm , little Harry and Fanny ran out to the door , to meet their father - Mrs. Andrews , and her children !
Here let me draw the veil , again .


103 .
CHAP .
CXCVIII .


AFTER dinner , tea , and the happy Eloisa 's wedding , were over , and that all interruption of servants was removed , Mrs. Beville seemed very impatient to have the mystery explained , of Mrs. Andrews 's recovery , her long absence from her husband and children , with her total silence toward them , during that so interesting an interval .


She looked first at Mr. Andrews , then at Mr. Beville , thinking it most natural for one or other of them , to begin the inquiry - But their whole souls were so much wrapt up , in the reality of her existence , that the least thought about reconciling of appearances , never once entered into their heads .


 She then turned herself toward the clergyman , wtth an eye of curiosity , hinting the question she would have proposed  but he happened to be so intirely occupied , in contemplations of an higher nature , that he did not remark the expressions of her countenance , any more than Beville or Andrews had done .


After these disappointments , applying herself to her brother , she begged of him , in a low voice , to make the proposition  but neither he , nor Eloisa , to whom she also addressed herself , gave the least attention to her request  for their hearts and minds were so happily engaged in their own mutual discoveries , he of her person , and she of his love , that they seemed to have no manner of curiosity , at that time , about any matter , foreign to their own concerns .


The impatience of the fair Ethelinda , increased at every difficulty - Women love little novels extremely , as Mrs. Seawell says * , and finding that the opening of the scene , rested solely upon herself , she at length addressed herself directly to the old lady , in these words : Madam , said she , I have borne my share , with great sincerity , in the general joy , which this happy and unexpected event in your family , has diffused among us all  but as I happen to be one of those persons , who  are not sufficiently satisfied with merely being happy , wihout knowing how they have become so , I must intreat the favour of you , to afford us a detail of all the extraordinary incidents , which must have happened to this lady and to you , since your leaving this kingdom together .


This proposition immediately engaged the attention of the rest of the company , and they all joined their voices in the same request .
The good old lady bowed , and prepared herself to satisfy their curiosity - but , upon opening her mouth , she was suddenly seized with such a fit of yawning , that she was not able to utter one syllable , for a considerable time  and when she had composed her muscles sufficiently to speak , it was only to desire a respite , till the next morning  saying , that the fatigue she had undergone , both of body and mind , the foregoing day and night , was then calling upon her so pressingly , for rest , that she must beg leave for the present , to retire to bed .
The whole company bowed , and some of them nodded too  upon which hint , the aunt 's motion soon became general  and each party following her example , took up a candle , and walked away supperless to their chambers .


104 .
CHAP .
CXCIX .


 PErhaps , reader , if you are a female , you may feel yourself as much disappointed here , madam , as the inquisitive Ethelinda appears to have been , last night - but if you are a man , you have reason , I assure you , Sir , to be greatly rejoiced at this interruption , for it is much better that she should yawn herself to sleep , before she began the story , than that you should be obliged to stretch your jaws , at her narration .


Women have such a tedious manner of telling a story !
with a said he , and said she  then again , he said , and she said  then she came into the room , and coming into the room - with other needless repetitions , conversations without subjects , characters without manners , language without stile , families without likeness , passion expiring in declamation , and action standing stock still , staring at narrative running by itself till it is out of breath .


But prithee , are we to receive no manner of satisfaction upon this point , at all ?
and because an old woman is apt to talk too much , must every one else be dumb ?
No , Sir , by no means .
I shall do you reason , myself  but will give you a  story , in a few pages , which would have taken her up a volume  for she commenced it the next morning , immediately after breakfast , and kept the company up to yawning-time , after supper , before she had got herself on ship-board .


105 .
CHAP .
CC .


AFTER Mrs. Andrews had been given over by the physicians , at Spa , the aunt was writing a letter , one night , to Mr. Andrews , when her daughter came crying into the room , saying that her dear cousin had just then expired , in her arms .
The aunt ran immediately to her bed-side , and judging from all appearances , that she was really dead , after some effusions of grief , returned to her letter , and added these words , Alas !
our Fanny is no more !
then sealing it with black wax , sent it off to the post .


Our Fanny , it seems , had only fainted , through weakness , at this time  and the nurse-tender perceiving still some signs of life in her patient , called for assistance , and by the application  of proper remedies , she was recovered to sense again , before the next morning .


The aunt would then have recalled the last paragraph of her letter , but it was too late for that , and yet too soon to venture to contradict it .
Her death seemed only delayed , and she thought it would have been cruel , after he had received the shock , to have amused Mr. Andrews with a fruitless hope , which none of her physicians had in the least encouraged .


Her fair cousin , who was herself in a deep decay , and loved her with a double sympathy , of affection and disorder , prevailed upon her , a day or two after her swoon , to suffer her picture to be drawn , in the very situation she then lay  for which she gave this virtuous and philosophic reason , that the looking on it sometimes , might serve to mortify every vain , proud , or presumptuous thought , which should ever hereafter happen to arise in her own breast , by shewing to what a condition , even health , youth , and beauty , might be so suddenly reduced .


Mrs. Andrews continued in this languishing way , all the winter  one week giving hopes , and another despair , of her recovery , till at length , toward spring , the physicians , upon finding her still holding out in a fluctuating state , pronounced that possibly , the warm air of Lisbon  might establish her health  which hint was readily taken hold of by the aunt , both out of affection to her niece , and that she imagined her own daughter might also receive some benefit from the same climate .


As soon as it was possible for them to begin their journey , this female Triumvirate set out from Spa , travelling to Brest , by slow marches , to prevent fatigue to the two invalids .
The daughter happened to catch cold on the road , her sea-sickness was extreme , and two days after she had landed at Lisbon , she was seized with a diarrhoea , which carried her off in about a week .


106 .
CHAP .
CCI .


HERE , reader , have I saved you a world of embarrassment , in this part of the story , by snatching it out of the mother 's mouth .
Why should you be reduced to grieve for a person , whom you knew not sufficiently , to be concerned about ?
and why should you be delayed the pleasure of hearing , that upon this loss , the aunt , to whom by her husband 's will , the  daughter 's estate of twelve hundred pounds a year , had devolved , immediately adopted her niece , our old acquaintance and favourite , for her heir .
It was this circumstance which afforded the good old lady the equivocation , of saying , at the village , that her dear and only child was in the room within .


Whether the motion of the sea , like stirring up of land , might have given some latent seeds of health a power to germinate - whether the spring of the air , in this dry climate , might have caused a brisker circulation in her blood - or finally , which is by no means the least physical hypothesis of the three , whether the satisfaction created in her mind , by finding herself , her husband , and her children , thus redeemed from difficulty and want , to affluence and ease , might have given a salutary elasticity to her nerves , I am not philosopher enough to pronounce  nor indeed is it worth our inquiry here , while this truth is certain , that Mrs. Andrews began visibly to recover at Lisbon , in a short time after her landing .


As soon as she was restored to health and features again , her aunt got her portrait taken * , for a reason of pretty much the same religious cast , with her daughter 's  to shew , by placing it near the former , that the hand which , to prove the  vanity of mortal boasts , can reduce health and beauty , to deformity and distemper , can , in manifestation of its goodness and mercy , restore them both again , to their former vigour and lustre .


107 .
CHAP .
CCII .


WHILE Mrs. Andrews continued in a desperate state of health , and even after her recovery appeared to be possible , the physicians at Spa , had laid all persons about her , under an injunction to keep her mind , as much , or even more than her body , free from all manner of emotion , either of joy or grief , suffering every passion and affection of the soul to subside to wholesome apathy .


Our aunt took advantage of this restriction .
She had never ventured to tell her niece of the mistaken paragraph , in her letter to Mr. Andrews  and yet without doing so , how could she be able to account for so fond an husband 's never writing a line to his wife , or troubling himself , even with inquiring about her health , from the aunt ?


 This precept of the physician , then , most luckily removed that difficulty  and having been delivered before the patient herself , the aunt immediately declared that she would acquaint Mr. Andrews of this restriction , by the next post  forbidding him to write any letter to his wife , thenceforward , till he should receive a license from her , to renew his correspondence .


At the same time , she assured her that she would direct her steward to send her constant accounts , of her husband , father , and children , which she would communicate freely to her , while they all continued in an uniform and uninteresting tenor of health  but that she must not expect to hear even of a tooth-ach , or a kibed heel , till her mind should be able to stand upon its own legs again .


The expiring Mrs. Andrews acquiesced in this disposition of things , not so much for the expediency of the advice , as because her mind had for some time , begun to wean itself from all human connections  not in the least by weakening their force in her breast , but by infinitely outweighing them , with the regards of another life .


The good old woman did accordingly direct her steward , in the manner she had promised , and received continued advice from him , of every change in Mr. Andrews 's situation and circumstances   his debrise in Hertfordshire  his father 's death , and will , with his present residence near Scarborough  it was by knowing of this last particular , that she had discovered him so quickly , at the village , upon just hearing the name of Andrews pronounced .


108 .
CHAP .
CCIII .


HOwever , all these articles of his fortunes , both good and bad , with old Beville 's death also , she kept still a secret from her niece , till after her being pronounced out of danger , at Lisbon  and then , upon her beginning to recommence a correspondence with her husband , she was made acquainted with the truth of the story .
This information rendered her extremely unhappy , she reflected with vast uneasiness , upon her dear husband 's still continuing in the same error  and was for immediately letting fly an express to England , with a letter from her own hand , to acquaint him of her recovery .


But her aunt restrained all this extasy , by saying that the too sudden surprise and joy , of such an unlocked and unhoped-for discovery , might  possibly produce some dangerous effect upon his health , or mind  that she might have the happiness of seeing him , and her children together , much sooner by setting out immediately for England , herself , than by waiting for his coming to Lisbon  that she would hire a ship , and sail directly to Harwich , which was near her own seat  and that an express from thence , would reach him sooner than the pacquet from Lisbon , going round by London .


The design of this very good old gentlewoman , was to have wrote to Mr. Andrews , as soon as she should arrive at her own house , to come to her , and bring his children along with him  without undeceiving him about his wife .
This miracle she meant to have opened to him , by degrees  and one of the methods which she had purposed to have employed toward that end , was to shew him the two portraits , in the same order that she did at the village .


She imagined that upon his seeing the living picture , so reversely succeed the dying one , it might naturally raise some hope , some suspicion , some inquiry , in him , at least , how it was possible to have obtained the second portrait , after death .
But we have already seen how little success she had upon that experiment  for the hurry of Mr. Andrews 's passions , when his dear Fanny  was the object , left him no leisure for the exercise of his reason or reflection .
Which , joined to the impatience of the fond Mrs. Andrews , precipitated the denoüement , before the plot had ripened to maturity .


Mrs. Andrews approved extremely , of this whole plan of operation , and they began to prepare themselves for the voyage , with the utmost expedition  and hired a ship to set sail the next morning , for England  when an extraordinary accident happened , which detained them at Lisbon , for above four months after their preparations for setting out .


109 .
CHAP .
CCIV .


THERE was a priest , who lodged in the same house with them , and with whom they had become very intimate , by their frequent intercourse with the people of the family .
He was a lively agreeable person , with an elegant taste in polite literature  and having been born and bred a Frenchman , had something extremely easy and polite , in his address and manners .


 The only point of good breeding , in which he seemed to be deficient , was his too frequently urging the argument of religion , in conversation .
But all his scholastic divinity , and jesuitical sophistry , were with ease exposed , by Mrs. Andrews , from the extreme perspicuity of her own natural sense , assisted by the instructions she had so frequently received , from her learned and ingenious friend , the clergyman .


Mrs. Andrews 's understanding , with her returning beauty , began soon to attract the regards of the abbé  and his particular address toward her , became at length , so remarkable , as to give her offence .
When she perceived it , she commenced a reserve , by degrees , till she had withdrawn herself intirely from any manner of society with the family where she lodged  and afterwards refused the visits of the abbé , on pretence of indisposition .


Affairs were in this situation , when a ship was hired , and the ladies were to have set sail the next morning , at ten o'clock .
But at the hour of twelve , the night before , after they had both been in bed for some time , they were awakened by a loud knocking at the portal of the house .
The door was opened , and the noise ceased there for a few minutes , but was again repeated at the bed-chamber  door , where Mrs. Andrews and her aunt lay .


They immediately called out to inquire the cause of this disturbance , and were answered by their landlady , who in a most doleful tone of voice , informed them that the most high and holy court of Inquisition , had sent their secretary with a guard , to take Mrs. Andrews into safe custody , till a tryal should be appointed her , for certain blasphemies , and profane expressions , uttered by her against holy mother the church , in derogation of antient reliques , modern miracles , and divine saint-worship .


The unhappy Mrs. Andrews quick perceived the priest 's hand , and the cloven-foot together , in this most horrid prosecution  which appeared still plainer , after she and her aunt had dressed themselves , and opened the door , when she saw the abbé enter the room , alone , with his arms folded , and his countenance masked under an assumed vizard of sorrow and compassion .
But soon shifting his saint 's look to a satyr 's leer , he whispered to her in French , that it was in her power to dismiss the suit , on the instant  and that upon such very easy terms as these - merely to prefer love , liberty , and life , to prison , death , and torture .


 I hope that none of my readers will harbour the least manner of doubt , with regard to Mrs. Andrews 's option , upon this occasion .
My female readers , I dare swear , have already determined the choice for her , between these alternatives , as the story of the nuns of Collingham * , is one of their strongest articles of faith .


' I doubtless do prefer , said she , speaking aloud , love , liberty , and life , to prison , death , and torture - but then , by infinitely greater odds , do I prefer prison , death , and torture , before prostitution , infamy , and wrath .
I therefore submit myself , not to the jurisdiction of this court , but to the dispensations of Providence , which has already rescued me from a more imminent danger , even than the present  but if a second miracle in my favour , may be too much for me to expect , I shall still hope , that implored Heaven will proportion my strength to the struggle , and raise my virtue above my torments . '


110 .
CHAP .
CCV .


 THE condition of the unhappy aunt , who remained in uncertainty about her dear niece 's life or death , during several months , may well be imagined , without the aid of description .
For the walls of the Inquisition cut off from the wretched prisoner , all manner of communication with the world , during her dismal confinement in that purgatory .


She frequently applied to the judges of that most iniquitous court , for leave only to see her niece , even in the presence of any of their own officers  but was inhumanly denied that satisfaction .
She then drew up a petition , and watched an opportunity of presenting it , in person , to his Portuguese majesty  which happened to have this good effect , that though it did not obtain her release , it preserved her , by the king 's intercession , from sustaining any manner of violence , or undergoing a tryal , during her confinement there .
For the minister , upon hearing that a British subject of some note , was in question , thought it politic to temporise with so potent an ally as England , while a Spanish war was depending .


 The aunt , at one time , drew up a memorial , setting forth the real state of the case , with the iniquity and malice of the abbé 's prosecution  which she had designed to have delivered into the court of Inquisition .
But upon communicating it to her landlord , he advised her most strenuously , against it  saying that instead of redeeming her niece by this method , she would infallibly involve herself , in the same misfortune , even without the least hope of redemption  for that the defamation of a priest , or the least censure against the church , was held , among them , to be an infinitely more deadly sin , than the highest profanation of God , or religion itself .


In this dreadful situation had both these unhappy women remained , for about four months , without any manner of consolation  except this only , which they each separately enjoyed , that poor Mr. Andrews had not been yet undeceived , with regard to his dear Fanny 's supposed death .
At the end of this period , Eloisa , with her brother and sister , arrived at Lisbon , and happening to take lodgings in the same hòtel with our aunt , became soon acquainted with this unhappy story .


They all most cordially commiserated her misfortune  and the brother-in-law happening fortunately to be nephew to the new ambassador ,  who had lately arrived from England to renew a treaty of alliance between the two crowns , went instantly to wait upon him , and obtained his promise that he would solicit the minister of Portugal , for Mrs. Andrews 's release , and if refused , would even proceed so far , as to interest his own court , on her behalf .


He kept his word punctually , with his nephew , and succeeded in his suit  but not time enough to afford him the satisfaction of knowing it  for that good and unhappy man died before Mrs. Andrews had been set at liberty , which she obtained but just time enough to acknowledge her obligations to the ladies , and to accompany them , along with her aunt , in their voyage to England .


111 .
CHAP .
CCVI .


 BUT to return to the farm .
These eight persons formed one of the most extraordinary and most amiable societies , that can well be imagined .
The sense , virtue , fondness , friendship , and chearfulness of the whole company , rendered them not only agreeable to each other , but the objects of envy or admiration , to all the world besides .


The only interruption to their enjoyments , was what Mrs. Carewe 's grief for her brother and sister , used often to occasion , at first , till it had subsided by degrees , to a tender , but composed concern for their loss , which was confined to her own breast , and rarely broke out any more , to the disturbance of the company .


This charming groupe of friends continued together at the farm , till the middle of December , when Mr. Beville invited them all to spend the Christmas with him , at Condisciple-Hall - From thence they proceeded to the deceased colonel 's seat , to pass their Easter with Mr. Carewe  and then returned to the farm , on the Whitsuntide following .


In this stated rotation of friendly visits , the Triumvirate ingaged to each other , to enjoy the  three great festivals of religion together , during their lives  appointing the worthy clergyman to be chaplain and almoner to this society , which subscribed among them , a purse of three hundred pounds a year , to be distributed in charity , at his sole discretion .


The union and harmony of this happy family of friends , subsist unbroken still , and ever must subsist  for their connections are founded on virtue , and reciprocal obligation .
Nothing worth relating has since occurred among them , except the birth of children , and the death of Mr. Carewe 's father , by which his fortune has received an addition of three thousand pounds a year ,


FINIS .
Notes * .
Frame a regular hexagon - inscribe two equilateral triangles , draw diagonals from angle to angle , and the points , with the intersections , mark out the station of the trees .
* .
This lord Rivers was a person of remarkable chivalry , and galantry of course .
He was also a man of letters , and translated the lives and sayings of the philosophers , from the Latin  but left out every passage of them , which contained any manner of reflection , or sarcasm , against women .
A polite , and peculiar instance of galantry !
* .
Midwifry .
* .
This thing is said to have happened some years ago , at Whyte 's chocolate-house .
* .
Quod persolvant debitum languide ,  oscitanter  undé foetus , à paretum generositate , descisit .
Says Lemnius , the great physician .
* .
See chapter C. second and third paragraphs .
* .
Chapter CX .
last paragraph but one .
* .
Chapter CXI .
last paragraph .
* .
By the Jewish laws the adulterer and adultress , were both stoned to death .
* .
This reflection will be explained in chapter cxxxix .
* .
These were the very words he made use of to her , when he was spiriting her up to the duel .
Chapter cii .
paragrath 4th , latter part of it .
* .
One of the names of Apollo , from his having no beard .
* .
The fool hath said in his heart , there is no God .
* .
A shell-snail .
* .
Nor in France , to exclude them from the throne , neither , though it was construed and strained to that sense by Philip de Valois , in order to exclude Edward the IIId , of England , from the crown .
* .
Anne of Austria used to say , that good teeth were the most natural beauty , because the only one that was of real use .
* .
Shakespear has an happy expression , to this purpose , in his Coriolanus , - I 'll watch him , Till he be dieted to my request .
* .
Suetonius mentions one woman , who was remarkable for resisting the prevalence of example .
Antonia , daughter to M. Anthony , and wife to Drusus , in the midst of a dissolute and debauched court , was an example of virtue , prudence , and conjugal love .
But 't was also remarkable of her , that she never spit , in her life .
* .
Win her with gifts , if she respect not words .
Dumb jewels often , in their silent kind , More than quick words , do move a woman 's mind .
Shakespear .
* .
Winter 's Tale .
* .
Cadmus , being dispatched by his father Agenor , in pursuit of his eloped sister Europa , happened to be struck with the beauties of a particular situation , and built the city of Thebes , in his way .
* .
See Matthew , chap .
xviii .
beginning at verse 21 .
* .
Neither Mr. Andrews nor his brother returned him any solution to this proposition , being unwilling to interrupt his story  nor shall I enter into a disquisition upon the subject , in this place , for the same reason  but shall content myself at present , with quoting a very pretty sentiment from the Peruvian Letters , which combats this delicacy strongly : ` To be thoroughly generous , one should listen to acknowledgements . '
It certainly must be a kind relief , to a grateful mind , to be indulged in the fond pleasure of expressing its obligations .
It , in some sort , eases us of the debt .
* .
See her own expression , chap .
clxiii .
parag .
4 .
* .
A term in anatomy , for the calf of the leg .
† .
A muscle of the thigh , which serves to move the leg , á .
Vide Harris 's Lexicon Technicum .
* .
This is called in anatomy , the Taylor 's Muscle , as it is that which enables us to cross our legs .
* .
An happy expression made use of by the lady who translated the memoirs and writings of Ninon de l'Enclos .
* .
See chap .
cxlvi .
parag .
2 .
* .
See Preface , parag .
12 .
* .
Psalm lxv .
ver .
7 .
* .
Chap .
clxiii .
parag .
4 .
* .
Chap .
cxcvi .
last parag .
* .
Who cut off their noses to preserve their chastity .

