
MEMOIRS OF HENRY HUNT , ESQ. .


Written by himself ,


IN HIS MAJESTY 'S JAIL AT ILCHESTER ,


IN THE COUNTY of SOMERSET .


Volume I


Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see , Thinks what ne'er was , nor is , nor e'er shall be .
In every work regard the Writer 's end , Since none can compass more than they intend  And if the means be just , the conduct true , Applause , in spite of trivial faults , is due .
POPE .


LONDON :


PUBLISHED BY T. DOLBY , 299 , STRAND  AND 34 , WARDOUR STREET , SOHO .


1820


TO


THE RADICAL REFORMERS ,


MALE AND FEMALE ,


OF


ENGLAND , IRELAND , AND SCOTLAND ,


And particularly to the Reformers of Lancashire , who attended the Meeting of the 16th of August , 1819 , held on St Peter 's Plain at Manchester , and more especially to the Reformers of Yorkshire , in which County a Jury found me Guilty of illegally attending that Meeting , for which , the Court of King 's Bench sentenced me to be imprisoned in Ilchester Jail for Two YEARS and SIX MONTHS , and at the end of that period , to enter into recognisances for my good behaviour , for Five Years , Myself in ONE THOUSAND POUNDS and Two Sureties in FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS EACH .


* * * * *


Ilchester Jail , May 22 , 1820


FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN , In dedicating this work to you , I will , in the first instance , briefly record the fact , that -- on Monday , the 15th day of May , Mr. Justice Bayley , as senior puisne Judge of the court of King 's Bench , in a mild and gentle manner , passed the above unexampled sentence upon me for having attended a public meeting at Manchester , by the invitation of seven hundred inhabitant householders of that town , who signed a requisition to the Boroughreeve to call the said meeting on the 16th day of August last , for the purpose `` of taking into consideration the best and most legal means of obtaining a reform in the Commons House of Parliament . ''
This meeting was no sooner assembled to the number of one hundred and fifty thousand persons , young and old of both sexes , in the most peaceable and orderly manner , than they were assailed by the Manchester yeomanry cavalry , who charged the multitude , sword in hand , and without the slightest provocation or resistance on the part of the people ( as was clearly proved by the trial at York ) , aided by two troops of the Cheshire yeomanry , the 15th hussars , the 81st regiment of foot , and two pieces of flying artillery , sabred , trampled upon , and dispersed the unoffending and unresisting people , when 14 persons were killed and upwards of 600 wounded .
I , and eleven others , having , by a mere miracle , escaped the military execution intended for us , were seized and confined in solitary dungeons in the New Bailey , for eleven days and nights , under a pretended charge of high treason .
At the end of that time , upon a final examination , I was sent under a military escort , upwards of fifty miles , to Lancaster Castle , although bail was ready , and waiting to be put in for me .
After this sentence was passed , I was sent to the King 's Bench Prison , where I was confined till four o'clock on the Wednesday following , when I was conveyed in a chaise to this prison , where I arrived at ten o'clock the same night , being a distance of 120 miles .
Thus , after having been confined in three separate jails since the 16th of August -- the New Bailey , at Manchester , Lancaster Castle , and the King 's Bench , I am doomed finally to be incarcerated in a dungeon of this , the fourth jail , for two years and six months , while Hulton of Hulton , and those benevolent gentlemen of the Manchester yeomanry cavalry , are at large , without even the chance of any proceedings , that might lead to the punishment of their crimes , being instituted against them .
Yet , we are gravely told from the bench , that the laws are equally administered to the rich and to the poor  of the truth of which assertion , the above will , in future ages , appear as an unexampled specimen .


In addressing this work to you , my brave , patient , and persecuted friends , I hope to have an opportunity of communicating with you once a month , during my incarceration , and during the progress of the work , I shall take care to avoid all exaggerated statements .
I shall confine myself to a strict relation of facts , and I shall be very particular not to gloss over or slight any one political or public act of my life you shall be in possession of the faithful history of that man whom you have so unanimously honoured by the denomination of your champion , and in whose incarceration a deadly blow is , with savage ferocity , aimed at your rights and liberties -- one who , during his whole political career , will be found to have been the consistent and undeviating advocate of real or radical reform , one who always , under every difficulty , at all times and seasons , boldly and unequivocally claimed for the people , the right of every man to have a vote for the members of the Commons House of Parliament , and who never , under any circumstances , paltered or compromised the great constitutional principle that `` no Englishman should be taxed without his own consent . ''
Even when its most zealous professed advocates had abandoned the intention of maintaining this proposition , even at the risk of loosing the friendship of his dearest political connections , he stood firm upon the solid basis of that incontrovertible principle , `` equal justice and freedom to all . ''
No pretended expediency , no crafty policy , although urged with the greatest force and zeal , by the most experienced and acute reasoners , neither flattery , bribes , nor threats , could ever , for one moment , shake his determination to support the principle Of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE , or in other words , the right of every freeman to have a share by his representative in the making of those laws , by which his life , his liberty , and his property , are to be governed and disposed of .
I allude , more particularly , to the meeting of delegates , ( by some called deputies ) in London , some time in the beginning of the year 1817 .
The principle of Universal Suffrage was nothing new .
I claim no merit in having proposed any thing novel -- this right is as old as the constitution of England  it had been advocated by Sir Robert , afterwards Lord Raymond , by Sir William Jones , and afterwards , with great perseverance and ability , by the Duke of Richmond , who brought a bill into the House of Lords , in which he claimed this right for the people , and proposed to carry it into execution .
At that time , however , no part of the people had petitioned for it , and the bill was thrown out .
At that period , the attention of the populace of the metropolis was directed to other matters -- they were engaged in Lord George Gordon 's disgraceful riots .
The Duke of Richmond , disgusted at the apathy of the reformers , to which he attributed the failure of his favourite measure , soon afterwards accepted a place as master general of the ordnance , and became a complete tool of the ministers .
The cause of reform languished till the year 1816 , although Major Cartwright , Sir F. Burdett , Mr. Cobbett , myself , and many others , had made frequent efforts to call the people 's attention to the only measure calculated to check the progress -- the fatal progress of corruption , and its consequent effects , unjust and unnecessary war , profligate expenditure , the funding or swindling system , and the rapid annual increase of a ruinous and irredeemable debt .
It will be said that these subjects will naturally be included in , and make part of , my history .
They certainly will , but there is one circumstance connected with the events of 1816 and 1817 , which is very imperfectly known to any of the reformers , and which I feel it a duty to detail to them all before I proceed any further .


In the latter end of the year 1815 and the beginning of the year 1816 , the evil effects of the war began to be severely felt amongst all classes throughout the country  and , in the North of England , it was particularly felt by those employed in the manufactories .
Great disturbances prevailed , and the Luddites , as they were called , committed repeated depredations , by destroying the machinery of their employers .
This ultimately led to the employment of spies and informers , by the agents of the government  by which means , many of the unhappy men were convicted and executed .
Major Cartwright and Mr. Cobbett , in the most laudable and praiseworthy manner , endeavoured , by their writings , and the Major , I believe , by going amongst them personally , to draw the attention of the starving manufacturers to the real cause of their distress , and recommended them to petition for reform instead of destroying the machinery .
This had the desired effect , and petitions drawn up by the Major , praying for reform in the Commons House of Parliament , and demanding suffrage for those who paid taxes , poured in from all quarters .
In the beginning of November some persons in London advertised and called a public meeting of the distressed inhabitants of the metropolis , to be held in Spafields , on the 15th  this originated with Dr. Watson and some of those who called themselves Spenceans .
As I have learned since , they sent invitations to Sir Francis Burdett , Major Cartwright , myself , and Lord Cochrane , and even to Mr. Waithman , and several other political characters , earnestly requesting them to attend the meeting , to advise with and to assist their distressed fellow creatures , as to the best means of obtaining relief .
In the mean time , the parties calling the meeting had drawn up and prepared a memorial to the Prince Regent , which was , if passed , to have been carried immediately to Carlton House , by the whole of the meeting , and presented in person to the Regent .
When the day arrived , of all the persons invited as political characters to the meeting , I was the only one who attended , and , having prevailed upon those who called the meeting to abandon their famous memorial , and to relinquish the plan of going in a body to Carlton House , I proposed the resolutions and the petition to his Royal Highness the Prince  which the next day I caused to be presented to him by Lord Sidmouth : on the following day his Royal Highness was pleased so far to comply with the request of the petitioners as to send Four Thousand Pounds as a subscription to the Spitalfields Soup Committee .
The resolutions proposed by me , and unanimously passed by the most numerous meeting ever held in this country , avowed the principle of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE  and the petition to the Regent claimed his pecuniary assistance , as an immediate and temporary relief  but declared that the petitioners had no hope or expectation of permanent prosperity and happiness , till a reform of Parliament was effected , which would give to every man a vote in the representation .
This was , therefore , the first time that universal suffrage was petitioned for at a public meeting  and I had the honour , and I shall ever feel a pride in the reflection , of being the first man who publicly proposed at a meeting of the reformers this measure , and of having caused to be presented the first petition to the throne , praying the Prince to assist the people in recovering their right of universal suffrage , in the election of members of the House of Commons .
You must all recollect the infamous manner in which I was attacked and assailed by the whole of the daily London Press at that time , with the single exception of the Statesman .
However , the reformers of the north , south , east , and west , became instantly alive to the appeal that was made to them in the resolutions passed at Spa Fields  public meetings were held , and petitions to the House of Commons were signed , all praying for universal suffrage  and , by the time of the meeting of Parliament , the delegates from petitioning bodies came up to town , in consequence of a circular letter signed by Sir Francis Burdett , to consult , and to settle upon the extent of suffrage and other matters to be recommended , for the adoption of all the petitioning bodies of reformers throughout the country .
This was most unnecessary , for they had , one and all , already adopted the principle , and followed the example , set them by the inhabitants of the metropolis at Spa Fields .
When the delegates were arrived from Scotland , Yorkshire , Lancashire , and most of the counties in the north , from Bath , Bristol , and other places in the west , with the petitions entrusted to them , the signatures to which , together with those of the petitions previously sent up , did not amount to less than half a million  I came to town as the delegate from Bath and Bristol , both of which cities had held public meetings , most numerously attended , and passed similar resolutions to those agreed to at Spa Fields .
The Reformers from each of those cities had sent me up a petition , to be presented to the House of Commons , praying for universal suffrage , one signed by 24,000 and the other by 25,000 persons .
To be brief here , ( for I shall detail the circumstances more fully hereafter , as they make a most important epoch of my life )  the delegates met , 63 in number , at the Crown and Anchor , Major Cartwright in the chair , who , together with Mr. Jones Burdett , attended as a deputation from the Hampden Club .
The Major , in opening the business of the day , stated that the members of the Hampden Club , with Sir Francis Burdett at their head , had come to a resolution to support suffrage to the extent of householders , and no further , and that they recommended the adoption of this plan to the delegates .
The Major was particularly eloquent , and went out of the usual course of a chairman , by requesting , almost as a personal favour to himself , that the delegates would adopt the recommendation of the Hampden Club .
Mr. Cobbett then rose , and , in a speech replete with every argument which this most clear and powerful reasoner could suggest , proposed the first resolution , that the meeting should adopt the recommendation of the Hampden Club , and agree to recommend the reformers to petition to the extent of householder suffrage only  urging , as Major Cartwright had done before , the necessity of agreeing to this plan , because Sir F. Burdett had positively refused to support any petitions for universal suffrage .
This resolution was seconded by Mr. Jno .
Allen , my brother delegate , from Bath , although he had positive instructions not to agree to any thing short of universal suffrage  but Mr. Cobbett 's powerful though fallacious reasoning , had convinced him , of the necessity of curtailing the right to householders only .
I rose and moved an amendment , substituting universal for householder suffrage , and , with all the reasoning and energy in my power , I combated the arguments of my friends Cobbett and Major Cartwright , deprecating the narrow-minded policy that would deprive 3-4ths of the population of the inherent birthright of every freeman .
My proposition , and the whole of the arguments I used in its support , were received by a very large majority of the delegates with enthusiastic approbation  so much so , that it convinced Mr. Cobbett of the folly as well as the inutility of persisting in his motion .
My amendment having been seconded by Mr. Hulme , from Bolton in Lancashire , and being supported by a very ingenious argument of my brave friend and fellow prisoner ( now in Lincoln Castle ) Mr. Bamford , Mr. Cobbett rose and begged to withdraw his motion , he having been convinced of the practicability of universal suffrage by the speech of Mr. Bamford , who had at the time only said a few words upon that subject .
The question was put , and principle carried it against policy , there being for my amendment I think 60 , and only 3 for the householder plan .
Thus then , my friends , whether I was right or whether I was wrong , I not only was the first to propose the adoption of the wild and visionary scheme of universal suffrage at a great public meeting , but I also stood firm to the cause , when those who have since so ably advocated the principle , were ( in evil hour ) from policy about to abandon it .
Let , therefore , all the blame of the reformers having so determinedly advocated the wild and visionary scheme of universal suffrage rest upon my shoulders , which , thank God , are quite broad enough to bear it without feeling it in any degree burdensome , particularly as Sir F. Burdett has at length come fully up to our mark .
From that time to this I have never deviated from , never shifted to the right or to the left , but always , at all times , through good report , and through evil report , undisguisedly enforced and maintained , with all the ability I possessed , the right of the whole of my fellow-countrymen to be fairly and freely represented , in the Commons House of Parliament .
If there be any merit in what was then called a stubborn and pertinacious adherence to this great principle , I am only entitled to share that merit jointly with Mr. Hulme , Mr. Bamford , and the other brave and patriotic men who came from different parts of the country , as delegates .
Without their manly support , this measure would have been lost , and the reformers throughout the kingdom would then have been recommended to abandon the high ground they had taken  to give up petitions , already signed by half a million of men for universal suffrage  and in its stead to petition for suffrage to the extent of householders , or to the payers of direct taxes ONLY .
-- Having established this position , for the correctness of which I appeal to all the delegates who were present , I shall leave it for the present , although there are very important matters , and some very curious circumstances connected with the events of that period , which have never yet appeared before the public , which must come out , and which will form a very material part of my history .
The government , or rather the ministers , had their eye upon this meeting of delegates , and they well knew ALL that passed there  and I should not be surprised if six months of my imprisonment may be fairly placed to the account of what the editor of the Macclesfield Courier called , `` my most uncompromising perseverance . ''
-- The editor of an obscure Sunday London Newspaper , in observing upon my sentence , says most exultingly , `` The game its now up -- with this man we have done , to the people we now turn : '' and what do you think he means to do , how does he propose to relieve their distresses ?
In speaking of your prospects of relief he says `` Suffer they must for a time , it would be vain to deny this , it would be dishonest to hold out any other hope .
IT REMAINS WITH THEMSELVES WHETHER THEIR SUFFERINGS BE LONG OR SHORT . ''
So this gentleman tells you first that the game is up , and then he consoles you by telling you that the game is in your own hands .
Was there ever such paltering , ever such base and stupid attempts to delude rational beings ?
The Morning Post of the 23d of May , a few days after my sentence , gives vent to his malignant joy in the following words .


`` The political matters of fact of the last month will descend to posterity as the proudest mementos of the age in which we live  never at any period since Trial by Jury has been the stipulation of our allegiance , never has that grand perfection of Justice been more sacredly guarded .
The trial of Mr. HUNT at York is a precedent of almost unattainable impartiality in judicial proceedings .
Pending that trial the reports of its progress gave radicalism a confidence it undisguisedly evinced , that the result would be favourable to its heart 's worst wishes .
The Io Pæns of Faction were in full rehearsal , when the bringers of evil tidings announced the triumph of Truth .
The conviction of a burlesque on baronetcy was expected in sulky helplessness -- but the overthrow of the CHAMPION of LIBERTY , the ORATOR whose eloquence was to have been the passing dirge of Justice -- his overthrow was the overthrow of thousands .
With his , hearts sunk , and menaces grew silent  the monster at his whetstone dropped the half-sharpened dagger at the conviction of Henry Hunt  and the tool of his excitement unscrewed the pike-head and threw away the musquet .
I have no hesitation in declaring , that all the numerous verdicts for the Crown , that of late have asserted the majesty of Law , including the convictions of high treason , have not done HALF so much for the real interest of social quiet , as the radically never-dreamt-of conviction of ` the Lord of the Manor of Glastonbury . ' ''


This you see , my friends of Yorkshire , is meant to quiet the conscience of Mr. SEPTIMUS BROMLEY and his brother TALESMAN .
The SPECIAL Gentlemen being above any thing of the sort .
I wish some friend who lives near the said Septimus would give me a line , and tell me who and what he is , and what he says for himself .
I hope some radical in his neighbourhood will send me a good and particular account of this gentleman .
But I see by the Newspapers that the game is not quite up , or if it is , a new game is begun .
If the Honourable House have got rid of one set of petitioners , a new set is sprung up , not of radicals to be sure , but a set of agriculturists , merchants , manufacturers , and shipowners , who all appear to be petitioning against each other , or at least each of them is petitioning for that which would add to the distress and ruin of the other .
The Honourable House is placed in a very ticklish and delicate situation .
It does not dare to serve the petitions of these new applicants as they did our petitions , my friends for reform -- kick them out of the House  but having for the present got rid of the radicals , they have now plenty of leisure to attend to the numerous petitions of all the rest of the community .
The Yeomanry Cavalry , good souls they are in distress , and they want another CORN BILL .
But then you see his Majesty 's Ministers , kind-hearted creatures , and the considerate merchants , the Barings , and the Ricardos , they say this must not be .
By management the New Corn Bill gentry got a majority : my Lord Castlereagh is quite shocked , and even Mr. Holme Sumner , benevolent heart , he is quite astounded with the unexpected and undeserved success of his own motion .
Mark their proceedings well , my friends -- for you to petition I fear will be in vain , but mark their proceedings .
It so very much resembles the proceedings when the last Corn Bill was passed , that I have little doubt there is foul play going on somewhere .
The farmers can not pay their rents , rates , and taxes unless they can do it by a rise in the price of the quartern loaf .
Baring and Ricardo do not approve of this -- each of them has his scheme for the relief of the general distress , agricultural and all .
Baring hints , but he only hints , at something tangible , he hints that rents should be lowered , and his brother stock-jobber , Ricardo , proposes then to pay off the national debt , by making the land-holders pay down at once 15 per cent .
upon the value of their estates .
The Honourable Members stare with astonishment at the propositions of these wise law-givers -- and well they may .
Although the `` game may be up  '' although the assertion of the editor of the Morning Post may be true , `` that the verdict against Henry Hunt has proved the overthrow of thousands , and rendered twice as much service to the real interest of social quiet , as ALL the other verdicts for the crown put together  '' yet I perceive by the language of a petition from the inhabitants of the town of Kirkeaton , presented to the Honourable House by my Lord Milton , that even the locking me up in a jail , in consequence of this verdict , has neither contributed to remove the distress , nor to put food into the mouths of the poor reformers of Kirkeaton .
Good God of Heaven !
what must Lord Milton be made of to present , merely present , mind , a petition shewing that 1729 of his constituents , in one parish had been , and were living , or rather starving , upon 11 3/4 d. each per week , that the average income of 1729 human beings in that county , Yorkshire , where he is their virtual representative , is under one shilling per head per week ?
-- Gracious God !
the present member for this county , Sir Thomas Lethbridge , once declared in the Honourable House , that the language of Sir Francis Burdett made `` his hair stand on end upon his head . ''
To have seen Lord Milton present such a petition as this , to have heard the officer of the Honourable House mumble out a description , a recital of the privations and cruel sufferings of my poor insulted fellow countrymen of Kirkeaton , without rising to say one word in their behalf  without calling down the vengeance of Heaven and Earth upon the heads of those who had by their acts reduced the country to such a state of wretchedness and woe  to have witnessed this , I say , although it might not have made my hair stand on end , it would , I am sure , have chilled every drop of blood in my body .
I can conscientiously say , that the mere reading in the Times newspaper the account of your cruel sufferings , my poor countrymen of Kirkeaton , has given me more pain than a years ' imprisonment would have done , if I could have known that you were enjoying a fair equivalent for your honest industry .
Talk of imprisonment indeed !
why it is a perfect Paradise compared with the wants and privations which you are doomed to endure .
The situation of a prisoner in this jail , let him be confined for any thing less than high treason or murder , is heaven upon earth compared to your lot .
Let us see  there is a prisoner who is appointed to wait upon me here , an old soldier , who has enjoyed rank in the army as an adjutant , but having a large family , and meeting with many reverses of fortune , he became reduced in his circumstances , and , in consequence of great persecutions , was at length driven to seek relief from the parish .
The sufferings and privations of his wife and children daily stared him in the face , without even the hope of relief  and , brooding over his unmerited persecutions and neglect , he was driven to drinking , c..
In a fit of temporary delirium he attempted to lay violent hands upon himself and wife , for which he is sentenced to be imprisoned here for twelve months .
His wife and family are supported by the parish  and I will now tell you what he receives for his week 's allowance , exclusive of clothes , lodging , fire , and washing , all found by the county .
He gets one pound and a half of good bread and one penny every day .
Ten pounds and a half of good white bread , and sevenpence to purchase potatoes and salt , or milk , per week .
Bread and pence , at the very lowest , two shillings and six-pence per week .
Now , if we reckon one shilling and six-pence , at the very lowest rate , for washing , lodging , clothing , and firing , which are all found in plenty and very good of the sort , he receives the value of four shillings per week .
The bread , c. is quite as much as , or rather more than , a moderate man can eat  and this person , who has seen a great deal of the world , seriously informs me that he enjoys here , happiness , ease , and comfort , compared to what he had to encounter out of prison  and as he professes to be very well pleased with waiting upon me , he dreads the approach of his release .
Every person in the jail has the same allowance , and if they choose to work , the Governor enables them to earn from threepence up to one shilling a-day over .


Now , my good friends of Kirkeaton , although I will not recommend you to do any thing to get sent to jail , yet , I will tell you what I would do if I were in your situation .
I would work hard from Monday to Saturday , and at the end of the week if I found that my wages were not sufficient to support myself , my wife , and children , in the common necessaries of life , I would , on the following Monday , try a fresh plan .
Instead of going to work , I would go to a neighbouring magistrate , Lord Milton , or Lord Fitzwilliam , for instance , if they were within reach , and I would tell him that I had left my wife and family chargeable to the parish , as I was unable to support them by my labour  but as I knew the leaving of my family as an incumbrance upon the parish was an offence against the laws , for which I was liable to be committed to prison , and as I did not wish to give the parish officers more trouble than was absolutely necessary , I had come to request his lordship to make out my mittimus , that I might go to jail as soon and as peaceably as possible .
I know what the corrupt knave of the Morning Post will say , `` Ha !
he is in a prison himself , and he wants now to get all his followers there also . ''
But suppose this were the case , which it is not , you would not , could not , be worse off than Lord Milton 's constituents are .
But I have said this a thousand times within the last five years  nay , I always said this , seeing that a poor labouring man is twice as well off in a jail as he is out of it , as to meat , drink , washing , and lodging .


Now , my friends and fellow countrymen , the writing the history of my own life , during my confinement in a prison , will not , I trust , be considered presumption in me  because I follow the example of Sir Walter Raleigh and many other patriotic and eminent men who have gone before me .
I am not much of a copyist , but I am not ashamed of being accused of endeavouring to imitate the brave and persecuted Napoleon , who is writing his Memoirs during his imprisonment on the barren rock of St. Helena .
Napoleon I esteem the most illustrious and eminent man of the present age , both as a profound statesman and a brave and matchless general .
Although he never appeared to evince so sincere a desire as could be wished , to promote the universal liberty of man to the extent that I contend , and have always contended for , yet , when I reflect upon the period in which his energetic mind was allowed to have its full scope of action , and when I recollect the powerful armies and fleets that he had to contend with , and the phalanx of tyrants who were at various times leagued together against him , I am disposed not to examine too nicely and with too critical an eye the means that he used to defend himself against their unceasing endeavours to destroy him , and to restore the old tyranny of the Bourbons .
He is , like myself , a prisoner , and imprisoned by the same power  only in his case they have not even the forms of law to justify them in his detention .
He is a prisoner upon a barren rock , but I have not the least hesitation in pronouncing him to have been , both in the cabinet and the field , as to talent and courage , unrivalled in the pages of modern or ancient history .
Neither the reformers nor the people of England had any share in sending him to St. Helena , nor ought they in fairness to participate in the disgrace of his detention .


In my humble judgment , the greatest fault he ever committed was , in having too good an opinion of the justice of the boroughmongers , and relying upon the liberality of their agents , so far as to be betrayed into that net which now surrounds him .
He always appeared to admire our courts of justice  but he knew nothing of our system of packing SPECIAL JURIES .


In the progress of this work I shall give a brief delineation of the political movements of the last twelve or fourteen years , or at least of those events that came within my knowledge , which I believe will include almost every thing relating to reform and the public characters who have taken any part in promoting or retarding that desirable object .
These public characters consist of George the Third down to Arthur Thistlewood inclusive , who are dead and gone  of those who are yet living from George the Fourth down to Mr. Cobler Preston and Mr. Billsticker Waddington .
The public events will more particularly include the History of the great Public Meetings held within the last twelve years in Wiltshire , Hampshire , Somersetshire , Middlesex , London , Westminster , Bristol , Bath , Spa-fields , Smithfield and Manchester , as well as those held at the Crown  Anchor and the Freemason 's and London Taverns  and likewise of the contested elections of Bristol , Westminster , London , Bridport , Ludgershal and Preston , at all of which I took an active part , and therefore am enabled to detail many curious and interesting anecdotes , facts , intrigues , plots , under-plots , cabals , c. which were never before presented to the public , and which circumstances , together with the secret springs and actions of those who worked in the back ground , which have hitherto been very imperfectly understood , shall be brought to light and faithfully recorded  taking due care not to betray any confidential communications .
I shall , also , as is usual , or at least as is very common , give a short sketch of my ancestors , not because I can show a long line of them up to the Conquest , ( nor because I esteem this a circumstance to boast of ) , but I shall state facts as they have been handed down from father to son by old family documents , regardless of the sneers of those who , at the same time and in the very same breath in which they affect to ridicule and despise all distinctions of this sort , fall themselves into a much greater error and indulge in a much less excusable folly  that of holding up to public admiration , esteem and confidence , their own offspring , and bedaubing them with the most fulsome adulation merely because they are their own progeny  although every other person except themselves can clearly perceive that they neither possess talent , intellect , public spirit , nor any other qualification calculated either to amuse or to instruct .
When I see a sensible man in other respects fall into an inconsistency of this sort , I am always reminded of the fable of the Eagle , the Owl , and her young ones .
The fact is , that I am more proud of my father than of any of my ancestors , because I know him to have been an excellent and an honest man , and one who by his industry and talent became a second founder of his family .
But as the object of my labours will be to give you a faithful history of my own life , it is of very little consequence either to you or me whether I ever had a grand father or not , except as far as relates to the coincidence of the events of the present time with those which occurred in the reigns of Charles the First and Second , and during the protectorship of Cromwell .
It may not be amiss to remind you that the brave and enlightened patriot , Prynne , was imprisoned at Dunster Castle in this county by the tyrant Charles the First .
Prynne had his nose slit , and his ears cut off , for speaking and writing his mind  but it must not be forgotten , that he lived to see the tyrant 's head struck off , and the infamous judge who passed the cruel sentence upon him , brought to a just and exemplary punishment .


In the confident hope that we shall live to see better days , our Country restored to prosperity , and its inhabitants to freedom and happiness ,


I remain ,


My friends and fellow-countrymen ,


Your faithful and sincere humble servant ,


H. HUNT .


MEMOIRS


OF HENRY HUNT .


I was born at Widdington Farm , in the parish of Upavon , in the county of Wilts , on the 6th day of Nov. 1773 , and am descended from as ancient and respectable a family as any in that county , my forefather having arrived in England with , and attended William the Conqueror , as a colonel in that army , with which he successfully invaded this country .
He became possessed of very considerable estates in the counties of Wilts and Somerset , which passed from father to son , down to the period of the civil wars in the reign of Charles the First , when , in consequence of the tyrannical government of that weak and wicked prince , resistance became a duty  and , at length , after having by the means of corrupt judges and packed juries , not only amerced and incarcerated , but caused to be executed many of the wisest , bravest , and most patriotic men of the age , the tyrant was ultimately brought to justice , and forfeited his head upon a scaffold , having first been compelled to sign the death warrant for his favourite , Lord Strafford [ 1 ] .
When the commonwealth was established , and Cromwell declared Lord Protector , my great great grandfather , colonel Thomas Hunt , who was in possession of those estates in Wiltshire , unfortunately took a decided and prominent part in favour of Charles the Second , who had fled , and was then remaining in France , waiting an opportunity for his restoration , and instigating those who were known to be his partisans in this country , to resist and overthrow the government and constitution of the country as then by law established .
Charles was in constant correspondence with my forefather colonel Hunt , who together with Mr. Grove and Mr. Penruddock , were all country gentlemen of large property and considerable influence , residing in the county of Wilts , and avowed royalists firmly attached to the family of Stuart .
And as it was well known by Cromwell that Charles had a number of powerful partisans in various parts of the kingdom , he took good care to have all their motions well watched , and as he kept a host of spies in his employ , they found it next to impossible to form or arrange any general plan of co-operation , without its coming to the knowledge of his agents .
Many well-digested schemes had been detected and frustrated , by these watchful well-paid minions of the Protector , but the royalists were not to be deterred from their purpose , although many of them received intimation from Oliver that he was aware of all their plans and intentions : he resting satisfied with this knowledge , and the conviction that he not only kept their restless spirits in check , but that he was at all times prepared to put them down with a high hand , in case they should ever dare to break out into open violence , or attempt to put their intentions into execution .
However , as Hunt , Grove , and Penruddock , with many other friends in the West , became very impatient  it was agreed to attempt a general communication by means of a meeting of the disaffected at [ 2 ] a great stag hunt , which was announced to be about to take place somewhere in the forest , in the neighbourhood of Wokingham , between Reading and Windsor .
To this stag hunt all the known partisans of the house of Stuart were invited  and when assembled there in great numbers from all parts of the kingdom , it was agreed among them , that each man should raise a force agreeable to his means , some horse and some foot , by a particular day , in order to attack the troops of Cromwell , who was a great deal too wary and cunning to suffer such an extraordinary assembly , under any circumstances , and particularly of such suspicious persons as those who attended the hunt were known to be , without sending some of his agents to join them , whereby he might become acquainted with whatever project they might have in contemplation .
They all departed after the hunt was over , having fixed to be ready and join in the field by a particular day .
Cromwell 's agents did their duty , and he was no sooner informed of the plan which was laid , than he made all due preparation for meeting any force that might be brought into the field against him by these powerful malcontents .
He not only did this , but he employed his agents to win over some of the most formidable of his adversaries , by bribes and promises .
Having succeeded in this , he wrote to all the remaining conspirators , and informed them separately , that he was perfectly aware of all their plots , and of their intention to bring a force into the field against him on a particular day  he assured them that he had made all necessary preparations , not only to meet , and to defeat them with an overwhelming force of well-disciplined troops , but that he had also made friends of some of those on whom the conspirators placed their greatest reliance .
He concluded by saying , that , as their project would be sure to end in discomfiture , ruin , and disgrace , he advised them to abandon their plan altogether  and in that case he promised each of the parties his pardon , and that it should be taken no further notice of .
This had the desired effect with most of the numerous partisans of Charles , who had pledged themselves to take the field  for when they found that all their plans had come to the knowledge of Cromwell , they anticipated that he would be prepared to meet them with such a force as it would not be prudent in them to encounter , and , as prudence is the better part of valour , they at once abandoned their intended insurrection , and trusted to the clemency of him whom they had resolved to hurl from the eminence which they professed to say he had usurped .
Not so with the three Wiltshire royalists  they also had received the circular intimation from Cromwell , but they scorned to be worse than their words , they took no notice of his proffered pardon , they each raised a troop of horse as they had promised , and having armed and accoutred their men by the time appointed , they marched into Salisbury , where Cromwell 's judges were then holding the assizes , and without any further ceremony struck the first blow , by consigning the Lord Protector 's judges to prison , having liberated the prisoners they were about to try .


The next day they marched into Hampshire towards the appointed rendezvous , as had been previously agreed upon  but when they arrived there , instead of meeting , as they expected , any of their friends who were parties at the stag hunt , they found Cromwell 's army who had intimation of their movements , already there in considerable force , ready to overwhelm them .
However , Cromwell , as usual , endeavoured to carry his point by policy  in the first instance , rather than sacrifice any lives in such an unequal conflict , he sent a flag of truce , and promised if they would lay down their arms they should be pardoned , and all officers and men might return to their homes without any molestation .
A consultation and council of war was held , when Grove , Hunt , and Penruddock came to a determination to die sword in hand rather than trust to the clemency of him , whom they deemed an usurper , and they returned an answer accordingly .
In the meantime , Oliver had sent some of his agents amongst the men , to whom they pointed out the desperate situation in which their commanders had placed them , and urged them at once to accept the offer of the Protector and return to their homes  and when Grove , Hunt , and Penruddock ordered their men to prepare for the attack , they one and all refused , and immediately lay down their arms , upon which they were instantly surrounded , and made prisoners  and instead of Cromwell keeping his word with these poor fellows , he ordered every common man to be instantly hung upon the boughs of trees and elsewhere , and the officers to be committed to three separate jails in the West of England upon a charge of high treason , for making war against the troops of the Commonwealth , in order to depose the Protector , and with an intent to alter the government and constitution of the country , as by the then law established .
Upon which charge they were tried , found guilty , and sentenced by the very judges whom they had before imprisoned at Salisbury , to be hanged , drawn , and quartered , but upon petition their sentence was mitigated by Cromwell to that of being beheaded .
Colonel Hunt was sent back after trial to be executed at this very jail , and possibly might have been confined , if not in the same room , upon the very same spot wherein his descendant is now writing the account of the transaction , which has descended by tradition and written documents to him as the heir of the family , and which written documents in proof thereof , are now in his possession .
However , be that as it may , it is therein recorded that Hunt 's two sisters , Elizabeth and Margery , came to visit him the night previous to his execution , which was ordered to take place at day-break the next morning .
The regulations of the jail not being so strictly performed as they are now , his sister Margery slept in his bed all night , while the Colonel , who had dressed himself in her clothes , walked out of the prison unperceived with his sister Elizabeth and escaped  but , as it is recorded by himself , being a stranger in the neighbourhood , and fearful of keeping in the high-way , he had lost himself in the night and had wandered about , so that when day-light arrived he had not got so far from the jail but that he heard the bell toll for his execution .
At this awful period he met a collier carrying a bag of coals upon his horse , and having ascertained by some conversation that he had with him , that he was friendly to the cause of the Stuarts and hostile to the Protector , he was induced to discover himself , and to place his person and his life in his power , of which he had no reason to repent , as the man proved faithful , and assisted him to escape to France , where he remained with the second Charles , and returned in company with him at the time of the restoration .


As the circumstances attending his escape are in my opinion very interesting , I shall give them as they have been handed down to me , although they may be by some considered as tedious in the detail  yet as they are circumstances very imperfectly recorded , only in the early editions of Lord Clarendon 's History of the Rebellion , and as they relate to events somewhat similar to the present times , wherein a prominent part was taken by one of my forefathers , I trust that they will not be esteemed superfluous , as making a component part of my memoirs , in reference to the political part taken by one of my family at this important epoch of the English history .
The collier took him up behind on his horse , dressed as he was in female attire , and having struck across the country by some private roads , he arrived at his habitation , a lone cottage situated on the side of a large common , where he remained concealed , anxiously awaiting the approach of night , and dreading [ 3 ] every moment the appearance of the officers of justice in pursuit of their victim .
In the mean time the collier had procured two muskets and a blunderbuss , which he had got loaded , determined to stand by the Colonel , who , if driven to extremities , was resolved to sell his life as dearly as possible , but not to be taken again alive .
But , to return to the jail  when the officers of death arrived to unbolt the door of the intended victim , what must have been their surprise and indignation to have found in his bed a woman , a brave and patriotic female , who gloried in having saved the life of a high spirited and beloved brother !
With what delight have we read of the conduct of Madame Lavalette , who saved her husband from an untimely death by similar means , who , by her virtuous devotion , rescued the victim marked out for the treacherous revenge of a weak , wicked , and pusillanimous prince  with what pleasure has every humane and patriotic bosom been roused into admiration , at the noble , generous , and successful exertions of Sir R. Wilson and his friends , to assist in snatching the life of that devoted victim , from the bloody hand of the executioner !
But many brave men have voluntarily sacrificed themselves to save the life of a friend  in the pages of history , we find that many an excellent wife has done the same to save a beloved husband  but where shall we find a similar instance of disinterested devotion in a sister ?
-- To be the descendant of such a woman -- to bear the same name and belong to her family , is in itself something that I am proud to boast of .
With what delight have I ( while yet a boy ) listened to this recital , while my father dwelt on it with rapture  his eye glistening with a dignified pride as he recounted the tale of this heroine of the family !
How often have I been sent up stairs to unlock the old oak chest , and to bring down the musty records of these eventful days , that they might be unrolled either to refresh my father 's memory , or to vouch for particular acts and circumstances !
How many times , subsequently , has it been my lot to turn to this or that particular event , and while he enjoyed his pipe , how often did I at his command read the minute detail as I found it written , upon the old musty parchments and papers !
However , to proceed , Colonel Desbrow , who then had the command of Oliver 's troops at this place , was instantly informed of the flight of the prisoner  he ordered Margery to appear before him , which she did habited in her brother 's clothes , and he threatened to have her executed instantly , without judge or jury , in her brother 's stead , if she did not immediately inform him of the whole plot , and assist in the re-capture of her brother .
She calmly replied , that she had not the least objection to comply with his demand as far as she knew of the plot .
She confessed that she went into the prison to visit her brother with the intention to effect his escape if possible  that neither her brother , nor even her sister , had the slightest knowledge of her intentions till she proposed it to him in the prison , that there she found him resigned to his fate , and it was with the greatest difficulty that she at last prevailed upon him to put it into practice  that all she knew of him was , that he had left the room with her sister Elizabeth , but which way or where he was gone she knew nothing  then , with great and dignified firmness , she added , even if she had known any thing of his route , Colonel Desbrow must be aware , that as she had the courage and goodness to plan and effect his escape , no threats , not even the torture , should induce her to do any thing that might place him in their power again .
Elizabeth was instantly taken into custody and examined also , but she knew nothing more than her sister .
They were both consigned to the dungeon that he had quitted , and the scaffold , although it remained fixed for some days , it mourned for the loss of its victim , and the gaping multitude daily stared in vain for the consummation of the bloody sacrifice .
Col. Desbrow sent off dispatches to the Government , raised a Hue and Cry to search every house they came to , and dispatched messengers to all the out-ports , so that neither pains , expense , nor trouble were spared to retake the fugitive .
In the mean time the sentence of Grove and Penruddock was put in execution .
They were both beheaded on the same morning , one at Exeter , and the other at some other jail .
It is a very remarkable coincidence of circumstances , that at the time myself , the lineal heir and descendant of Colonel Hunt , am confined in this jail by the state policy of the day , Colonel Desbrow , the lineal descendant of the very Colonel Desbrow , who then had the command of this district as a soldier and servant of Cromwell , is at this very time an officer in the service of the present reigning family , and , I believe , an attendant about the person of the Sovereign .
Colonel Hunt remained concealed in the cottage of his protector , but when night came they were too agitated to retire to rest  they therefore barricadoed the door of their little fortress as well as they could , and , having put out the lights , took their station at the bed-room window , each with a loaded firelock , and all the arms and ammunition they could muster for re-loading , preparatory to the best and most determined defence in case of necessity .
In this they were ably and resolutely assisted by the wife of the collier , both of whom are recorded to have evinced the most heroic courage , coolness , and presence of mind upon this , to them , desperate and trying occasion , which qualities were soon put to the test , by the sudden and boisterous arrival of the Hue c.y , consisting of 8 or 10 mounted troops , accompanied by an officer belonging to the Sheriff .
As that which followed relating to this rencontre is described minutely , and in the most simple manner , I will give it verbatim , as I find it recorded in the family document , from which I have taken the whole narrative .
Colonel Hunt and the Collier were standing at the window , each with a loaded musket  the collier 's wife stood behind , with a loaded blunderbuss in one hand , and with the other she was to supply the powder and slugs , for they had no ball , for reloading .
They were in this order when the commander of the gang loudly halloed and demanded admittance .
This , as was agreed upon by the party within , was repeated three times before any answer was given , or any movement made from within .
At length , the Collier opened the casement of the thatched cottage , and , rubbing his eyes as if he had just awoke out of his first sleep , he exclaimed , in the broad Somersetshire dialect , `` What 's thow want makin such a naise there ? ''
The reply was , `` We want admittance : we are the Hue and Cry , come to search every house for a prisoner that has escaped from Ilchester jail in woman 's clothes . ''
At which the Collier exclaimed , `` Ha , ha , ha !
what a pack of fools , to come to look for a man in woman 's clothes at this time o ' the night . ''
The officer , with a stern voice , demanded immediate admittance , saying , that they had a warrant , signed by Colonel Desbrow , for searching every house  and that , unless he came down and opened the door , they would force their way in immediately  upon which the Collier turned round and said , as if speaking to his wife , `` Come , dame , you must get up and strike a light , and we will let the gentlemen in presently . ''
There was then some pretended delay in finding the tinder-box , and at length the Collier began striking the steel with the flint , and , after bestowing a few curses on the dampness of the tinder , intentionally struck down the tinderbox , tinder and all , upon which he said , `` There , now , they must come in and search in the dark . ''
All this time they were actually preparing to fire upon the Hue and Cry , and just as they had taken aim , and were upon the point of drawing their triggers , the Captain of the gang gave the Collier two or three heavy curses , and said to his men , `` Come , let us be off to some more likely place : there is nobody here but that stupid fellow , that does not appear to know his right hand from his left . ''
They therefore galloped off to search the next house , leaving to Colonel Hunt and his faithful friends in adversity , the uninterrupted possession of his safe and secure retreat  where he remained concealed , till , in the disguise of some of the Collier 's clothes , he contrived , soon afterwards , to escape to France , accompanied by his friend .
He was received by Charles with open arms , with every demonstration of gratitude , and professions of future reward , in case he should succeed in re-establishing himself upon the throne of England .
In the meanwhile , Cromwell , enraged at the escape of one , who had discovered such intrepid and persevering hostility to his power , confiscated the whole of his estates , kept his sisters , Elizabeth and Margery , close prisoners in this jail , and frequently threatened to execute the latter , unless Hunt would return from France , and surrender himself to his fate .
This reaching the ears of Colonel Hunt in France , and fearing for the safety of such excellent sisters , he at length resolved to return and rescue them from their unpleasant and precarious situation , by resigning himself into the hands of Cromwell .
-- Charles remonstrated in vain , as Hunt appeared resolute in his determination .
The Prince , therefore , put him under arrest , and forcibly detained him in custody to prevent him from surrendering himself .
His two sisters were confined two years .
When they were set at liberty , Charles released him from his confinement  he remained in constant attendance about his person , returned with him in the same vessel , and assisted in his restoration to the throne , which had been withheld from him during the life of Cromwell .


Colonel Hunt , as well as all his friends , expected the immediate restoration of his estates , which had been confiscated .
In fact no one could have expected less than this act of justice at least , in return for his long , zealous and faithful services .
But , on the contrary , the secret advisers of the grateful prince recommended to him by all means to endeavour to conciliate his enemies , and to let his friends shift for themselves , which advice he followed to the letter in this instance .
As Colonel Hunt 's estates had fallen into powerful hands , Charles absolutely refused to take any measures for their restoration .
Thus was this faithful partisan of royalty rewarded for all his services , by one of the basest acts of ingratitude that ever disgraced the character even of a prince .
How truly verified was the prophetic and sublime admonition of Scripture , `` Put not your trust in princes . ''
However , Colonel Hunt was offered the Chancellorship of the Duchy of Lancaster for life , which offer he indignantly refused , and in disgust retired into the country , where he married and passed the remainder of his life in tranquillity , accompanied by his sisters , upon a small estate in the parish of Enford in the county of Wilts , which had been overlooked by the agents of Cromwell .
Here , with the property he had with his lady , and the wreck of his fortune , he sustained the character of a gentleman to a good old age , leaving an only son , to whom Queen Anne gave the colonelcy of a regiment of foot .
This was the last of my family who was ever in the employment of the government , or who ever received one shilling of the public money in any capacity whatever .


This little estate descended to my grandfather , who married Miss Biggs of Stockton , and , at his death , it came , considerably encumbered , to my father , in the year 1774 , the year after I was born .
Finding , during the life time of his father , that this was a very poor property to live upon as a gentleman , he turned his mind to business , and to the improvement of his fortune .
He married at the age of forty-one to Miss Powell who was only nineteen , the eldest daughter of a respectable farmer of Week near Devizes , and went to live at Widdington , in the parish of Upavon , a lone farm situated upon Salisbury Plain , not within one mile of any other house whatever .
The 6th day of November , 1773 , gave birth to the author of these memoirs , and as I was the first born , my father having a great deal of the old family pride about him , the event was commemorated in a very memorable and extraordinary manner .
It was the custom of the country to celebrate the birth of a child by inviting the friends and neighbours to partake of a sugar-toast feast , which consisted of toast well baked , sliced in layers , in a large bowl , interspersed with sugar and nutmeg , well soaked in boiling ale , or what was called in that country , good old October .
My father as soon as he was about to marry , anticipating the natural result , prepared and provided two hogsheads of real stingo for the occasion , it being brewed exactly fifteen bushels to the hogshead , which he liberally determined should be devoted to celebrate the happy event , which was literally carried into effect .
I have very often heard those who were present , and who participated in the good cheer and rejoicing , mention these circumstances .
It was usual , in that part of the country , upon these occasions , to have a day fixed and set apart for the feast , when all the neighbours were invited to partake and drink to the health of the good lady in the straw , and long life to the little stranger .
But upon this occasion my father set no bounds to his joy , and determined to keep it up , which he did , till the whole to the last hoop of the stingo was gone .
I have heard the nurse say that she toasted bread from morning till night for a fortnight , and that in the whole there could not have been less bread used than what was made from two bags of flour .
The 6th of November was annually celebrated as long as my father lived , by a dinner which he gave to his neighbours and friends , and one thing was never forgotten , which was a bumper toast to the memory of Colonel Thomas and Miss Margery Hunt  which generally concluded by the production of the sword , which Charles the second took from his side and presented to the Colonel on his arrival in France , which my father with great pride exhibited to his friends , frequently accompanied by some part of the foregoing narrative .


My mother was of a weak and nervous constitution , and I inherited in some degree , when a child , her complaint , for I was very delicate , although remarkable for activity and high spirits .
I remember about a month before I first went to school , which was at the early age of only five years and a half , I rode to Magdalen-hill fair near Winchester , a distance of thirty-one miles , and back again the same day , with my father .
To ride sixty-two miles in one day for a boy not five years and a half old , which I did without any apparent fatigue , was considered rather an extraordinary omen of my future capability for active exertion .
I was sent to a boarding-school at Tilshead in Wiltshire , at five and a half years of age , and , my father told me at my departure , `` that I was going to begin a little world for myself . ''
Before I mounted my poney he seriously gave me his blessing and his parting advice , which was delivered in a very emphatic manner , my mother anxiously listening , while a tear glistened in her eye .
`` Go , '' said he , `` my dear , and may heaven bless and direct all your actions , so that you may grow up to be an honest , a brave , and a good man  but remember well what I now say : you must fight your own battles amongst your schoolfellows as well as you can .
If I ever hear that you are quarrelsome I shall detest you , but if I find that you are a coward I will disown and disinherit you . ''
This was the language of one of the best of fathers to his son , a child of five years and a half old , and it speaks volumes as to the character of the man and the parent .
This school , which was situated in a healthy village upon Salisbury Plain , consisted of a master and an usher , who had the care and instruction of sixty-three boys .
The scholars were better fed than taught  but as a healthy situation was more looked to than their education , by the parents of those children who were sent there , the discipline was calculated to give general satisfaction .
We learned to read ( the Bible ) , to write , and cast accounts , and at the end of one year I was taken from this school .


Beyond the common-place events incident to an early initiation into the tricks and frolics of a school-boy , there occurred , during my stay at this place , nothing worthy of being introduced here  with the exception , however , of one very important circumstance , relative to the strict discipline maintained by my father , in all cases where there was the slightest deviation from truth .
A violation of truth was always sure to be punished by him with the greatest severity .
As the circumstance to which I allude made a strong and lasting impression upon my mind , and in a great measure laid the foundation for my general rule of action ever since , I shall faithfully record it .


During the year that I was at Tilshead I came home for the Midsummer holidays .
On the last Thursday , before I returned , I accompanied my father to Devizes market , and while he was taking his dinner and selling his corn I was directed to go to Week , about half a mile distant , to dine with and see my grandfather .
I set off to walk thither , but on my road there was a number of persons collected on the green , seeing some soldiers fire at a target -- The firing was kept up in rapid succession .
I felt alarmed and was fearful of passing them  I therefore , returned into the town , and having passed the time away in play with some boys that I met , I returned to my father at the inn and answered the questions that he put to me , relative to my grandfather , so as to make him believe that I had been there as he desired me , being ashamed to confess the truth , that I was afraid to pass the soldiers .
On the following Monday , I went to school again , without thinking any more of the falsehood that I had been guilty of  however , about six o'clock in the afternoon of the next Friday , I was surprised and delighted to see my father ride up to the door of the school-yard .
I ran to meet him , but he received me rather coolly , which I scarcely perceived  but he asked to see Mr. Cooper , my master , who came out and invited him to get off his horse , which he declined , and said that I might ride a little way with him on his road home , if my master had no objection , and I could walk back  which was readily assented to -- All this was done with a dignified calmness which I did not comprehend .
However , as I rode along , seated before him  he began to question me as to the truth of some transactions , that had passed during the holidays , and at length came to the visit to my grandfather .
The whole fabrication flashed across my mind at once , and the mighty secret of all his apparent solemnity had such an effect upon my nerves that I should , I am sure , have fallen from the horse if he had not held me on .


At length , after I had confessed the whole truth , which he did not appear to believe , he broke out into the following exclamation , `` you have been guilty of an abominable falsehood , and you have now , as is always the case , told me another artful lie , in order to screen yourself from the punishment which you deserve , and to give you which I have ridden over here eight miles on purpose .
Your conduct has almost broken your afflicted mother 's heart , and has rendered me completely miserable .
I would rather follow you to the grave than live to see you bearing the character of a liar , and I will now nearly half kill you for your infamous behaviour . ''
Upon which he lifted me off by the side of the road , on the down , no person being within hearing or sight , and having alighted , and tied his horse to a bush , all remonstrance and intreaties on my part proved in vain : he made me strip off my coat , and , with a smart stick , he gave me a most severe flogging .
As he helped me on with my coat , and sent me back to school , I saw the big tear trickle down his noble , manly cheek  a convincing proof to me , even at that time , that he suffered much more in performing such a painful duty to save a child from disgrace , than I did in receiving such a severe , though well-merited , chastisement .
Although I thought the punishment very harsh at the time , yet I felt conscious that I deserved it  and he performed the heart-rending task in such a manner as convinced me of its justice , and the more I reflected upon it the more I was satisfied that it arose from the greatest parental affection .
It made the most lasting impression upon my mind , and stamped my determination , at all hazards , to speak the truth in future .
The kindness of my father and mother was such , that they never mentioned the subject afterwards , till I was grown up to manhood , and thanked him for it .
It was a severe but excellent lesson for me , and I have always found that as honesty is the best policy , so is truth in the end always sure to prevail .
Although I know I am sent here for speaking boldly and publicly the truth , and for always under every circumstance acting up to its lovely and substantial precepts  yet I never felt more grateful than I do at this moment , to my excellent and noble-minded father , for inculcating the principle of always speaking the truth , notwithstanding that I am suffering for practising it .
He used to say nothing could be more dangerous than the doctrine so frequently promulgated , `` that the truth should not be spoken at all times  '' thus leaving it to be inferred that falsehood was sometimes justifiable .
Although , he added , there are times when it may be prudent for a man not to speak at all , yet when he does speak , nothing but a time-serving coward would hesitate to speak boldly the truth .
This was the language of that man to whom I owe my existence , and from whom I imbibed , at a very early age , those principles of veracity , justice , humanity , and public spirit , the free exercise of which , although it consigned his forefather as well as his descendant to the same prison  yet , such is the consoling and heart-cheering effect of following the dictates of an honest mind , that it not only tranquillizes the passions , and checks their overflowing the due bounds of discretion , while under the influence of prosperity , but also conveys to the persecuted captive that inward satisfaction , which makes reflection , even in a prison , a source of delight , and teaches him to despise that outward shew of mirth and affected gaiety which accompany the selfish votaries of pleasure , who sacrifice every honest independent principle at the shrine of fashion , till the man is degraded to a mere time-serving pander in the Temple of Folly .


When I left this school , Mr. Cooper , the master , came round during the holidays , as was customary , to collect his bills .
My father , having settled the amount and invited him to dine , informed him of his intention to remove me to Hursley , in Hampshire  which he did at the recommendation of Sir Thomas Heathcot , whom he had met at Mr. Wyndham 's , at Dinton , of whom my father rented Widdington Farm .
Mr. Cooper , who was one of the best hearted and worthy men that perhaps ever lived , and who possessed as little of the pedantry and stiffness of a schoolmaster , as any man who had spent his life in such an occupation , replied , that he was very sorry to part with me , as he had no doubt I should some day make as clever , and he hoped as good , a man as my father .
The only fault in me of which he had to complain was , that I was too volatile , and inattentive to my books  but he added , that he could already discover sufficient capacity to enable me , with a little steadiness , to become a very good scholar .
Then , addressing himself particularly to my mother , he said , that he was bound in justice to declare , that he had not a more tractable or better-disposed boy in his school  that I was a generous and warm-hearted lad , and that my school-fellows would be sorry to hear that I was going to leave them .
He spent the day with my father and mother , and in the most benignant and good-humoured manner , recounted some of the idle boyish tricks and frolicks that he had detected me in  assuring them , at the same time , that I had been punished only once during my stay with him , and that was for a venial offence , which was committed out of school hours .


Young as I was , being under seven years of age , when I left this school , I , nevertheless , formed connections and attachments , which have existed to this hour with unabated sincerity and uninterrupted friendship .
And , as a gratifying proof of this fact , one of my then school fellows , Mr. Thomas Cousens , of Heytesbury , with whom I have ever since that period been on the most friendly footing , was the very first person who came to visit me after my arrival at this prison .
He no sooner heard of my sentence than he mounted his horse , and before I had scarcely had time to look round my new habitation , the name of my friend Cousens was announced , who had ridden upwards of thirty miles  and , in the true spirit of disinterested genuine friendship , proffered not only his hand but his heart , to serve me in any way that lay in his power .
I have indeed received innumerable proofs of kindness and sympathy from various quarters of the empire , since my arrival here  but the recollection of this prompt and efficient testimony of the sincerity of his friendship , will only be forgotten by me in the grave .


Upon the death of my grandfather , at this period , my father went to reside at Littlecot Farm , in the parish of Enford  but he still occupied Widdington Farm .
Having spent two or three days , by invitation , with his landlord , Mr. Wyndham , of Dinton , where he met Sir Thomas Heathcot , of Hursley Park , who was the brother of Mrs. Wyndham , he was prevailed upon , by the joint intercession of Sir Thomas and Mr. as well as Mrs. Wyndham , to send me to be educated at Hursley , where Sir Thomas was patronising in a school a very worthy man , of the name of Alner , the brother of Mr. Alner , of Salisbury , who for so many years had the conducting and arranging the materials which composed the Western Almanack .
Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham had also promised to send their three eldest sons at the same time to the same school , and one or two sons of Mr. Wyndham , of Salisbury , were also going there  and the worthy baronet , who never did a kind action by halves , promised my father , who was a great favourite with him , that he would take the same care of me , and shew me the same attention that he did to his nephews  which promise he did not forget to perform during my stay at Hursley School , which was about two years and a half .


Mr. Alner was a remarkably good penman and accountant , as well as a great proficient in teaching the use of the globes .
Here I became an adept in writing , arithmetic , and geography , which were the principal things to be learned at that school .
During my stay there , I was in the frequent habit of spending the Sunday with the young Wyndham 's at Hursley Park  and , as often as my father came to see me , the old baronet insisted upon his making the Lodge his home .
Kindness , generosity , and hospitality , welcomed every visitor to Hursley Lodge , during the life of Sir Thomas  in fact , his philanthropy was such , that it not only extended to his own tenants , but to his brother-in-law 's tenants , and to the whole of the surrounding neighbourhood .
Perhaps there never were two country gentlemen , who did greater credit to the character of genuine old English hospitality , than the then owners of Hursley Lodge , in Hampshire , and Dinton House , in Wiltshire .
My old school-fellow , the present proprietor of Dinton , still keeps up the character of an hospitable English country gentleman  but , alas !
Hursley Lodge , since the death of old Sir Thomas -- but , as I can not say any thing favourable , either from my own knowledge , or from the report of others , I will content myself with saying nothing .


I left this school at the age of ten years .
During the holidays I had frequent means of seeing , and now first began to reflect , and make my observations upon , the situation of the labouring poor of the parish of Enford  for my mother devoted a very great portion of her time to relieving the wants of those who , either through illness or accident , stood in need of assistance  and although she was herself in a very weakly state of health , yet neither inclemency of the weather , nor the distance , ever deterred her from going in person to visit , to comfort , and to assist , those of her fellow-creatures who were in distress .
It was quite enough for her to know , that any of her poor neighbours were in want , to command her immediate aid .
How often , when she was about to relieve some one whom they supposed to be an unworthy object , who had brought want on his own head by misconduct or crime , have I heard even my father , as well as other friends , endeavour in vain to persuade her , that her indiscriminate charity did almost as much harm as good .
Her answer always was , having first quoted some amiable Christian precept , `` would you leave them to starve , and thus drive them to despair ?
They are in want of bread  and , after I have relieved them from their present distress , I shall have some claim to their attention  and by setting them a good Christian example , I shall be the better enabled to enforce the mild and wholesome doctrines of religion .
Surely , I shall have a much better chance of reforming and reclaiming them by the practice of kindness , than I should have by treating them with neglect , or casting on them the chilling and forbidding look of harshness . ''
And here let me observe , that if there ever was a human being who acted up to the spirit and letter of Christianity , both in profession and practice , I believe my excellent departed mother to have been that mortal .
Her greatest pleasure consisted in doing good  and to pour the healing balm of comfort into the wounded and afflicted breast , was to her the very essence of delight .
Surrounded by every comfort herself , her very existence appeared to depend upon her power to make others participate in those comforts : no living creature in distress was ever turned away from her door without being relieved .
I could fill a volume in her praise , without being able to do her common justice .


I was now become of sufficient age , to be at once a companion and an assistant in these charitable peregrinations .
There was not a threshold in the village but she had crossed at one time or another , in order to render some act of kindness or attention  and , as she passed along , the grateful inhabitants of every cottage came forth to bestow upon her their spontaneous and fervent blessings , whilst those who were rolling in wealth , and puffed up with pride , were suffered to pass unheeded by .
Here it was that my little heart first began to pant for the power to do good  and I longed to receive , and to deserve such blessings , as were lavished with grateful lips upon my angelic mother by the poor of all denominations .
I now began to pity their wants and sufferings , and to participate and rejoice in their happiness .
When I expressed a desire for riches , to enable me to purchase such blessings as were bestowed upon her , how often did my beloved mother reprove me in the kindest manner , and endeavour to impress upon my young mind this valuable truth , that wealth did not always afford the best means of doing good .
She used to say , that those who sincerely wished to do an act of charity , seldom wanted the means of doing something to relieve the wants , and soothe the afflictions , of those who were pining in wretchedness and want  for , said she , even a kind consoling word , combined with a very little personal attention , is frequently esteemed more valuable , and even proved to be more useful , than money , to those whose spirits as well as bodies are pressed down to the earth by unforeseen and frequently unmerited misfortune .
These examples opened to my susceptible mind a new field for reflection , and the scenes of misery [ 4 ] I witnessed , although at that period they were not numerous , and required to be sought for to be known , yet they created a sympathy in my young breast , which I flatter myself I have ever cherished , and from that period I may date the origin of my philanthropy .
My mother saw the impression which it had made upon the mind of her son , and having kindled the sacred fire of benevolence , she took good care to fan the flame , by giving me the means of exercising those charitable feelings , which she had by her example created .
Added to these , as well as all the other moral virtues , this excellent woman practised the most pious and scrupulous attention to her religious duties .
Her motto was


`` Teach me to feel another 's woe , To hide the fault I see  That mercy I to others shew , That mercy shew to me . ''


While my mother was instilling into my mind , and teaching me to practice , the mild and lowly principles of Christianity , my father never failed to hold up for my admiration and example , the exploits of the noble , generous , brave , and renowned heroes of antiquity .
Pope was his favourite author  and of all Pope 's works , his Universal Prayer , and his Translation of Homer , were the theme of his never-ceasing and unqualified panegyric .
The former he never failed to repeat aloud , night and morning , in the most fervent and impassioned manner .
He made me learn it , and recommended me to follow his example , by making it the daily expression of my praise and adoration of the Allwise and Supreme Disposer of events .
He could repeat every line of the Iliad  and , what was more remarkable , he could begin at any one line and proceed with the greatest fluency and correctness , even to the end of any chapter or book .
In short , he endeavoured to instil into my breast the patriotic principle of disinterested love of country .
Although he was himself a man of business and of the world , he never failed to hold up for my example , those heroes who had lived and died alone for their country .
Hector was his favourite warrior , and he appeared to have obtained the dearest wish of his heart when , coming into my room by accident one day , he found me reading aloud , and repeating the speech of Hector to Andromache .
I was taken by surprise , and laid down the book  but he entreated me to continue the subject , and to oblige him I began the dialogue again , and he repeated the part of Andromache .
Although heretofore a very shy boy , I now became warm , and at length impassioned  he encouraged me , and before we had concluded I almost fancied myself a hero .
He was delighted  he took me in his arms , he embraced and caressed me  he saw that I had caught the `` electric spark  '' he wept over me with rapture , and he exclaimed aloud , in a sort of frantic extacy , `` The name of HUNT will again be recorded in the page of history , and I feel that you , my dear boy , are destined to restore the fame of our family  and I hope to live to see you prove yourself worthy of your ancestors . ''


This brought into the room my mother , who was struck with astonishment at the unusual manner of my father .
He repeated to her that be had , he thought , discovered in me such seeds as would grow up and produce fruit of future fame .
She smiled in the most benignant manner , and said , he must trust to time to realize such hopes  but at all events she could answer for one thing , which was , that the seeds of humanity and philanthropy were implanted in my breast  for she had hailed , with great satisfaction , the proof that I could feel for others , and that it was a pleasure to me to relieve the wants and sufferings of my fellow creatures  and therefore , she fondly hoped , that I should make a good man and a good Christian  and addressing herself to my father , she added , `` we will , my dear , trust to chance whether he ever makes a hero or not . ''
I mention these particular incidents , to shew what pains were taken by my excellent , noble-minded father , and my amiable , tender-hearted , and affectionate mother , to instil into my young mind those precepts which each conceived would be most conducive to my future happiness .
My fathers great object appeared to be , to fire the young aspiring hope with deeds of honour , courage , and patriotism .
My mother 's more gentle nature induced her to cultivate the genial soil with the milder virtues , making Christian piety and charity the foundation of all her present and future hopes .
There never lived a child that had more pains and care bestowed upon him , by his parents , than I had .
My father inherited and practised the noblest qualities  he was an intelligent , industrious , strictly honest , honourable , high-spirited Englishman  the motto , taken from his favourite author , was constantly upon his lips , `` An honest man is the noblest work of God . ''
My mother may be correctly described in one short sentence , to have been a gentle , virtuous , amiable , charitable , and truly pious Christian .


Having now left the school at Hursley , where I had learned all that could be learned there , my father received from Mr. Alner , the worthy master , very similar assurances to those he had previously received from Mr. Cooper : that I was a high-spirited , generous , volatile lad , capable of learning any thing that I chose to apply myself to  but that I was rather more fond of excelling in feats of activity , than of a strict adherence to my studies .


I was now sent to the grammar school at Andover , under the care of the Rev. Thomas Griffith , where I was to enter upon the study of the classics .
My father took me on a Saturday , that being a market-day at Andover  and having introduced me to Mr. and Mrs. Griffith , he did not forget to give me the character he had received from the masters of the two schools which I had previously left  adding his own testimony , in confirmation of my being of a kind , generous , and open disposition .
Mrs. Griffith received us very politely  and , as she had a very prepossessing manner , I felt pleased with the prospect before me , although I thought I saw something that I did not much like in the countenance of Mr. Griffith , who was a muscular , swarthy , dark-looking person , with rather a forbidding air .
My father , having given me his blessing , took his leave , and consigned me to my new master , who led me into the school  and , as it was then past eleven o'clock , he gave me an Enfield 's Speaker , and desired me to look it over , as he should not place me in any class until Monday .
The school hours were up at twelve o'clock , Saturday afternoon being always a holiday , and consequently I did not consider that I had any task to learn on that day .
I was therefore more employed in thinking of my mother at home , and in looking round the school , surveying my new companions , than I was with the volume .
At length I caught my master 's eye , and as he seemed to be smiling , as I thought at me , I returned it , as an earnest of my sense of his kindness .
But alas !
as it will appear , I mistook my man .
He beckoned to me , and called me up to his desk , at the other end of the school .
I obeyed  `` Pray , Sir , '' said he , `` what were you laughing at ? ''
I found I was deceived , and I stood silent , unable to answer the interrogatory  upon which he gave me a severe box under the ear , which made me reel again , and nearly knocked me down .
He then sternly said , `` Go , Sir , to your seat , and mind your business , and in future take care how you let me catch you laughing again . ''
This at once impressed upon my mind the ferocity and cowardice of his nature  for I had not been in the school at the time more than ten minutes .
It was such an act of injustice , cruelty , and tyranny , and so very different from any thing that I had ever before experienced , that I was almost stupified with indignation  but , recovering myself a little , I was upon the point of rushing out of the school , and flying to my father , who must have been yet at the inn in the town .
I looked towards the door  it stood enticingly open , and if my pride had not come to my assistance , I should most assuredly have indulged the first impulse of my resentment .
From that moment to this , however , I have never thought of the circumstance , without regretting that I did not follow that impulse .
However , I sat down  but , from that time , I never failed to consider him as an unjust and cruel petty tyrant  nor did I ever , for one moment afterward , look up to him even with common respect .


I continued at this place for nearly two years and a half , during which time , in common with many of my school-fellows , I had to endure the cruel , unnecessary , and wanton punishments , indiscriminately inflicted by this modern Dionysius .
I soon became hardened , and set all controul at defiance  and , instead of my pride being hurt , or being ashamed of punishment , it became a boast and a pride to brave it , and to bear it with indifference and contempt .
This monster in human form would come into the school and flog half a dozen boys before he sat down , under some pretence or other  either that he had heard some noise in their bedroom the night before , or that they had not washed their hands clean  nay , he sometimes flogged a boy without ever telling him what it was for  and frequently , while his hand was in , he would , gnashing his large white teeth , which looked white from the same cause that a chimney-sweeper 's teeth look so , merely because they were such a great contrast to his black fiend-like visage , he would dart his eye round the different classes to see which boy he should fix upon as his next victim .
During these disgusting periods , with the exception of two or three favourites , every one 's heart palpitated within his agitated breast .
When this vindictive mania was upon him , myself and three or four other boys were almost certain to come in for a share .
In fact , when his eye came to my class , I would almost involuntarily lay down my book , and meet his horrid gaze , as if prepared to receive a beckon from him to come out .
If he passed me over , which was very seldom , it was considered as a miracle .
Frequently , while he was punishing me , and while the blood was running almost in streams from my lacerated back , I have looked him steadily in the face , and I could fancy I saw him enjoying the same sort of savage ferocious delight , that a hungry wolf would discover in gorging upon the mangled vitals of the unoffending lamb .
Such is the effect which tyranny produces upon the noble mind , that although I was of a tender delicate frame , and rather of a timid nature , yet I soon became so inured to punishment , that I constantly bore the most severe flogging without altering a muscle of my face , notwithstanding I frequently received from ten to twenty lashes from the recently made instrument of torture , which was composed of new birch twigs , each stroke from which drew the blood  and it was no uncommon thing , after I had left the room , to get some other boy to pick out the spills which were left sticking in my lacerated flesh , some of them more than half an inch long .
Nay , at last it became so bad that one of the washerwomen made a serious complaint to Mrs. Griffith , about the horrid state of my linen .
Mrs. Griffith 's expostulations were in vain , although they were made in the most urgent and pressing manner in my hearing .


I speak of myself here , but there were several other boys , who were punished equally without justice and without mercy , as well as myself .
To recite particular acts of this sort would be as disgusting as they would be tedious and uninteresting .
But there was a nice lad , of the name of George Blandford , that he had literally flogged into a hardened dunce -- he had whipped every power of learning out of him , and then he whipped him daily because he could not learn .
At length his elder brother , who slept in the same room with me , planned their escape from the school .
I went down stairs with them very early one morning , and having let them out I locked the doors again , and returned to my bed , without being detected .
Griffith , however , called me up to his desk , and having charged me with having assisted in their escape , I boldly admitted the fact , rather than tell a lie  upon which I received a most severe flogging before he set off to reclaim the fugitives .
The Blandfords escaped all pursuit , and reached their home  and fortunately for them their parents never suffered them to return .
As for myself , he continued to flog , and I continued to set him at defiance .
One more act of his extreme injustice I will relate , to shew how unfit he was to have the care of children  and as a caution to parents not to place them in the power of such men , particularly under the care of such clergymen , who , while they practise every species of tyranny , injustice , and cruelty , upon their pupils , contrive to escape detection by covering their real character with the garb of religion , and thus hide the most atrocious acts under the cloak of their hypocritical sanctity .


Immediately before the holidays , there was a prize to be written for , which prize was a handsome pen-knife .
The Rev. Hugh Stevens , a gentleman in every respect exactly the reverse of Mr. Griffith , was the principal assistant and writing-master , who always decided which was the best written piece  and he at once declared that I was the winner .
Griffith , who had never before interfered in a matter of this kind , was enraged that I should be successful , in spite of his malignant exertions always to put me back  and he insisted upon it , that a boy of the name of Butcher had written his piece better than mine , and that he should have the prize .
Mr. Stevens felt indignant at this barefaced act of partiality and gross injustice , and would not be come a party to it .
After having expostulated some time in vain , he handed me over the prize upon his own responsibility , in the presence of the enraged parson  and desired Griffith , if he wished to favour Butcher , to do it by giving him a knife out of his own pocket , which he actually did , in order to sneak out of the business .
By these repeated acts of injustice and cruelty he , however , soon lost his school .
Another boy , Mrs. Griffith 's own nephew , whose name was Bradley , now ran away , for setting a hollow tree on fire in the public parade , called the Acre .


To shew what acts of tyranny and oppression will drive even a lad to do , in the way of hardened resistance , observe the following instance Seventeen of the boys were to be flogged for making a bonfire on the 5th of November , myself of course among the number  many of them were large boys , and we were left together while Griffith was busily employed making up a number of rods out of half a dozen new birch brooms , a great many dozens of which he bought every year at Weyhill fair , expressly for that purpose .
While he was thus amiably occupied , although I was one of the smallest and youngest among them , I volunteered to recommend forcible resistance  and proposed , if they would all stick together , that when he came into the school we would seize him , lay him down , tie him hand and foot , and give him a good flogging , instead of taking the flogging ourselves  and I believe that I went so far as to offer to become myself the operator .
This was listened to for a moment , but such is the effect of tyranny upon the human mind , that the majority were for remaining passive slaves , and accordingly we all patiently suffered him to flog us one after the other .
When it came to my turn I looked him in the face , and received any punishment with a hardened indifference , which enraged him to such a degree , that he gave me a double dose  declaring at one time , as he gnashed his teeth , that he would flog me till I did cry out .
In spite of his threat , however , he became tired first  for I believe I should have expired under his bloody hand before I would have uttered a single sigh or a groan .
I must do my fellow-sufferers the justice to say , that the whole seventeen acted in the same manner , not one of them gratified his tender ear with a shriek , a groan , or even a complaint .


Our play ground was the church yard , at the back of the school  a very improper place indeed for boys to amuse themselves in , as it was covered with graves , and tomb and head stones , over which it was our occupation to be constantly jumping .
The churchwardens complained to Griffith of the injury done to the graves by our jumping on them , and Griffith , tyrant like , always ready to curtail any indulgence and liberty we had , however previously limited it might be , instead of appropriating a fresh play ground to our use , threatened to punish any boy who was found jumping over the tomb stones , or upon the graves , and prohibited almost every species of amusement that we had hitherto enjoyed .
A consultation was held , and it was agreed , in order to be revenged upon the churchwardens , that we would all meet , in the dusk of the evening , or rather as soon as it was dark , and that every one should throw a stone into the chancel window .
When the time arrived , this was religiously performed  and I believe myself and some half dozen more remained , while the rest were scampering off , and had a second throw , although the first did ample execution , and made a tremendous crash , particularly at that still hour of the night .
The noise brought all the neighbours out of their houses , who perceived us flying  but we all escaped , and got into the school , without the detection of any one in particular .
However , as it was known that some of the boys had done this , we were , all told by Griffith , the next day , that unless we gave up the boy or boys who did it , to be flogged , he would not grant a holiday the whole half year  and he only gave us till two o'clock in the afternoon to consider of what he had said .


During the play hours , between twelve and two o'clock , the whole time was occupied in devising expedients how to avert this dreadful denunciation , which was to deprive us of our usual holidays .
At length it was declared that all expedients were in vain  and that , unless some one would undertake to bear the brunt , and sacrifice himself for the common good , they must all submit to be incarcerated within the walls of the school the whole half-year , without any recreation whatever .
One of the largest boys said , if any one would volunteer to do this , the others would not only , with gratitude , subscribe the sum required to pay for mending the window , but would also subscribe a handsome sum , as a reward for him who would undertake to receive the punishment .


After this speech , silence reigned around for a time  but all eyes were soon fixed upon me , with a sort of anxious supplicating hope .
I stepped forward with a determined air .
I was hailed with a general cheer , and I soon realized their hopes , by boldly saying , that I would take the flogging , although it must and would no doubt be a very severe one  provided that they would subscribe to pay for mending the window , but that I scorned to receive any thing more for myself than the reward of their good opinion , and the consciousness of having made a generous sacrifice of myself , in order to relieve the whole of my school fellows from a dilemma which was in no other way to be overcome .
I was cheered and caressed , and was led back to the school , a sort of willing captive , and surrendered up to the vengeance of the master , as the culprit who had been guilty of a crime very little short of , and bordering upon , sacrilege .
Two or three of the boys came forward , and stated that they had been eye witnesses of the transaction , and had seen me break the window , by throwing repeatedly at it with a hatful of stones .
Although Griffith knew this to be a falsehood , as it was ascertained that it was done at one smash , by all the boys , yet , he received the communication with a savage delight  and , having put on one of his usual smiles , a `` ghastly grin , '' he ordered me to prepare for the punishment due to my temerity .
The very boy who had proposed the measure was selected to take me on his back , to hold me while I received the flogging , which was inflicted with such savage cruelty , and extended to such a length of time , that with some difficulty I was , by being led into the air , prevented from fainting .
Now the result !
after coming out of the school I was , I own , extolled by some , and caressed by others  but many laughed at my folly behind my back , some even taunted me at times with having broken the church windows  but , from first to last , they never subscribed one penny towards paying for the window , and I was left to do it myself , which was accomplished by my week 's allowance being stopped for the whole half-year , and the remainder was placed to my account , and sent home to my father , in the following item -- `` for breaking church windows 4s .
6d . ''
And , to this very day , I bear the character in the town of Andover of being the person who , when a boy at school , broke the church windows .


This act of ingratitude was enough to have broken the public spirit of almost any one but myself .
I have , from that day to this , been in the constant habit of making personal and pecuniary sacrifices for the common good  but human nature , as taken in the mass , was faithfully imaged , even in a school  and I can safely say , that the only reward which I have ever received , from that day to this , for all my public services , devotion , and sacrifices , consists in the substantial reflection that I have never had any selfish , sinister motives , but that I have always been actuated by the most disinterested philanthropy , and inflexible love of country .
How many good men have I seen even in my own time , stand forward the zealous advocates of the people 's rights , who have flitted upon the public stage but a very short period , and we have heard no more of them !
what is the cause of this dereliction ?
The inference generally is , that all mankind are alike  none are to be trusted .
But the fact is this , many really disinterested , truly patriotic men have been driven from off the field by the infamous slanders of the corrupt daily press .
Many of them were men who would have faced a cannon 's mouth , or would have suffered the most horrid punishment , even the torture , rather than have deserted the public cause  but they were incapable of bearing up against the malignant slanders , base assertions , and foul attacks of the public press .


There are also many who have come before the public with very patriotic feelings , and who have at the same time calculated upon receiving a public reward  at any rate , they have expected to be saved harmless in their pockets  that the expence of any public exertion would at least be repaid by those who surrounded them , and who cheered and applauded their every exertion .
-- But , no !
so sure as a man entertains any notion or expectation of this sort , so sure is he to meet with cruel disappointment , the very first time he places himself in a situation to try the experiment .
Thus , otherwise a very good man , he feels at once disgusted with public ingratitude , and not having calculated upon such conduct , and not perhaps ever having tried the experiment , as I did while at school , he retires with scorn and indignation from public life , or he turns over to some new faction in place or power , who have both the means and inclination to reward him for his apostacy .


To proceed with the narrative , Griffith did every thing he could to prevent my getting on in my studies  but I always contrived to say my lesson , even to him , so as to escape punishment  and , out of all the floggings I got at this school , I was never once punished for not learning my task .
Indeed , when I had to say my lesson to Mr. Stevens , I did it with ease , and frequently left off at the head of the class , having worked my way up during his examination .
In fact , when I said my lesson to Mr. Stevens , I generally left off at the head or top of the class  but when I said it to Griffith , I was sure always to finish at the bottom .


After having endured this sort of discipline nearly two years and a half , Griffith , one evening , came into the school , after having had bad sport in shooting , as if to wreak that vengeance upon the boys which the partridges had escaped .
He walked up the school , throwing his eyes to the right and to the left , to seek for some proper objects  at length he fixed upon a boy of the name of Ludlow , and , having ordered him to prepare for a flogging , Ludlow expostulated , and demanded to know what he had done to justify the punishment ?
Griffith hesitated , and assigned some trifling reason , frivolous even had it not been unfounded  but he persisted , and gave Ludlow the flogging .
As usual he called me up , and upon his ordering me to prepare , I followed the example of Ludlow , and demanded the reason  he gave me a box on the ear , and told me he would inform me after I had received the flogging .
When he had given me this chastisement , as usual very severely , he said , `` Now , sir , this is for what you did yesterday , and I will flog you to-morrow for what you did the day before , '' ( mentioning at the same time some trivial circumstance , ) `` unless you should do something in the meanwhile to deserve it . ''
Thus he taught me to look forward to a flogging every day for five or six days to come !
This was a little too bad  to live in anticipation , nay of a certainty , of being flogged every day for the next week  and I consequently determined to embrace the first opportunity of taking French leave .
I communicated my intention to Ludlow , who slept in the same room , and he , feeling indignant at the injustice done him , determined to accompany me .


The next day , being a half holiday , I was to be confined at home to learn some lines , instead of going out to walk with the rest of the boys  and Ludlow having agreed to sham illness in the morning , we hoped that we should by that means be left at home together by ourselves , and if a fair opportunity offered , we resolved that we would be off .
Every thing turned out as we had anticipated .
Ludlow was very ill , and Mrs. Griffith , who was a very humane , kind-hearted woman , made him lie in bed , where he was nursed with tea and toast , and other nice things that were necessary for a sick person .
About three o'clock all the other boys went out with the usher , to take their after noon 's walk .
I was left at home , and ordered to remain in the school , to learn a very hard task out of some book , or to take a flogging in the morning .
I went immediately up stairs to inform my companion that the coast was clear  he jumped out of bed , and put on his cloaths , and in a few minutes we walked down stairs , out of the back door , across the church yard  and in less than a quarter of an hour we were on our road to Weyhill , leaving Mrs. Griffith to take her patient 's physic herself , and any one that chose , to learn the lines that the Parson had set me .


As we passed along we saw our master and his friend shooting in a field adjoining the road .
We began to quake for fear , but he was too busily engaged with his sport to notice us  and , creeping along under the hedge , we passed on unnoticed .
Ludlow 's parents lived at Devizes , a distance of twenty-seven miles from Andover  Enford , the residence of my father , was a little more than fifteen miles on the same road .
We lost no time , and , having kept on a good pace , we arrived at Enford soon after six o'clock .
This was some time in October , and it was quite dark before we got within sight of the house .
We had agreed that Ludlow should sleep with me , and proceed on to his own house the next morning .
When we reached the door my heart began to sink within me , and I was actually afraid to enter  for now I began to dread the anger of my father , which was much more terrible to me than the tyranny of Griffith .
At length one of the servants , James Jukes , came by , and I begged him to go in and inform my father of my being come home .
He told me that my father was from home , but he hastened in , for the purpose of informing my mother .
This , however , was not necessary , for we followed him , and stood before my mother , who gave a shriek of astonishment .
We told her the story , but she instantly dispatched the servant for my father , who was gone to visit a neighbour .
Ludlow was very brave upon this occasion .
Before my father arrived , my mother had given us a supper of Apple pie  and , as we were very tired , and as I wished to avoid the presence of my father as long as I could , we requested to go to bed  but my mother would not admit of this till he was come home .


At length , the well known knock at the door announced his approach -- I never before felt such a sensation of fear as I did at this moment .
He came in , and having sternly surveyed us , after a short pause , he said , `` Pray gentlemen , what wind brought you here ? ''
I was speechless  but Ludlow boldly replied , `` the severity of our Master , Sir . ''
`` Well , '' he rejoined , `` and my severity shall flog you back again to-morrow , '' upon which we were immediately packed off to bed , which my Mother had taken care to provide for us .


As soon as we were alone in the bed room , Ludlow began to complain of the injustice of my Father  adding , that he had no right to take him back , that he might do what he pleased as to his son , but he should not take him back .
I told him this was very brave talking , but that he knew nothing of my Father if he expected to escape , either by blustering or reasoning .
If , however , he was determined to proceed home , I would do any thing in my power to get him out of the house very early in the morning .
-- This was at once agreed upon , to be attempted at all events .
We lay awake till day break , when he got up .
Having put on his cloaths , we crept down stairs very quietly , and I unlocked the door , and having shaken him by the hand , and wished him better success than I was likely to meet with , he departed for Devizes .
I returned to bed , and being called up in the morning , my Father , when he entered the breakfast room , demanded why Ludlow did not get up .
I told him the truth , that he had been gone for four hours , and must by that time have reached his own home .
My Father made no reply , but with a very stern look he left the room , as I afterwards understood from my Mother , to attend a court-leet at Updavon , where he had engaged to meet his friend and landlord Mr. Wyndham .
He informed that gentlemen of the circumstance of my having run away from school , and added , that he intended to take me back early in the morning , a step in the propriety of which Mr. Wyndham heartily concurred -- However , in the course of the day , a messenger came with a letter from Griffith to my Father , which was delivered to him in the presence of his landlord .
The letter was couched in the most coarse and unfeeling language  he charged my Father with being the author and instigator of all my faults , and accused him of having not only encouraged me in disobeying his orders , but also of conniving at my running away from the school .
-- This was a most fortunate circumstance for me , and the only thing that could have saved me from being taken back again .
Mr. Wyndham told my Father that nothing on earth ought to prevail upon him to place his son again under the care of such a monster  and they now both became just as determinedly hostile to my return as they had previously been agreed that I ought to go back .


In the course of a few days , my Father rode over to Andover , and sent for Griffith down to the Star Inn , to pay him his bill .
Having expostulated with him upon his conduct to me , and his still more unfeeling conduct if possible to himself  Griffith chose to bluster and bully , upon which my father coolly turned him out of the room , telling him that his gown alone saved him from the chastisement that he merited  a privilege which the parson did not choose to waive .
He , therefore sneaked off , in order to save himself from being either kicked or horse-whipped .
Ludlow was taken back to the School by his Father , and having subsequently formed connections , he got into business , and has lived in the own of Andover ever since .
Within two years of this time Griffith 's school dwindled down to nothing , and soon afterwards , execrated by every boy that had ever been under his care , he returned to Wales , from whence he came .


In detailing these occurrences of my boyhood , I have been thus particular for two purposes  first , to shew the reader the tyranny I had to encounter before I was yet thirteen years of age , and the effect it produced upon my mind , as well as the determined manner in which I resisted oppression , even at that time  and , secondly , with the hope that it will be a warning to all those who may read these memoirs , to avoid sending their children to be flogged out of every good quality , and rendered miserable , without the least chance of improvement , by one of these petty tyrants .
The greatest care and circumspection should be exercised by parents , for they have a sacred duty to perform , in the selection of those with whom they intrust the care and education of their children .
As to this school , it was a stain upon and a disgrace to the character of English education : in Scotland such a school would not have existed a month , and the master would have been indicted .


I was next placed under the care of the Rev. James Evans , who kept a very respectable school in Castle Street , at Salisbury .
This gentleman was also a Welshman  and , as I had taken a great antipathy to Reverend Welshmen , I felt rather uncomfortable when I ascertained that he came from the land of goats .
My fears , however , were groundless  he was a gentleman in every respect the reverse of him of whom I have so recently spoken .
To be sure he was pedantic enough , having been all his life a school-master  but he was a humane , kind-hearted man , and his strictness was assumed , for the purpose of maintaining by discipline a due subordination in the school .
His lady , Mrs. Evans , was also a combination of good qualities , and I believe there never was a more happy couple .
She delighted to make every body happy about her .
As for myself , the good disposition that I took with me to Andover , was in a great measure flogged out of me there  I was become impatient of controul , and had imbibed an ungovernable spirit , which led me into difficulties and disappointments , that I should otherwise have avoided .
I have often lamented the trouble that I gave this worthy man , as well as his lady , and many years back thought it my duty to take an occasion of expressing the sorrow I felt for any uneasiness that I had caused them during my stay there .


The life which I led here was a life , of pleasure compared to that which I led at the place I had quitted , and although it was impossible for me to recover that which I lost at Andover , either in disposition or in learning , yet I acquired ten times more real knowledge of books in one year at this school , under Mr. Evans , than I did at Andover in the two years and a half that I existed there .
I remained nearly three years at Salisbury , at the end of which time I was become a pretty good latin scholar , and could construe Virgil and Horace with considerable ease to myself .
I was an excellent penman , and a pretty good mathematician , as well as a complete master of mensuration .
I had for many years been a pupil of the celebrated Mr. Goodall , and as I was acknowledged by him to have arrived at a great degree of perfection in elegantly `` tripping it on the light fantastic toe , '' he frequently took me to exhibit at his balls , both in Salisbury and other places .
I was , in good truth , excessively fond of dancing , and I was not a little proud , at one of the race balls , to be selected by Mr. Goodall , who was master of the ceremonies , to stand one of the first three couple with the Prince of Wales , ( my partner Miss S. Mahon ) to enable his royal Highness to accomplish the figure of Maney Musk , for the first time introduced at Salisbury , by his Royal Highness .


I will relate only one particular occurrence which I had to encounter at this school , and which , but for a mere accident , would have fixed upon my character an indelible stain  and I am especially induced to notice it by the circumstance of its having been grossly misrepresented by the venal part of the public press .
I believe it appeared either in one or both of those sinks of corruption , those stews of falsehood , those unblushing vehicles of calumny and lies , the Morning Post and the Courier , viz .
`` that Hunt , when a boy , was turned out of a school for robbing one of his schoolfellows . ''
Although I believe there is not one disinterested intelligent person in a thousand , who reads those papers , that ever gives the least credit to any of those atrocious falsehoods with which their columns are constantly filled , yet the baseness and cowardice of their intentions are not the less disgraceful on that account .
To proceed , my bedfellow , whose name was Scott , when he arose one morning , discovered that , during the night , his Breeches had been removed from under his pillow , and his purse , which contained a guinea and two or three shillings , had been taken out of the pocket , ransacked of its contents , and then replaced under the pillow .
Scott missed the money as he was getting up , and , having mentioned the thing , all the boys collected round him to hear his account of the story .
There were also some boys who came out of another room up stairs , and amongst them a boy of the name of Best , who , after having heard what Scott had to say , at once declared that it was impossible for any one but the boy who had slept with him in the same bed to have stolen the money .
I instantly fired up , and endeavoured to knock down the scoundrel , who had by implication charged me with the theft .
A battle ensued , in which Best got the worst of it , and amongst other things a black eye  which being perceived by Mr. Evans , when we got into the school , I was punished with an imposition for having given it to him  notwithstanding I informed the master that it arose in consequence of his having falsely charged me with a theft .
Upon this an investigation took place .
Scott proved that he had the money when he went to bed  I also spoke to the knowledge of that fact  all which Best urged as a presumptive proof of my guilt .
Appearances were against me , and my having so suddenly attacked Best for the insinuation , rather increased than diminished those appearances .


After breakfast Mr. Evans called me into his parlour , where there was no one but himself and Mrs. Evans , and addressed me in a very solemn manner , trusting , he said , that I would instantly confess to him that I had played some trick with the money , and restore it to him  in which case , he would endeavour to hush the matter up as well as he could .
I stood gasping with astonishment , without being able to give an immediate answer  not before believing that he had any suspicion of me .
He proceeded as follows , `` it is no use for you to deny it , Master Hunt , as I know those who will prove that they saw you take the money . ''
My surprise was now turned to indignation .
I protested vehemently against the truth of his assertion , and dared him to the proof .
I denied , in the most solemn manner , that I knew any thing of the money , and demanded , with more than common earnestness , that he would bring forth my accusers , that I might meet them face to face .


Mrs. Evans now came forward , and earnestly entreated her husband , in common justice , if there was any person who had seen me , or if he had any proof that I took the money , or knew any thing of it , that he would bring them forward  and , if he had not , that he would at least , admit that he had no ground for saying what he had said .
Mr. Evans felt the force of her observation , and seeing that I denied the fact so unequivocally , he said that he had no proof of the fact , that he had gone too far , that as circumstances appeared strong against me at first , and it appeared that I was embarrassed , he thought it best to charge me boldly with it , to induce me to confess at once .
Mrs. Evans , who was a good creature , and a sincere lover of justice , possessing too a great deal of discrimination , inveighed in very strong terms against charging a boy with theft , and casting aspersions upon his character , without any foundation or proof whatever .
She added , that I had been at the school nearly three [ 5 ] years , without ever having created any suspicion of my honesty , or without doing the slightest act upon which they could ground such a charge : -- that she had frequently trusted me with money to execute errands and commissions for her , that I had always done it with the strictest regularity , and the most scrupulous regard to honesty  and , raising her voice , she said she would herself be bound for my innocence upon this occasion  adding , with great warmth , there was not an honester lad in the school , and that some of those who threw out dark hints of suspicion against Master Hunt , were much more likely , from their general character , to have robbed Scott than he was .


In consequence of this tone being taken by my kind friend , whose memory I have always held , and ever shall hold , in the highest veneration , Mr. Evans slightly apologized for having asserted that he had proof of my guilt  saying in excuse that it was his duty to do every thing in his power to unravel the mystery .
`` You may go Master Hunt , '' said Mrs. Evans  and in the kindest possible manner she endeavoured to console me for the injustice I had suffered , by telling me that the thief would certainly be found out , and then those that had accused me would be ashamed of themselves .


As I walked out of the parlour up the play ground , many of my school fellows approached , to know the result of such a long conference -- `` Well , Hunt , is there any thing made out likely to clear up this affair ? ''
all of them anxious to see me fairly acquitted of the charge .
I exclaimed in a loud voice , `` what a d -- d liar that Taffy Evans is -- He first declared that some one had seen me take the money , and afterwards confessed it was no such thing . ''
Mr. Evans , who had followed me out of the parlour , and had , unperceived by me , walked up his garden , which was only separated from the play ground by some pales and a slight low yew hedge , heard this as plain as any of the boys , In a very emphatic tone , and close to my elbow , he , to my utter confusion , said , `` really Master Hunt !
Pray , sir , go to your room , and we will settle that account as soon as we go into school , '' which was in a few minutes after .


I certainly now expected that I should have a severe flogging , and so did all my school fellows  but I was agreeably disappointed when he arrived in the school , by his addressing me in a very serious manner , as follows , `` Master Hunt , I now set you an imposition of one hundred lines of Virgil to learn by Friday , and the next time I ever hear you make use of such words I will certainly give you a flogging . ''
The lines were learnt , and so ended that part of the story .


As , however , no discovery was made about the money , I felt very uneasy  not that I believed any of the boys had any suspicion of me , and Scott himself constantly declared that he had not the slightest idea that I knew any thing of the matter .
Notwithstanding this , there was sometimes an insinuation thrown out , which rendered my life very miserable  and Best , the boy who had first accused me , although from the drubbing he got he was deterred from repeating the assertion , yet he would frequently ask in my hearing , `` who stole Scott 's money ? ''
A month had nearly passed , and with most of the Boys the affair began to wear off , and it was seldom mentioned  not so with me , it pressed very heavily upon my mind , and instead of being one of the most lively and cheerful boys in the school , I was now become quite serious , and even melancholy , and was frequently observed to shed tears .
My Friends endeavoured to rally me out of this what they called sulky mood  I replied that I could not help it , that I should never again be happy till it was discovered who it was that took my bed-fellow 's Money  and that its being lost while I was his bed fellow , certainly threw a sort of suspicion on me , that I could not get over , and to labour under which rendered me completely miserable .
They all endeavoured to laugh me out of this humour , and I must say that Scott himself did every thing in his power to relieve me  but it was all in vain , I not only grew melancholy , but I began to lose my appetite , and as I looked very thin and ill , Mrs. Evans was really somewhat alarmed , and said every thing she could to comfort me .
Alas !
it was all in vain , and I really began to think that I should fall a victim to a false accusation , for I had no sleep by night , nor ease by day .


[ Illustration : THE NORTH WEST VIEW OF HIS MAJESTY 'S JAIL AT ILCHESTER .
Taken from the lower part of the Meadow behind the Bell Inn .


a .
The part occupied by Mr. Hunt .
b .
The Top of the Keeper 's House .
c .
The part occupied by the Debtors d .
The part occupied by the Time people f .
The part occupied by the Task Master  Matron Behind this is the part occupied by the Females g .
The Lodge or entrance  occupied by the chief Turnkey h .
The Keeper 's stable and Chaise House . ]


Mrs. Evans now proposed to send for my father , which in a few days she did .
When he arrived and was informed of the circumstances , he felt greatly distressed .
I was sent for into the parlour  my father was shocked at my appearing in such ill health , and the agony of his feelings was intense at the cause of my illness .
He intreated me , by the love I bore towards him and my mother , to confess the truth  if I had in an unguarded moment been led into an error , the only reparation was openly to confess it , and , in that case , he offered immediately to repay Scott his money , and to make him a handsome present besides  in fact he promised to do any thing .
Before he would allow me to make an answer , he went almost upon his knees , and implored me to tell him the whole truth , proffering at the same time his entire forgiveness if I had done it .
I assured him , in the most serious and solemn manner , that I knew nothing whatever of the money , that it had made me very unhappy indeed , that I had had no sleep for the last eight or ten nights , and had lost my appetite , and that I was become very weak and ill  which illness he found , by feeling my pulse , was attended with a very considerable fever .
He proposed to take me home for a short time , to restore my health  but this I objected to , as being likely to give a colour to the charge .
It was therefore settled that I should take some medicine , prescribed by Mr. Stills [ 6 ] , to calm my spirits and allay my fever .


My father returned home almost broken-hearted , and I continued in the same melancholy and hopeless state .
However , in the evening of the next Sunday , a boy came running up to me almost breathless , and declared that he had discovered the thief , who had stolen the money .
I eagerly entreated him to explain himself -- he answered that Charles Best , together with his brother James , had just brought in a hatful of Carraway Comfits , which be said he had bought with five shillings , given to him by his father .
The Father of these boys lived in the town , and they had been home on the Sunday , as was usual , to dine with him .
They had just returned from their visit , about eight o'clock in the evening , and Charles , the eldest , the fellow who had accused me of being the thief , had now brought these comfits in his hat , saying that his father had given him five shillings , which he had expended at once in this way .
My friend directly declared that it was a falsehood , that his father was a cursedly stingy old fellow , and that he had never before returned with more than sixpence in his pocket  and he added , suppose his father or any other person had given him five shillings , it was very unlikely that he would lay it all out at once in such a manner .
I requested Best to show us his purse , to see if he had any more money in it .
This he declined to do  and , as his brother James began to shuffle , and did not confirm him altogether in his story , I immediately seized him by the collar , and having tripped up his heels , called for assistance to search him .
This we accomplished with some difficulty , and having got at his purse , we found it contained sixteen shillings in silver more .
He now changed his tale , and asserted that his father had given him a guinea , which he had changed at Mrs. Hadding 's the pie-woman  that he had purchased five shillings-worth of carraway comfits , and the sixteen shillings was the remainder of the change .


By the manner of his telling this story it was evidently false .
Some of the boys accordingly kept him in custody , while myself and my friend , who had first brought me the intelligence , rushed out of the house , regardless of the consequences , and proceeded as fast as possible to the house of old Best , either to have this account confirmed or denied .
On our reaching the door we knocked with great authority , and upon the servant 's opening it , we marched in without any ceremony , and demanded an audience of his master immediately , as we had some very important business with him .
The servant informed him of our visit , and he came out of the parlour to us , and demanded what business we could have with him at that time of night , it being then nearly nine o'clock .
We first asked if his sons had been home to dine with him  he answered yes , and that they had left his house upwards of an hour ago , in order to return to the school , and he wished to know whether they had not arrived before we left it .
We replied that they had .
We then asked him if he had given his son Charles any money  he at once said , `` Certainly not . ''
We then asked him if he had given him a guinea  he replied , `` Certainly not . ''
His mother might have given him sixpence , but if she did it was without his knowledge .
He then returned into the parlour  and we heard him ask his wife if she had given Charles any money to-day , the answer was , `` No , my dear . ''


This was quite enough for us , and without waiting any further ceremony , we started off back to the school .
In the mean time , Best , having ascertained that we were gone to his father to make enquiry , had confessed that it was he who had stolen the money out of Scott 's pocket  and when we returned he was surrounded by all the boys , who were upbraiding and taunting him with his villainy  but they were all more enraged with him for his baseness in accusing me of the theft , than they were with the theft itself .
I was the only one who expressed any pity for him , and had the weakness to solicit for that mercy to be shewn to him which he had denied to me .
The next morning he was expelled the school  but , in consideration of his family very little was said about it -- however , they soon left the town , which it was generally understood was occasioned by this unfortunate event .
My father was sent for , and he came over immediately , to participate with me in the happiness I felt , at being so completely exculpated from all suspicion  and every endeavour was made to render me , as far as it was possible , compensation for my sufferings .


I trust that this circumstance will prove to the reader the danger and the injustice of condemning any person upon mere circumstantial evidence .
How cautious ought jurors upon their oaths to be , not to find men guilty upon mere circumstances  and , particularly , when their verdict may give the party over , bound hand and foot , and place his life or his liberty at the disposal of corrupt , wicked , cruel , and vindictive judges !


I now recovered my health and strength , and prosecuted my studies till I was nearly sixteen years of age .
My father then , on condition of my taking orders , and going into the Church , proposed to send me to Oxford , and to purchase the next presentation to a living of upwards of a thousand a year , which was offered to him at that time at a very moderate price  subject to the life of the incumbent , who was upwards of seventy years of age .
This I declined , as I had a great wish to be a farmer  and , at the same time , had a particular objection to the Church , an objection which principally originated in the dislike I had to Parson Griffith , and to the way in which he enforced the precepts of Christianity .


My father desired me to reflect well upon it , before I made up my mind  though I could discover that he was not at all displeased at my determination .
He would not , he said , prejudice my choice , but whether I was a clergyman , or whether I was a farmer , he hoped I should make a good , a brave , and an honest man  but he added , `` if you intend to be a farmer , I trust that it is not from an idea that a farmer 's life is composed merely of coursing , hunting , shooting , and fishing .
These alone , said he , are very well , when occasionally and moderately used as a recreation  but a farmer must learn his business before he is capable of conducting and managing a farm -- for , remember the old couplet , `` he that by the plough would thrive , must either hold himself or drive . ''
I would , therefore , have you think this matter over , before you finally make your choice .
If you should like to be a clergyman , I have now an opportunity of purchasing the next presentation to a good living , and you will then have secured to you for life a thousand or perhaps twelve hundred pounds a year  and you will have nothing else to do , for six days out of the seven , but hunt , shoot , and fish by day , and play cards and win the money of the farmer 's wives and children by night .
Although , continued he , this may appear to you , and I am ready to admit , that this is , a very inglorious sort of a life , yet it is a very easy one .
All that will be expected of you is to read prayers , and preach a sermon , which will cost you three pence once a week .
This is the life of modern clergymen  and they might do very well , and get on very smoothly , in this way , if they did not screw up their tythes too high , and get drunk too often , so as to cause a serious complaint to be made to the bishop by some of the parishioners  which you may rest assured they never will do by you , let your conduct be ever so immoral or ever so irreligious , provided that you let the farmers have their tythes at an easy rate .
Do that , and no complaint will ever be made against you to the bishop . ''


While my father was thus addressing me , my mother returned from visiting a poor gypsy woman , who had that morning been delivered of a fine child , under an adjoining hedge , without any other covering but one of their small tents , which are merely composed of a sheet thrown over a few arched sticks , stuck into the ground .
She came into the room just in time to hear the latter part of my father 's observations , describing the life of a modern clergyman .
With her accustomed charitable feeling , she said `` really , my dear , although there is too much truth in the picture you have drawn , yet you have been a little too severe upon the clergy , when speaking of them in the mass .
There are many excellent and worthy men , who follow the precepts of their great master , who are an ornament to that society to which they belong , and are , therefore , most deserving members of , and do great credit to , the profession which you have so indiscriminately reprobated . ''


`` Do not tell me , '' said my father , `` about ornaments to society  the best of them are the drones of society , and , without contributing any thing to the common stock , they feed upon the choicest honey , collected by the labour of the industrious bees .
To be sure , when they do the duty allotted to them conscientiously , and do not screw up their tythes too high , they may be very necessary evils  but you are aware , my dear , that what I say is true as to most of them that we know  and I am not sorry that Henry appears to have no inclination towards that course of life . ''


`` But , '' said my mother , `` because some of the clergy bear the character that you say they do , is that any reason that Henry should follow their example ?
If he should be a clergyman , he will have great power of doing good among his parishioners  he may be a magistrate , or perhaps a Doctor of Divinity  and who knows but he may by and bye be a bishop ? ''


My father now began to grow impatient .
`` A bishop indeed ! ''
said he , `` God forbid that I should ever live to see him act in such a way as to obtain a bishopric , even if he were to go into the church . ''


My mother was surprised at this language , and enquired if he would not wish his son to gain the top of his profession  to which he answered sternly , ( which was not often the case to my mother , ) `` No , indeed .
I would not .
The road to such preferment is generally so disgraceful , that I never wish to see him tread its path .
He will never attain such an honour but by the most dishonourable means .
Would you like to see him the tutor to the son of some nobleman ?
This is the first step to promotion .
When he is in that situation , if his pupil should be of an abandoned character and he will condescend to be his pimp and the pander to his vices , laugh at his follies , and flatter his vanity : why , then , should this sprig of nobility hereafter become a minister of state , or a man in power , knowing the servility of his late tutor , and that he will make a willing tool for the administration to which he belongs , then , forsooth , he is a proper man , and may possibly become a bishop . ''


My mother could not believe that the highest dignities of the church were ever obtained by such disgraceful means  but my father justified his assertion by pointing out one or two living instances , that had come within the reach of his own knowledge .
He also pointed out some dignitaries of the church who lived in his immediate neighbourhood , whom my mother knew , and was obliged to admit to be very profligate characters .
But she , always wishing to look at the bright , instead of the dark side of the question , called in turn to his recollection a number of very excellent and very worthy members of the church , whom they knew to be most amiable , charitable , and truly religions characters .


Thus ended this conference upon a subject which appeared to be so very important to my parents .
My mother certainly had a great leaning to the desire of seeing me a clergyman , and I believe it would have been the summit of her happiness and ambition to have seen me zealously enforcing those principles of christianity , which she had so faithfully practised .
My father dropped the subject at that time  but he took an early opportunity of seriously going into the matter in private , and he exhorted me to give the question a deliberate consideration , as it most materially concerned my future welfare  adding , `` he that sets out wrong is more than half undone .
If , '' said he `` you intend to lead a quiet , easy life , that of a clergyman will exactly suit you .
If you are disposed to make one of the common herd of mankind , and pass your time away in enjoying the sports of the field , and the recreations of a social country life , you may live and die a clergyman , and a very happy man .
But if you have any ambition to be a shining character in the world , that is the very last profession I would recommend  as I am firmly persuaded that you will have no chance of becoming eminent , or exalted in rank , unless you will condescend to obtain it by the most prostituted sycophancy , and a total dereliction of every manly noble feeling of independence . ''


If I had been wavering in my decision , or had entertained any doubts before , this would have turned the scale  but I had already made up my mind to be a farmer , which determination I seriously and firmly communicated to my father .
`` Well then , '' said he , `` you are young enough to learn , and if you will manfully set your shoulder to the wheel , I have no doubt of your soon becoming acquainted with the practical part of the profession , and when you have acquired a knowledge of the practice the theory will follow very easily .
To-morrow you shall make a beginning .
You are now sixteen , and no time is to be lost .
God and nature have bestowed upon you a sound mind , and an active body  and if you properly apply these inestimable blessings , there is no doubt of your becoming a useful member of society , and of your making a respectable figure in the world .
But never forget the maxim that I now lay down for your future guidance  recollect that ' a man can never dirt his hands about his own business  ' and always bear in mind these three old Italian proverbs -- first , ` Never do that by proxy , which you can do yourself . '
-- Second , ` Never defer till to-morrow that which can be done well to-day . '
-- Third , ` Never neglect small matters and expences . ' ''


The next morning I was called up early , and , to begin upon my labours , I drove one of the teams at plough all day .
I came home very tired .
Not being accustomed to labour , I found it a very different occupation from that of attending my studies at school  my feet were sore , and my heels were galled , but I was deterred from complaining , by seeing that I was merely performing the same labour that little plough boys , of eight or nine years of age , were only receiving sixpence a day for doing .
Driving plough was , therefore , not only , soon learned , but it became very irksome to me  and as I thought myself full as good a man as the lad that was holding , I demanded , before the week was up , that he should change places with me .
This he refused , and that occurred which is very common upon such occasions .
I threw away the whip , and having seized the handle of the plough , a struggle ensued , which led to blows .
At length , the horses and plough were both abandoned , and a regular fight took place between myself and the under carter , who had been holding the plough to which I was the driver .
I soon , however , compelled him to cry `` hold ! ''
and without farther ceremony I took the plough and he the whip .
I mention this trivial circumstance to shew the reader that I was obliged to fight my way into a practical knowledge of agricultural pursuits  my father well knowing , from experience , that there was no other method by which I could gain a complete knowledge of farming , but by the manual performance of every branch of the profession .


Before I proceed it will not be improper to observe that , in detailing the events of my own life , I am confined to the strict limits which truth imposes upon my pen  for if I wished either to exaggerate or to embellish by any imaginary touches , such as may be admissible , and in fact such as are indulged in , by the writers of common events , I should be liable to immediate detection and exposure  because I am detailing circumstances which , although they are long past , are still in the recollection of numerous living witnesses .
In fact , there is not an occurrence that I have hitherto mentioned , but what is within the knowledge and the recollection of many of those witnesses , and very many of the most important events which I shall have to detail will be familiar to hundreds .
On the other hand , there are certainly many facts and anecdotes , which are only known to myself and those immediately connected with them , and these , when I arrive at them , will , I doubt not , be read with a lively interest by those who are not yet in the secret how many public and private intrigues are carried on and effected .
All that I can promise is , that I will , to the best of my knowledge and recollection , which I find no ways impaired by imprisonment , record the truth  and should I , in my anxiety to speak the truth , sometimes become dull , tiresome , or tedious , I must rely upon the indulgence of the reader , to attribute it to my desire that the public should be made acquainted with those circumstances which appear to me to have materially contributed to the formation of that character which has been so vilified , abused , and misrepresented , by the venal tools , and corrupt agents , of a system of persevering , fatal misrule , such as was never equalled in any age or in any country .


To proceed -- I now found that I was encountering greater difficulties than I had anticipated .
Though it was very easy to learn to drive plough , yet it was a very different thing to be able to hold plough well .
I returned home at night ten times more tired than I was when I drove the first day  my feet were not only sore , but my legs and arms ached ready to drop off , and my hands were in a gore of blood , and blistered all over .
My poor mother began now to lament my undertaking , and threw out hints how much better and easier it would have been to have gone to Oxford , and have been now preparing myself by study to become a candidate for the black cloth , and to be a respectable clergyman , instead of being a clod-hopper .
In the midst of her advice and admonition my mother did not forget to wash my hands and feet , and plaster up my lacerated flesh  and as soon as she had made me comfortable I retired to rest .
I rose refreshed , and returned the next day with renovated vigour to my task .
To be brief , I soon because a good ploughman .
My father daily witnessed with considerable anxiety my zealous and persevering exertions  and as I proceeded , he encouraged me by the most animating hopes of future prospects  he informed me that he had remarked with no small pleasure my determination to excel in every thing that I undertook  and that I set about every thing with an enthusiasm calculated to surmount all difficulties , which was , as he justly observed , the only way to attain any object , or to arrive at any degree of perfection .


I had now regularly persevered with the most assiduous industry for more than a fortnight , and although I was but a tall thin stripling , I perceived that I gathered strength with my labour  and what I at first found to be the most trying exertion and severe hard work , as I became acquainted with the art , it appeared a pleasant and cheerful occupation  for I could now turn a furrow as true and as straight as `` the path of an arrow . ''
My father , who was an excellent and an accomplished husbandman , never failed during this time to pass some part of the day with me , in order to instruct me how to set my plough , to fix the share and point , and so to regulate its various bearings as to make it , at the same time it did the work well , go easy and pleasant to the holder .
This may , perhaps , be very uninteresting to many sedentary readers , and to those who are mere passing observers , and who believe that there is no art in holding plough  but they are very much mistaken who think that any body will make a farmer , and that to be a good husbandman is the natural result of living in the country .
It is a very common and vulgar saying in the country , among farmers , when any one has a son that is more stupid than common , `` if he will make nothing else , if he is unfit or incapable of learning any business or trade , why , he will make a parson . ''
But to make a good farmer , a man must have served a double apprenticeship to the profession  and after that , he must be a philosopher and a chemist .
No business requires the exercise of a man 's patience and his reasoning faculties so much as that of a farmer .
Every day , nay , every hour , produces something new , something fresh , which calls forth the active use of his reason , his exertion , and his talent .
No two seasons are alike , and scarcely any two days .
In every other profession or business , a clever intelligent person can calculate for any given number of hands , nearly , the work of a week , a month , or almost a year , in advance .
The manufacturer or the tradesman has a constant regular routine of business for his workmen to perform  and if he be called from his home , for any length of time , he can leave orders what work almost every man shall do till his return  but the farmer 's occupation , and that of all his servants , changes with the weather  nay , it becomes his peculiar care , at some periods of the year , to watch with anxiety every change of the wind , and his business to observe the direction of every cloud .
But as four or five years of my life were passed in practically acquiring a knowledge of every branch of this most valuable and respectable occupation , I shall , by reciting the particular occurrences of that period , as I pass along , convince the readers of this work , of that which they little suppose to be the case , that it is absolutely necessary for a man to be a philosopher , before he can be a good farmer .


My father , having convinced himself of my capability , as well as my determination to persevere in acquiring the practical manual knowledge of the various branches belonging to husbandry , now said that he was not only satisfied , but extremely well pleased , with the progress I had made  and , therefore , I should now have a respite from such incessant labour , and should take my poney and accompany him round the farms , to inspect and to assist him in giving directions to the workmen .
A fresh plough boy was immediately found , and my driver , the vanquished under-carter , again resumed his situation between the handles of the plough , very well pleased with my removal .
The scene to which I was now introduced opened to my enquiring eye a new field for observation , and what I had heretofore passed over as common occurrences , became intensely interesting to me .
My father felt great delight in satisfying my eager enquiries , and , instead of being annoyed at my unceasing inquisitiveness , he encouraged me to satisfy myself , and not to leave any one subject till he had made me comprehend the cause as well as the effect .


About this time my mother , who had been for several years in a very declining state of health , from a violent nervous affection , which produced a constant oppressive head-ache , was put to bed of a son , her sixth child , and to the great joy of my father , as well as all her friends , as she recovered her strength , and the natural effects of her lying-in wore off , she appeared also to have recovered her general good health , and her usual cheerfulness .
She was always benignant , kind , and affectionate , but the effects of an incessant nervous headache had produced a sombre sadness , which threw a gloom around , and affected the whole family , and prevented that sort of hilarity and cheerfulness , which was the usual companion of our abode .
My father was of a generous , hospitable , sociable disposition , and was never so happy and blessed as when he had his friends surrounding him , and partaking of those comforts which he had acquired by his industry , skill , and persevering attention to his business  but even these sociable enjoyments with his friends had been very much curtailed , by my dear mother 's melancholy indisposition .


The restoration of her health was hailed by my father as the greatest blessing that Divine Providence could have bestowed upon him and his family  and we were all made to join him in audibly offering up our nightly prayers and grateful acknowledgments to the allwise and beneficent Creator , for this to us the greatest of earthly blessings .
My father was enraptured , and a hundred times a day , while he burst forth into sincere and extatic praise and adoration of the goodness of the Divine Being , he would enjoin us , his children , never to forget his mercy and loving kindness , in restoring his dear Elizabeth to health .
He also called in his friends again , to partake of his hospitable and festive board .
In fact , he would sometimes exclaim , to my mother , that he was almost too happy for a mortal , in this vale of misery and probation .
My amiable mother used gently to chide him , and to tell him that the best way to manifest their gratitude to Divine Providence , for the happiness which it bestowed , was never to let a day pass over their heads without doing some good act to prove their willingness to deserve it .
She would add , with her eye beaming a heavenly smile , `` as our blessed Saviour has bestowed every earthly comfort upon us , let it be part of our duty and our pleasure to dispense happiness among our poorer and less fortunate neighbours  for recollect , my dear , ` that all our doings without charity are nothing worth . ' ''


My mother had not yet been able personally to perform any of her accustomed charitable visits since her lying in  for she was too strict an observer of her religious duties , to go from home till she had gone to the parish church , and publicly offered up her prayers and thanksgivings to her blessed Creator and Saviour .
The following Sunday was fixed upon as the day for this religious ceremony .
My father expostulated  saying that the church was damp , and that she had better defer it till the next Sunday , and , in the mean time , take some gentle walks abroad , to enure herself by degrees to bear the walk and the fatigue of remaining in the church during the length of the service .
He expressed his great dread of her catching cold , and having a relapse in consequence  but she firmly replied , that she never feared any evil when she was performing a sacred religious duty  that God was too wise and too good to permit one of his creatures to suffer , when in the act of obeying his commands  and she urged so many pious reasons to shew the necessity of her not delaying to perform what she termed her indispensable duty , that my father silently , but very reluctantly , submitted to her decision .


But , alas !
alas !
my father 's prophetic forebodings were but too well founded !
The ways of God are just , and the dispensations of his wisdom are not to be scanned , much more disputed , by impious man  to submit to his Divine will without repining , is the imperative duty of every sincere Christian .
I shall never forget the day , nor the care and anxiety of my excellent father .
We set off early , in order to walk leisurely to church , that my mother should not be so heated as to render her liable to catch cold  there was my mother leaning on the right upon my father , and on the left upon me , and two of my sisters , Elizabeth and Sophia , the one about five , and the other about seven years old , skipping lightly along before us .
My mother enjoyed the walk very much , and as my father led her into the church , preceded by the clergyman , upon whom we had called in our way thither , the whole congregation spontaneously rose up to greet and to welcome their best and kindest benefactress and amiable neighbour .
A gleam of pleasure beamed from every eye , and the curtseys and bows that were bestowed upon her , as she passed along the aisle , most clearly shewed that they proceeded from the impulse of grateful hearts .
With a heavenly smile of inward delight , and with an air of the greatest sweetness , she returned their kind salutations .
It was an enviable sight , and it imparted to me such sensations of pride and delight , as have been seldom , if ever , equalled since .
To see an amiable parent , upon such an occasion , receive the spontaneous willing homage of three or four hundred , the whole , of her poorer neighbours , and the sincere congratulations and kind attentions of all her friends , of this happy village , was a scene never likely to be erased from the memory  every heart appeared to leap with joy , and it seemed to me as if that the whole congregation were preparing to join in prayer , and to participate in the performance of the divine service of the afternoon , with more than usual earnestness and zealous piety .


My mother , who was a tall , thin , elegant figure , and very fair , had a roseate flush spread over her delicate features , and she looked beautiful as she knelt to offer up her grateful and sincere adoration to the omnipotent , omnipresent , merciful Disposer of All .
I believe that my father was the only person amongst the whole congregation who did not , at that moment , enjoy unmixed delight .
I could discover that his enquiring eye was more frequently fixed upon my mother , than it was upon his prayer-book  a sort of uneasy doubt sat visible upon his brow , and it was plainly to be perceived that his prayers were interrupted by his meditations upon the fearful consequences which he apprehended might be the result of my mother 's catching cold , by remaining within the walls of a large damp building , and that building only inhabited for a few hours once a week .
But , while he was anticipating earthly misery by the loss of the greatest blessing that kind Heaven had ever bestowed upon man , my angelic mother 's soul and body were alike absorbed in the most devout and earnest prayer .
In the mean time , the beautiful rosy hue , that had spread such a lustre over her fair face , disappeared .
My father 's intense anxiety now became so obvious to me that the dreadful uneasiness of mind which he displayed drew my attention to the paleness which had succeeded the colour upon her cheek .
The instant the clergyman began to pronounce the concluding prayer , `` The peace of God , '' c. my father flew across the seat , while my mother was yet on her knees , joining most fervently and devoutly in that beautiful sentence , and exclaimed , in a loud half whisper , which was heard all over the church , `` for God 's sake !
are you not well , my love ! ''
She appeared surprised at the earnestness of his manner , and rather hurt at being interrupted in her devotions  but replied , that she was very well , only a little cold .
He hurried her out of the church , and scarcely gave her time to return the salutations of her neighbours , requesting her to take his and my arm , and hasten home as fast as possible , to avoid the effect of a chill which he very much feared that she had taken in the church .


When we got home she was rather fatigued , but , though the colour that had adorned her face did not return , she ate her dinner with a good appetite , and my father began to hope that his fears were groundless .
His hope was soon blighted : my mother suddenly screamed out , saying that she had a violent pain in one of her feet .
She complained of this pain , sometimes in one foot and sometimes in the other , till bed time  but my father , in order to hide his own forebodings , endeavoured to rally her , and in a joking way told her she was going to have the gout .
She took some warm gruel , and retired early to rest .


About twelve o'clock my father came into my bedroom to awake me , and desired me to rise immediately , take my horse , and go for the family apothecary , who lived at a distance of about five miles .
I , who was accustomed to rise at a moment 's warning , jumped out of bed , and with the greatest haste performed the sad office .
I accompanied the apothecary to her bedside before two o'clock , for I had made my poney almost fly thither and back .
We found my poor father , who had been anxiously attending the progress of her disorder , in great distress .
She had no sooner gone to bed than she was seized with cold chills , which continued , with alternate fever , the paroxysms of which had increased with such violence that she was already partially delirious .
The next day Dr. Barvis [ 7 ] , from Devizes , attended her and pronounced her in considerable danger .
I mounted my poney , rode back with him , and soon returned again with the medicine he had prescribed  but my mother 's disorder baffled all their skill and attention .
My poor father was distracted  he never quitted her bedside for a moment  all his large farming concerns were left to the care of the servants  he desired me to go to them on the Monday morning , the day after my mother was taken ill , and to request them all to do their best in each of their separate departments , and they were left entirely to themselves  every other thought but what was directed to the attention and care of my mother was abandoned  my father , whom I had never known to neglect seeing all his servants once a day at least , and who suffered nothing to be done unless it was under his immediate direction , would not now listen even to an inquiry about his business  his whole soul was wrapped up in his attention to my mother , whose illness he had anticipated with a presaging spirit , even before it came upon her .
I was incessantly employed in going too and from the medical attendants , and assisting to wait upon my mother  and from the time of her first attack she took nothing but from the hand either of myself or my father .
Her illness was now pronounced to be a determined putrid fever , and she was continually in a delirious state .
Her infant son , William , had been kindly received to nurse by an excellent neighbour , Mrs. Patient of Compton , a most worthy lady , who nursed him and her own son together , with great good-nature and ease to herself .


My mother grew worse and worse , and was at length pronounced by the physician past all hopes of recovery .
My poor father was frantic  he , who possessed the most manly resolution and firmness upon all other occasions , was now by excessive grief and despair reduced almost to the level of a child  he alternately wept and prayed  but he wept and prayed in vain .
I was at this time under seventeen years of age , and I had scarcely time to vent my sorrow .
Although I was distressed beyond measure at the suffering of my mother , yet the affliction , the indiscribable anguish , of my father demanded almost as much of my attention as the illness of my mother .
To see his noble soul bent down to the earth , driven almost to the madness of desperation , was to me a more heart-rending spectacle than the delirium which produced a sort of stupor in my mother .
She had not been sensible for any considerable period of time together for two days  and we were under dreadful apprehensions that she would be taken from us without ever recovering her reason .
This my poor father dreaded excessively  yet the very thing we most prayed for , proved , when it was ultimately granted to us , our greatest affliction  so incapable are poor frail mortals of judging what is best for them under such trying circumstances .


My mother had now lain as it were in a doze for about two hours , and my father and myself , who were anxiously watching every breath , observed her awake up , as if it were from a sound sleep  she appeared to feel as if she had recovered from a trance  she spoke  and to the great joy of my father and myself she was perfectly collected .
But our joy was of the most transient nature .
She looked around in the most melancholy manner , and having enquired where all the children were gone , she expressed a great desire to see them before she breathed her last  for she said she was perfectly sensible of her situation , and she must see her children once more .
They had all been removed to the house of a friend , as those who remained were considered in imminent danger from infection , the putrid state of my mother having assumed a very alarming appearance , and no one was now left , except my father , myself , and the nurse  the maid servant having already failed with the fever .
My poor father had entreated , nay had commanded me also to save myself by flight  but upon my knees I implored him to let me remain and participate with him in performing the last sad office for my dear mother  I told him that I should break my heart to leave him alone  for he really was now become an object of much greater pity than my dying parent .


My mother repeated so earnestly her wish to see her children , that they were immediately sent for , and she took a last sad farewell of them .
They were hastened out of the room , that they might be removed at once from such a melancholy scene , and from the serious danger of contagion , arising from the dreadful state of their mother .
To those who have never witnessed a parting of this sort , any attempt of mine to convey to them even a slight representation of the agony it inflicts on those who undergo it , would be in vain , for it is impossible .
The great exertion of my poor mother , during this affecting scene , was such as left her almost without the power of speech  her respiration became excessively quick , and my afflicted father exclaimed , `` I shall never hear her voice again ! ''
She , however , soon recovered a little , and in the most plaintive strain lamented her approaching end , and prayed aloud to her blessed Saviour , to spare her life that she might have the happiness of seeing her children brought up .
In fact , this most excellent of women appeared very much to dread the hand of death .
My father now implored her to be tranquillised , and , in the most tender and affectionate manner , assured her , that of all living creatures she was , he thought , the best prepared to enter the presence of her Creator .
She calmly replied that though to her knowledge she had never intentionally injured any human being , either in thought , word , or deed  though she had never neglected her duty to her Maker , but had always acted to the best of her judgment so as to deserve his mercy  yet , she trembled , and doubted , and feared to die .
My father now observed that her voice faltered , and , to draw her attention from such a painful , heart-rending subject , he asked her if she knew me , supposing that she was becoming insensible .
With the kindest look she took my hand , and gently replied , `` I know him perfectly well , God bless him ! ''
She then seized his hand also , and instantly expired , grasping both .
Thus breathed the last , of as bright , as lovely , and as perfect a pattern of Christian piety as ever lived to grace society , and to adorn and bless a husband and family .


My father 's sorrow was now become too intense for outward shew  he stood dumb and motionless , with his eyes fixed and rivetted upon her , in whose death he felt that he had sustained an irretrievable loss .
We had both still hold of her hands  his mute , immovable figure looked like a statue  and I fancied that his heart was breaking .
I seized him by the hand , and in the most supplicating manner implored him to leave the room .
My extreme sorrow seemed to awake him from his trance  and I led him gently , and he followed involuntarily , out of the chamber .
Having seated him in his armed chair , I knelt before him , and threw my head in his lap , there I gave a loose to my grief , and mingled my tears with those which were now flowing in streams down his manly cheeks .
To endeavour to describe what I felt , upon this melancholy event , would be puerile in the extreme  none but those who have been placed in a similar situation are capable of comprehending the distress which enters the soul of such a husband and child , who had witnessed the last sad moments of such a wife and mother .


To have dwelt so long upon such a melancholy subject , may , perhaps , appear to some of my readers to be not only unnecessary , but tedious .
I must , therefore , intreat their indulgence , by confessing my error , if an error it be .
At the same time I must assure them , that I believe this to have not only been the most important event of my life , but that it was a matter of more serious importance to me than all the occurrences of my previous existence multiplied ten times ten fold  and this being the case , I shall rely upon their kind forgiveness with great confidence  for I feel that every incident of my life , for many years after this , may be fairly said to have been influenced in some degree , or in some way or other , by this ever to be regretted , never to be forgotten , loss .


My father remained absorbed in melancholy , shut himself up , and refused to see any one till after the last sad office had been performed for my mother .
In the mean time , he gave me instructions to overlook all the servants , and to superintend their work .


At length the day arrived for performing the ceremony of depositing her honoured remains in the family vault , which was in the chancel of the parish church .
My father and myself followed as chief-mourners  and , during the performance of the funeral service , I believe there was not a dry eye amongst the numerous congregation who attended .
Every one felt that he had sustained a loss .
My father was so agitated , that I thought at one moment he would have thrown himself headlong into the grave , upon my mother 's coffin  and it was with some difficulty that he was drawn from the sacred spot .


The maid servant was yet confined to her bed , very ill with the fever  and my eldest sister , who was about thirteen years of age , also fell sick the morning before the funeral took place .
When we returned from church , we found that she had been obliged to go to bed , and the apothecary declared that she also had taken the fever .
My father was very much alarmed for the consequences , and he now devoted his whole attention to the care of my sister , and left me entirely to manage his business .


The servant soon got well , in spite , as it were , of herself  for having heard the dogs howl very much one night , the circumstance made such an impression upon her weak , fearful mind , that it was with the greatest difficulty she could be persuaded that she was better .
The howling of the dogs she considered as a certain omen of her death , and she gave herself up entirely to this ridiculous notion  nor could any thing short of a most excellent constitution have saved her from falling a prey to her own superstition .
However , having been almost forced out of her bed , and persuaded with difficulty to put on her cloaths , she soon found , to her great astonishment , that she was as well as ever she was in her life , with the exception of being a little languid from the effects of the fever .
The recovery of poor BETTY KITE was a great comfort to the whole family  for , although she was one of the plainest women in the world , and also very illiterate , and full of superstition , yet she was an unequalled servant both as to cleanliness and work .
I was a great plague to her in various ways .
She not being the best tempered woman in the world , I used to irritate her very much , by imitating the howling of dogs  and the complaints that she frequently made to my father of my conduct to her were truly ridiculous .


My father was now left a widower , in the prime of life  ( at least he considered himself quite in the prime of life at the age of fifty-eight ) with six children , myself the least , three sisters and two brothers .
With such a family , the loss of a mother is at all times , and under almost all circumstances , the most serious and irreparable  but the loss of such a mother as ours , alas it was most distressing !
Ours was indeed a house of joy turned into a house of mourning  it was not the same house , it was not the same family .
There stood my poor departed mother 's chair , and the sight of the vacant seat perpetually called forth our tears , and sighs , and lamentations  my father would not have it removed , -- but I must quit this subject , or I shall dwell upon it for ever .


My sister recovered from the fever , but there remained such a languor and weakness , that it was a long time before she could walk alone .
My father dreaded her loss now almost as much as he had before dreaded that of my mother  he devoted a great portion of his time to her , and I was still left to look after his very extensive business .
I shall never forget the authority I now began to assume .
I was as dictatorial over the servants , and gave my commands as peremptorily , as if I had been an old farmer .
Some of the old servants , who knew that my directions were improper , disputed my commands , and expostulated against my proceedings .
However , like a true Jack in office , feeling that I was clothed with power , I considered this `` brief authority '' to be all-sufficient , and , like all other ignorant upstarts , what I was deficient in knowledge and real information , I made up in positiveness .
But I soon found that by this foolish course , I lost all influence , and that I was laughed at by the old servants , who knew very well how to please my father , and I was , therefore , astonished that they did not know how to please me .
My own sense now whispered to me that I must be wrong , yet , I nevertheless , appealed to my father , and complained of some of the servants having refused to comply with my directions .
He enquired what those directions were , and he soon taught me that I ought to have applied for information to , and have followed the advice of , those very men with whom I had been contending .
My father then pointed out to me the absolute necessity of becoming a master of my own business , and learning how to do the work myself , before I attempted to give directions to others .
`` This want of knowledge , '' said he , `` causes more than half of the quarrels and squabbles that arise between the master and the servant .
The moment a servant finds out that his master does not understand the nature of his business , he immediately begins to dispute his orders , and then there is an end of all authority  the master probably perseveres in his error , and insists upon it that his servant has not done his work properly , or that he has not done enough  and the moment a master orders a servant to do what is unreasonable , that moment the servant despises the master .
And , unless the master knows how himself to shew the servant with his own hands the way to do any thing , he had better hold his tongue , and not find any fault whatever .
I found my old neighbour Barnes , '' continued he , `` the other day in this predicament .
Although he has been for many many years a farmer , and manages his farm as well as most men , yet , as he was bred up a gardener , he does not know , nor did he ever learn , how to perform many of the laborious parts of husbandry  and I shall , I am sure , convince you , from what occurred to him , of the absolute necessity of acquiring a knowledge of every minute operation belonging to the affairs of husbandry , before you will be able to manage your business with ease to yourself , and with satisfaction to your servants .
As I was riding past the risk yard of my worthy friend and neighbour Barnes 's farm , I heard him storming and blustering , quite in a rage with passion .
`` What is the matter , friend Barnes ?
what is it that has ruffed your temper so ? ''
He was nearly choaked with passion  but at length he informed me , that one of his labourers , of the name of RODNEY , ( who , by-the-bye , I believe had acquired this nick name from the circumstance of his having been a sailor , and fought under Admiral Rodney ) had behaved to him in the most insolent manner .


`` What has he done , neighbour Barnes ? ''


`` Why , '' said he , `` I found fault with the fellow several times , for not making the Helms properly , for thatching the ricks , and he told me as often that he could not make them any better , and at length he put his hand into his pocket , pulled out his purse , and with an oath declared that he would make an Helm with me for a wager of a shilling . ''
`` Well , neighbour Barnes , what did you do , did you accept his offer , or did you shew him how to do it without the wager '' ?
`` Oh , no , replied he , I will send the insolent scoundrel about his business . ''
Upon which , guessing that my neighbour did not understand how to make a helm himself , therefore could not shew the man how to do it , I said , `` let me see the fellow , and talk to him a little , and hear what he has got to say for himself  and let me see whether I can not make him do his work better . ''
We then rode back together to the man , who was doing his work certainly not so well as it ought to have been done .
`` Well , Rodney , '' said I to him , `` what is all this dispute about , between your master and you ? ''
`` Lord , Sir , '' replied the man , `` I do the work as well as I can  but master is always finding fault , and wont show me how to do it better .
I am very willing to learn , Sir , and if you will please to show me how , I will do any thing to please in my power . ''
I then alighted from my horse , and having made some Helms , convinced the man of his error , by ocular demonstration .
He was very thankful for my kindness , immediately followed my example , and did the remainder of his work to the thorough satisfaction of his master as well as with ease to himself .
Barnes was now grown cool , and , while he expressed his thanks to me , he admitted the great superiority that a man who knows the practical part of his business had over one who only knew the theory . ''
[ '' ]


This was the method my father took , to instruct me in useful knowledge  and , as my sister grew better and gained strength , he by degrees began to accompany me over his farms again , and in his rounds he made it his peculiar business to explain every part of the operations that were in progress by the servants .
He appeared to take quite as much delight in cultivating my mind as he did in cultivating the soil , and no man knew better than he did how to cultivate the soil and manage a farm in all its branches .
When there was any particular work to do , I always made a hand in it , and my father never failed to take pains to shew me how to do it well , and in the most scientific manner  always observing , that no man could perform his work well unless he appeared to do it easily to himself .
Sowing time came , I learned to sow  haymaking time came , I learned to mow  harvest came , I learned to reap  in fact , I learned not only to plough , to sow , to reap , to mow , to pitch , to load , to make ricks , to thrash , and to winnow , but I made it my study to excel in all these things  and in recounting some of my feats of activity , strength , agility , and perseverance in these matters , the reader will recollect that I am recording them in the life time of numerous individuals , who were eye-witnesses of these facts , and who worked side by side with me  and as I know that this work is taken in , and read , not only by my old school-fellows , but also by my old [ 8 ] work-fellows , they who peruse these pages will take into their consideration , that I am not writing , neither are they reading , a novel or a romance  that on the contrary , they are perusing the real facts that have occurred within the knowledge and the recollection of thousands .


After the labour of the day was over , and the servants had retired to their homes to obtain their natural rest , to fit them for the toils of the coming morn , my father used to read , alternately with myself , some useful or entertaining book  and be frequently lamented that I appeared to give up so much the study of my Latin books .
I had all along spent a few hours , twice or three times a week , in reading the Classics with the Rev. Mr. Carrington , the clergyman of the parish , who was an excellent scholar , and a very sensible , liberal-minded , worthy man .
To him I am greatly indebted for a deal of useful , sound information , and a knowledge of that portion of mankind with whom my father had never associated .
Mr. now the Rev. Dr. Carrington , the Rector of Berkeley , in Gloucestershire , took great pleasure in completing my education  and at the end of one year , with the advantage of this friendly assistance , I believe sincerely that I had acquired more knowledge , both of literature and of ancient and modern history , than I should have done in seven years at college .


Although my time was so much occupied in the business of the farms , yet I longed for the refined instruction of the mind , which was conveyed with so much kindness , with so much care , and with so much assiduity , by this worthy and intelligent man .
He was at that time denominated by the vulgar , illiterate , grovelling , low-bred slaves of the day , a jacobin  and this excellent , enlightened being , who possessed more real love of country than a legion of the reptiles with which he was surrounded , was constantly exposed to the petty insults of some of his big-bellied , big-headed , empty-pated neighbours , who termed themselves loyal and constitutional subjects , and who took upon themselves to point him out as an enemy to his country , because he did not choose to shut his eyes and join in the war-whoop , the savage , stupid , ideotic cry against the patriotic efforts that were then making by the friends of liberty in France , to rescue their fellow countrymen from the accursed yoke , the double bondage of superstition and tyranny .


This was the period that the people of England , at all times and in all ages esteemed the most credulous people in the universe , were made drunk with their own ignorance and folly .
Mr. Paine had now written and published his wonderful book , his `` Rights of Man , '' and to put down , to prevent the people from reading , to prejudice the public feeling , and to misrepresent and to vilify the author and his work , the whole power of this powerful government was put in motion .
I was myself at this time too young to take any active part in the proceedings  I knew nothing of politics  I loved my country , and was taught to honour my king  I knew not what to make of the violence and bigotry of faction  but I always so far stood by , and gave that support to , my tutor and friend , as to demand that he should be heard in his own defence , when any of these brutal attacks were made upon him by his half-savage , half-human assailants .
My father was a loyal , but a liberal-minded man  when he was present , the parson always had fair play  my father would combat his arguments , but he would always in return hear his reply , and , although he was a very shrewd , intelligent , well-informed man , yet I generally observed that Mr. Carrington had the best of the argument , and that he frequently convinced my father of the truth of his positions .
As my father was obliged , in fairness , to admit the truth of his opponent 's assertions , and the correctness of his reasonings , and the conclusions which he drew therefrom , he generally finished by putting in the plea of necessity , and defending the government and measures of Mr. Pitt , on the ground of policy .
This used to enrage their audience , which consisted of the farmers of the parish and neighbourhood , among whom was frequently some upstart puppy , some ineffable coxcomb , one of their sons , perhaps , apprenticed at the neighbouring town , who came home on a Sunday , at Easter , Whitsuntide , Michaelmas , or Christmas , on a visit , and who had imbibed a double portion of the mania , in consequence of his having licked up the froth and saliva which had been vomited forth by the ministerial agents and tools of the rotten borough , or corporate town , of which his master was one of the rotten limbs .
How often have I seen one of these self-sufficient cubs , with all the solemn mummery , without half the sense , of an ape , deliver what the fool vainly called his opinion , which consisted of the most stupid and senseless contradictions and assertions , generally finishing with something which he conceived to be unanswerable , `` as our mayor said ! ''
How often have I felt my blood boil , to hear my worthy friend and preceptor insulted by one of these contemptible jackanapes .
In fact , more than once , when I found that my friend the clergyman did not condescend even to return a look of contempt in answer to such despicable trash , I have taken up the cudgels myself  but , being fully as ignorant of such matters as my opponent , it generally followed that I retorted nothing more than flat contradictions to his assertions , and frequently I proposed to settle the dispute by an appeal to force  and sometimes it actually ended in blows .
My worthy friend used at first to laugh at my zeal most heartily  but when he found that I more than once concluded by a knock-down argument , he begged me to moderate my ardour , and expostulated with me upon the impropriety , as well as the absurdity , of my following the example of such contemptible opponents , by falling into the very error which he and all good and honest men must deplore , `` that of resorting to brute force , instead of relying upon truth , reason , and justice . ''


Yet though I was warmly his friend , I own I thought the parson took up the matter too harshly against the measures of Mr. Pitt , and I could not understand many of the grounds of complaint which he made against the proceedings of government .
I was taught to believe that those who promoted the Revolution and guillotined the King of France were bloody-minded fellows , and that the people of this happy country ought to do any thing rather than submit to have its streets stained with the blood of their monarch .
I was in the habit of hearing all the ridiculous stories of invasion , rapine , and murder , and of listening to all the hobgoblin accounts of what we were to expect from our fellow creatures on the other side of the channel , and my young mind was worked up to such a pitch , that I longed to become one of the number of those who were going to resist and to punish them if ever they dared to invade our happy shores  nay , I always expressed my determination , if that day should ever arrive , that I would not remain at home , wasting my time in inglorious ease and safety , while they were disfiguring the fair face of our favoured Isle with blood and conquest .
My father , who had frequently heard me burst out in loud declamation and expressions of a patriotic feeling of abhorrence , and threaten defiance in case any attempt at invasion was made , began to reason with me upon this subject  and he trusted that I should never put myself forward to enter any of the volunteer corps , as they were called  adding `` why , do you not see that amongst these men every idea of sincere patriotism or genuine love of country is a mere joke , a farce ?
Look round , '' said he , `` and you will find that nine out of every ten persons who enter these corps do it at the command of their landlord , or some other person in power , who is a magistrate , or the immediate agent of government . ''


I had never before heard my father talk in this manner  but our little friend , the clergyman , appeared delighted to think that he had made a convert of him , and he expressed his pleasure upon ascertaining this fact , by hearing him talk to and admonish me in the way he did .
He joined in my father 's censure of the selfish motives and views of those exclusively loyal gentry , the yeomanry , and said they were a set of tools of the government , who wished to enslave the minds as well as the bodies of their fellow countrymen .
`` Hold !
hold ! ''
said my father to the parson , `` you mistake me if you think I am a convert to your doctrine , I am a truly loyal man , and a sincere friend of the constitution both in church and state  and if I thought these volunteer corps were raised for the sole purpose of repelling the invasion of the French , I would not only wish my son to enter into one of them , but I would also go myself , old as I am , rather than live under a foreign domination .
My opinion , '' said he , `` always has been that we ought not to have meddled with the affairs of France  that we had quite enough to do to mind our own business , and if we could only take care of our own concerns , and manage them with a little more economy , and do justice by the people , and keep our magistrates and the courts of law independent , upright and impartial in their decisions , we need not dread the French , nor all the foreigners in the world put together . ''
`` Why , really , my friend , '' replied Mr. Carrington , `` you have now been merely repeating that for which those whom you call jacobins have been contending : they wish for nothing more than you have said we all ought to have , with this exception , that they say , that the `` only way to secure this is by the means of a free and equal representation . '' ''
`` Ah ! ''
said my father , `` there 's the rub  that word equal will never go down  do you want that equality which has caused the shedding of so much blood in France ? ''
`` No , Sir , '' said the parson , `` we want equal justice , equal political rights  in fact all we want , and all that the people require , to make them free and happy , is equal laws and an impartial and just administration of those laws , which we shall never have while the present corrupt system lasts .
However , '' said the clergyman to me , `` my young friend , do nothing hastily  but should you go into any of the yeomanry corps , with your zealous feeling and patriotic love of country , I fear you will be woefully disappointed if you expect to find any of your comrades acting under a corresponding impulse .
Their main object appears to be to secure their corn ricks , and to keep up the price of their grain  and their landlords , who are the officers of these their tenants , encourage this measure , that they may be enabled to pay them high rents .
Depend upon it nine tenths of them are actuated by this selfish feeling  therefore , let me advise you to reserve your disinterested and praiseworthy patriotism for another and a better occasion . ''
My father said there was too much truth in our friend 's observations , and under this impression I was induced to forego my design of being among the first to volunteer into one of these troops that were about to be embodied  and very much to the satisfaction of my father , as well as to that of my tutor , I resolved to redouble my attention to the business of the farm .


At this time , in the beginning of the year 1794 , great alarm was raised and propagated all over the country , of the introduction of French principles .
Party spirit ran high in every company and society .
A great portion of the enlightened part of the community protested in very loud terms against the war , and numerous petitions were sent from various parts of the country demanding peace .
The debates in parliament were very violent , and Mr. Fox , with an irresistible eloquence and a prophetic voice , foretold the disasters that were likely to follow , if such a course of hostility were pursued against the liberties of France , and he accused the ministers of making and continuing the war for the purpose of ultimately restoring the tyranny of the Bourbons , and replacing that family upon the throne .
This was disclaimed by all the ministers , and Mr. Pitt broadly and unequivocally denied that they had any such intention .
The opposition moved to address the King to make peace , but this was negatived by a large majority , and war !
war !
war !
eternal war against French principles !
was the cry which was resounded by all the agents of the government throughout the country  and although this was lamented and deplored by every humane , thinking , rational man , yet such was the fact , that the nation was drunk with the clamour , and particularly the lower orders ( for they then truly merited the degrading appellation ) .
Church and King mobs were the order of the day !
Every honest man who had the courage to express his opinion , was denounced as a jacobin  and great depredations were committed in many parts of the country .
Dreadful outrages of this sort had been perpetrated at Birmingham , as far back as the year 1792 , by the drunken , hired , besotted populace destroying the houses and property of several worthy and patriotic , and therefore obnoxious , individuals .
At Bath a very worthy man of the name of Campbell had his house pulled down by one of these drunken church-and-king mobs , merely because he took in the COURIER NEWSPAPER , published by the notorious DANIEL STEWART , who was a violent republican , and who propagated his principles and doctrines in that paper .
I am informed that the hired wretches , who acted under authority , actually pulled down this poor fellow 's house to the tune of God save the King  many of the loyal inhabitants of that loyal town , who were standing by looking on , excited them to persevere , by joining in the chorus .
Poor Campbell was ruined by the loss of his house and furniture , which broke his heart .
The fact of his taking in the Courier was understood to have arisen from his acquaintance with Stewart , with whom he had been in the habits of intimacy when they were both JOURNEYMEN TAYLORS .
This notorious DANIEL STEWART , who has made a large fortune by turning his coat , and devoting the columns of the Courier to the ministers , is still the same man at the bottom of his heart  and I understand , from those who are his pot companions , that he is as violent a jacobin and supporter of revolutionary doctrines over his cup as he ever was .
To call such a miserable creature as this a radical , would be to cast a greater stigma upon the word radical than all that Castlereagh , Brougham , and Canning ever sent forth against those who bear it .
It is confidently asserted by those who profess to know his private concerns , that he has feathered his dirty nest well , and that , as the best means of securing his ill gotten pelf , he has lately invested it in the French funds , to the amount of one hundred thousand pounds !


On the first of June in this year , 1794 , the brave sailors under Lord Howe defeated the French fleet , took seven sail of the line , and brought them into Spithead  and it was announced that the king and queen and the royal family were going to Portsmouth , to thank and to congratulate Lord Howe and those brave officers who had survived the dreadful slaughter of the engagement .
As the Prince of Wales , a ninety-six gun ship of war , was to be launched upon the occasion , a great number of persons from the part of the world where I lived , which was about fifty miles from Portsmouth , were going there to see the launch , and to witness the effect of this bloody battle .
I was very anxious to make one of the party , and I expressed my wish to my father , with which he positively refused to comply .
This refusal arose from some little misunderstanding we had about a favourite maid servant of his who lived with us at the time , to whom I had not conducted myself with all the attention that she required .
She had therefore caused that sort of shyness and distance between my father and me , which rendered my home not so pleasant as it had heretofore been , and indeed exactly the reverse of what it had been in my poor mother 's life time .
My father assigned as a reason for his detaining me , that there was some hay about , and although this was of very trivial moment , it being a very small quantity , yet he positively refused to give his consent to my going .
I urged my plea of constant attention to business , and my extraordinary personal exertions for several years past , wherein I had done more work than almost any two of his men servants , and I demanded to know if he had ever seen me neglect his business , or shift from performing the severest labour ?
He admitted that he had no fault to find with me , and that he did not require that I should work so hard  nay , he added , that , so far from having any complaint to make against me for not working , he thought I tasked myself too much , and that he was fearful that I should injure myself by such excessive exertions as he had frequently witnessed .
`` Then pray , Sir , '' said I , `` why will you not allow me a little recreation ?
this small indulgence ? ''
I promised I would return at the end of two days .
But all would not do .
I found that his favourite maid had prejudiced him , and I was foolish enough to hint this to him , which he resented very warmly , and gave me a lecture in such language as I had never before received from him .
At length we rose to very high words , and the dispute was of so serious a nature that he almost ordered me out of doors .
It ended in my declaring that nothing should deter me from going to Portsmouth , and by his declaring that , if I did , I should never enter his house again  and in order to put my threat of going out of my power , he took my horse , which was already saddled , instead of his own , and rode out to the other farm .


Burning with rage at this harsh , this unusual , as well as unjust treatment , I rushed up stairs , and began dressing myself for the journey .
My sister flew up stairs with tears in her eyes , and upon her knees implored me not to think of going .
I coolly asked her if she had heard what passed between my father and me .
She replied that she had heard it with the greatest astonishment and dismay , and that she had heard my determination with the greatest pain .
Although she knew too well the cause of my father 's harshness to me , and felt most acutely the reason of his ill humour , which she herself had sometimes partaken of , and had borne in silence , yet she dreaded the effect of my leaving home .
However , all her expostulations were in vain  I had made my resolve , and that once done with me , even then , nothing but death would have deterred me from carrying it into effect .
Having dressed myself , I saddled my father 's favourite horse , as he had taken mine , and having mounted him , I was twenty miles on my road to Portsmouth in less than two hours .


I slept with a friend , and started the next morning at four o'clock , to ride the remaining thirty miles , in order to be there by eleven o'clock , which was the hour the ship was to be launched .
On the other side of Andover I overtook a gentleman , of the name of NEALE , who , as well as myself , was also going to Portsmouth , to see the Royal Family .
I had known him a little when a boy at school at Andover , and having soon learned each others intentions , we agreed to go in company together .
We intended to have breakfasted at Winchester , but we were too early , all the windows and doors of the inns were shut , and we passed on till we came to Whiteflood , a small inn by the road side , where we got good corn for our horses , and an excellent breakfast for ourselves .


We arrived at Gosport about nine o'clock , and having put up our horses we crossed to Portsmouth about ten .
The gates of the dockyard were closed , and we were told that we were too late to be launched in the man of war , that the king , queen , and three or four of the princesses were at the governor 's house , and the ship would be launched at eleven precisely .
I had more anxiety about being launched in a ship of war , never having seen any thing of the sort before , than I had about any thing  therefore I felt greatly mortified at being too late , and I began to try the experiment of bribing the gatekeeper , who had positive orders not to let any one pass after that hour .
My friend Neale , seeing it in vain to remain there , took another course , and said he would get a boat to see the launch , if he could not get into it  but as I had set my heart upon being in the ship when it was launched , I remained at the door .
As soon as I was alone with the door-keeper , I renewed my application , and finding that he began to relax , I plied him close , and he soon put me in the way how to cheat the devil .
He asked if I did not know any one who lived in the dock yard , and I instantly made up my mind to say yes , and urged him to repeat some of their names .
This he did , and I was luckily saved the disgrace of telling a lie , for the second person he named was an old school-fellow of mine  and I never in my life claimed acquaintance with any old friend with so much alacrity and pleasure .
A half crown now opened the gates , and in I went , a fine sunburnt country youth , and made my way to my friend 's house as fast as possible .
Another check !
he was from home !
I then hastened to the part where the majestic Prince stood upon her few remaining stocks , ready at a moment 's notice for the signal of being launched into the watery element .
But no entrance was to be obtained !
all communication was cut off from the dock to the vessel , except by one step ladder , strongly guarded , waiting for the arrival of the principal commissioner , who had gone to conduct the royal family to the sort of balcony that was erected to enable them to see the whole of the launch with ease and safety .
I now placed myself as near as possible to the foot of this ladder , anxiously waiting the arrival of the commissioner .
At length the old gentleman arrived , dressed in an admiral 's uniform .
The pressure of the crowd was immense  but , although it was the first crowd I had ever had to encounter , I made a dash and forced my way through , close up to the foot of the ladder and , as the old officer ascended , I sprang through the sentinels and up the steps , and held him fast by the skirt of his coat .
The sentinels seized me and pulled me back , with great violence .
I held fast , and down came the commissioner and myself together to the bottom of the ladder .
The old boy stared , and the sentinels swore , but I still held fast .
They endeavoured to release him , and struck me some hard blows .
With one desperate effort , however I sprang by the commissioner , and was up the ladder like a cat .
I was seized at the top to be handed back again , and as I was about to make a determined resistance , the commissioner came up and kindly released me , and after a gentle reprimand for placing him in such danger , I was permitted to remain on board and to be launched in the Prince of Wales  having got on board more than an hour after all other communication had been cut off from her : and I obtained this gratification in the presence of thousands , who hailed the success of my daring perseverence by giving me three cheers .
This was the first act of my life that gained me the cheers of a large multitude , and I was not a little proud of the compliment .
I believe there were upwards of a thousand persons on board , and I was struck with astonishment at the stupendous magnitude of a ship of war of the first rate .
On the larboard side of this magnificent specimen of the wooden walls of old England , sat the venerable monarch George the Third with his Queen and their fine family of Princesses in all their pride and beauty , two or three of them at that time being remarkably fine young women .
I believe they were accompanied by one of the princes , and on the side of the king stood the victorious hero of the day , Lord Howe , commonly called by the sailors , Black Dick .
In a few minutes , unknown and unobserved by me , the signal was given , and she glided almost imperceptibly from the stocks into the middle of the harbour , thus riding most majestically dignified in the midst of applauding and admiring myriads who hailed her progress with enthusiastic cheers  the king , the queen , and the princesses all waving their handkerchiefs .
Such was the beauty of this launch , and such was the skill with which it was accomplished that the only sensation which I felt was , that the other ships , that were along side of us , appeared to move gently from us .
A boat now came alongside of her , being hailed by a party , of which the late John Weeks , who then kept the Bush at Bristol , was one , and he began to descend [ 9 ] when a thought struck me , that as I was the last person , except the commissioner of the Dock-yard , who came on board , so I should like to be the first out of her  and the thought was no sooner conceived than I put it in execution .


Although there were two or three persons going down the ladder on the side of the ship before me , yet I made a spring and jumped fourteen or fifteen feet , and reached the boat first , at the imminent risk of swamping her .
I did not get any cheers for this , but many a reprimand for my temerity .
But , as my poor father used at that time to say , that it was a word and a blow with me  I was very quick in forming a plan , and when I had once made up my mind , it was generally executed with the rapidity of lightening .
I returned , and dined at the Fountain Inn with the party from Bath and Bristol , and in the evening I called again upon my old school fellow , whose father held some situation and lived in the dock yard , but I do not now recollect his name .
He was at home , and was very happy to see me , and having introduced me to his father , mothers and sisters , together with some friends who were on a visit , I drank tea with them  and being offered it , I most willingly accepted part of his bed , a valuable acquisition to me , as a bed was not to be had , either in , or within ten miles of Portsmouth , for love or money .


Before I rose in the morning , my young friend informed me that , in the course of the forenoon , I should have an opportunity of seeing the royal family , as they were going to inspect the dock-yard , and on that account the gates were kept closed , that they might not be annoyed by the crowd , which would otherwise have impeded their progress .
He said that he must not appear , but he thought I might , as a stranger , take an opportunity of getting very near them , without creating any particular notice .


I took the hint , and thanked him most cordially for the information  and when the royal party came round , I joined them without any ceremony .
They were attended by very few persons , among whom were Lord Howe and the commissioner to whom I had caused such a fall the day before : the latter eyed me immediately , and shook his head , but in such a good humoured way that it encouraged me to remain rather than otherwise .
I therefore now joined the party , at a respectful distance .
At the entrance of the cable room lay a piece of a very large cable , about six feet long , to which Lord Howe called the attention of the royal family , by stating that it was part of the cable of the French admiral 's ship , and that it had been shot off at that length by two balls from the English fleet , which were supposed to have struck it at the same moment at six feet distance .
Lord Howe also said that there was a twelve pounder ball stuck into it also , but as it lay on the ground , and they could not see it , he ordered one of the attendants to heave it upon its end .
It was however , too heavy , and the man could not accomplish it , but let it fall back again .
The commissioner was calling some one to assist , when I sprung forward , and having seized it , I heaved it upright in an instant  for which the gallant admiral as well as the commissioner thanked me , and I held it nearly a quarter of an hour , while the king and all the family examined it , as it was esteemed a great curiosity , and a striking proof of the heat and severity of the engagement .
The king very politely now thanked me , and the queen particularly so , and expressed a desire that some one should help me to sink it down again , fearing that it was too heavy for me  but I was anxious to shew my strength , as well as my gallantry , and I sunk it into its place on the ground again , with great ease .
The princesses deigned a smile , which I esteemed a very high reward .
After this I went round the whole dock yard with the party , and offered my assistance whenever it was wanted , which was accepted with the greatest politeness  the princesses entering at times freely into conversation with me .


At length the commissioner took me aside , and asked me how I came into the dock yard .
I stated the fact to him as it was , and he then said he had his Majesty 's command to ask my name .
I told him my name , what was my occupation , and whence I came  and the king hearing that I was the son of a large Wiltshire farmer , asked me many questions relating to the crops , c. c. all of which I answered very much to his satisfaction , and when they departed , he politely took leave of me .
The reader may easily conceive that I was not a little proud of the opportunity I had of being so near , and of having such means of conversing with , the royal party .


I forgot to notice , that the Prince of Wales , the ship which was launched the day before , had been got back again into Dock , the same afternoon , and was this day exhibited to his majesty completely copper-bottomed , which operation had been performed in twenty-four hours by the workmen in the yard  an instance of speed and of the power of well-directed and incessant labour , which never was before , and probably never has since , been equalled in the annals of ship-building .
I went on board some of the captured French ships of war , that had been cleared up from the carnage of the battle for the inspection of the royal visitors  but , notwithstanding the care which had been taken to put them in a state fit to be viewed , the visible proofs of the horrible slaughter met the eye in every direction , and the recollection of the sight , even at this distance of time , makes the heart sicken .


Although I was at this time in the zenith of my loyalty , I could not avoid enquiring of myself whether all this blood and carnage , all this waste of valuable life , was absolutely necessary ?
Whether no means could have been devised to settle the point in dispute , without resorting to arms , and sacrificing the best blood of both countries ?
On the one hand , the too common feeling was , that it was absolutely necessary , and almost all those who were the loudest in their lamentations , and who appeared most to deplore the dreadful loss of so many gallant men , were at the same time the greatest advocates of the war , and boldly justified it upon the score of dire necessity  adding , that it was better a few should suffer in war , than that the whole country should be overrun by an invading army , which they would have us to believe was composed of such monsters as would never rest satisfied , unless they murdered us all , young and old , male and female .
The republicans of France were described as wild beasts of the most ferocious kind , whose only delight was in blood , and who never spared either age or sex .
But yet it often occurred to me , should but the opinion , the representations of my worthy friend and tutor be correct , that not the French republicans , but those who supported the war , the English ministers , were the bloody minded monsters  that they , as he asserted , were the cause of the war , in order to restore the old tyranny that had desolated France , and had for so many centuries enslaved a brave , an intelligent , and a truly gallant people ?
These reflections would frequently come across my mind  but we were told they were threatening to invade us , and the threat of an invasion always roused the spirit of every British heart , and made it glow with the desire to repel them .


I had now seen nearly all the sights , and as I had been absent from home four days , I began to bend my thoughts that way  but the reflection that I had left my father , not only without his leave , but also against his consent , now began to render every thing that others appeared to enjoy very irksome to me .
I , however , mustered courage , took my horse , and reached home in the afternoon of the fifth day .
At the door I met my father , who received me in the most hostile manner .
He lavished his imprecations upon my head , and as he burst out of the room , he , in a paroxysm of passion , ordered me to quit his house , and see his face no more .
Springing by me in a menacing manner , he repeated his denunciations , declaring that I should not remain under his roof .
He then went to the stable , took his horse , which I had just brought home , mounted it , and rode away towards his Farms .


Young and foolish as I was , I felt that I had given him cause of just complaint , although I thought his conduct displayed an unnecessary and unbecoming rigour , in refusing me such an indulgence in the first instance ?
My eldest sister implored me to endeavour to conciliate my father , and informed me how uneasy he had been since my first departure , and what a wretched house they had had at home .
But his determined aspect at leaving me , the threats which he held out , and the peremptory tone in which he ordered me to depart from his house , appeared to me to admit of no alternative  and therefore , with a desperate determination I hastened up stairs , and packed up a small portmanteau , and , in less than half an hour , in spite of the entreaties of my sister , I was mounted upon my own horse , and took a final leave , as I expected , of that home where I had passed so many delightful happy days .


As I embraced my afflicted sister , who had fainted upon seeing my determination , and who was now relieved by a flood of tears , I could not refrain from calling aloud upon the angelic spirit of my dear departed mother , who had she been alive this dreadful calamity had never befallen me or our family .
I tore myself from my sister , who was in an agony of grief , and who now upon her knees implored me to think of my father , and how miserable my leaving home again , under such distressing circumstances , would make him  she used all the arguments which her reason could suggest , to persuade me that it was my duty to bear with his temper , and to submit to his will , however arbitrary .
But , as I was now of age , and as I had laboured incessantly in my father 's business for nearly five years , and had scarcely ever left it for a day , I was mortified at his unnecessary severity , in denying me the privilege of a day or two upon such an occasion  and , besides , as my father 's temper was very much altered since the death of my mother , and my home was become not at all comfortable of late , I was unfortunately not in the humour to brook such harsh treatment  nor indeed , did I know how it was possible for me to remain after his determined behaviour at quitting me .
I therefore , most unwisely and most imprudently , started off as I thought to seek my fortune  determined , at all events , if I could not live in my father 's house , that I would leave the kingdom .


I rode to Bath , a distance of thirty miles , in about three hours , whence , having baited my horse , I rode forward to Bristol , where I arrived and put up at the White Lion , in Broad-street , about eight o'clock  having ridden from Portsmouth to Bristol , a distance of ninety five miles , in about thirteen hours .
I was not known to any one at the inn , nor to any one in Bristol except a Mr. Gresley , of whom my father rented Littlecot Farm .
I found him out immediately , and he received me with great kindness , expressing himself most happy to see me , as he had repeatedly given me invitations to come and visit him .
I carefully concealed the rupture with my father , and , very luckily for me , I was in very good hands , as my friend , although an easy voluptuary , was nevertheless an amiable and a good-hearted man , and took care to check instead of encouraging me in any soft of debauchery , which a youth of my age was so likely to fall into in such a profligate city .


I began the very next day to look out for some situation amongst the captains of vessels outward bound , and I was soon introduced to a very worthy man , a friend of Mr. Gresley 's , who , in the course of ten days , was about to sail to Africa in the command of a vessel upon the slave trade .
I soon imparted to him my wish to go abroad in some active situation  but I bound him to secrecy , even with my friend Gresley .
He professed to be very much pleased with me , but endeavoured , by every means in his power , to prevail upon me to abandon my design  and he pointed out to me , in very glowing colours , all the miseries and all the perils which were incident to a sea-faring life , and did every thing that he possibly could , to persuade me to return to my father 's house .
At length I told him that I was irrevocably determined to look out for a situation , and to close with the first captain who would give me a birth , and the longer the voyage the better I should be pleased with it  for I was resolved upon leaving England , as I could not bear the thoughts of remaining in this country , and an alien from the house of my father .
At last , after he had ascertained that I was immutably resolved to go to sea , he at once made me an offer of taking me out as his clerk and cabin friend .
I jumped at the offer , but told him that I had but little money , and was , perhaps , ill prepared for such a voyage .
He then made one more trial to prevail upon me to return , but with as little success as before .
Finding that it was in vain to reason any further , he then said that be would equip me the next morning , at his own expense , with all the necessary clothing , c. c. for the voyage  and he added , that if he were successful , of which he had no doubt , he would pay me something handsome for my services , which he anticipated would be very valuable to him .


The morning came without my having closed my eyes , I having been entirely occupied the whole of the night with the thoughts of my undertaking , to which I looked forward with the greatest enthusiasm , regardless of the atrocious occupation upon which I was about to enter .
In fact , it did not once occur to me , that the slave trade was any worse than any other trade , so little had I thought upon it , and so little did I know of the nature of it at that time .
Thousands being engaged in it , who were protected by the laws , it never came into my head that I was about to commit any moral crime .
Indeed , I was driven to such a state of desperation by the quarrel which I had had with my father , and was so indignant at what I thought his cruel treatment , that I was a fit subject for any enterprise , even had it been ten times more desperate than that in which I was about to engage  and , having once made up my mind to the thing , I thought of nothing else till my trunk of clothes was ready and on board .
That being effected , I went down with the captain , and took possession of my cabin and birth in the vessel , which lay off King 's - road , and , as she was ready to sail with the first fair wind , I should have staid on board had not the captain insisted upon my taking leave of Mr. Gresley , and sending my horse back to my father .
Although I considered the horse as my own , and had been offered thirty guineas for him , yet such was the liberality and proper feeling of the captain , that he absolutely refused to take me unless I returned the horse , and I consequently , in his presence , hired a man to take him off the next morning .


I was to see Mr. Gresley by appointment at the White Lion at nine o'clock that evening , and was to go down with the captain , at eight the next day , to the vessel , which was to weigh anchor at ten , and drop down the Bristol Channel with the tide .
The wind being fair , we expected to be off Ilfracombe the same night .
Every thing was arranged  I had written home , and taken leave of my father and my sister , lamenting the cause , but rejoicing in the prospect , of my voyage  I had drank tea with the captain , and was anxiously waiting the arrival of our mutual friend Gresley to break the affair to him , and at the same time to take leave of him , when the waiter announced a gentleman enquiring for Mr. Hunt .
I rose to receive , as I supposed , my friend Gresley , and was prepared to give him a brief explanation of my intentions , when , lo !
who should walk in but an intimate friend of my father 's , who had just arrived in his own carriage from Bath , in search of the fugitive .
He immediately produced a letter from my father , not only inviting my return home , not only promising forgiveness to me , but actually intreating my forgiveness for his harshness towards me , and imploring me to hasten home , and relieve him from the terrible state of misery to which my absence had reduced him .
The language of his letter was such as would have melted the heart of a much more hardened offender than I was -- but , I had made an engagement with the captain , and I told my father 's friend that I was sorry that he was come too late , but that no consideration whatever should make me run from the engagement which I had contracted with him , at my own particular request .
It is true that I felt an irresistible impulse to embrace my beloved father again  that to be restored to his good opinion was a treasure to me , far surpassing all and every prospect that my sanguine hopes had painted in the most vivid colours upon my enthusiastic imagination , and that I felt for a moment a struggle between honour and duty  yet , I am almost ashamed to relate it , but the truth must be told , that I instantly declared that as I had gone so far , no power on earth should deter me from fulfilling my engagement with Captain -- .
This worthy , warm-hearted , and disinterested fellow , however , instantly protested , that under such circumstances , with such a prospect of my being restored to my family and friends , nothing in the world should induce him to take me with him .


At this moment , my friend Gresley arrived , and heard , from the captain and my father 's friend , my obstinate resolve with the greatest astonishment .
He assured me that , unless I instantly gave up all thoughts of going , he would get a warrant from his friend , the mayor , to detain me by force .
This was , however , unnecessary  for , after the captain 's generous and manly avowal , I yielded without farther delay to the earnest entreaties of all present , and I believe that the worthy captain felt as much real delight and happiness at the result as anyone of the party .
My father 's friend offered to pay the captain for any expence that he had been put to on my account , but the latter positively refused to take a farthing , adding , that he should sell what he had provided for me for two hundred per cent .
profit , and that he would rather lose two hundred per cent .
than forego the pleasure he felt at the idea of a reconciliation , between his young friend and his father .


The kindness of my father 's letter had a great effect upon me  the expressions of sorrow which it contained at my departure , and the assurance , that he would be completely miserable till my return , recalled all his former kindness to me , and I would instantly have set out on my way home , although it was now dusk , and it rained in torrents , I had already ordered my horse to be saddled -- that horse which I had the same evening paid a man twelve shillings to take back to my father 's house without his master , I was now eager to mount myself , that I might fly to receive my parent 's blessing , and acknowledge my error in disobeying his commands .
But my friends all entreated me to defer my departure till the morning , to which I reluctantly consented , and retired to bed about twelve o'clock , after having taken a most affectionate leave of the worthy , generous , and kind-hearted captain .
Good God !
how often have I been since rivetted to the earth , as it were with astonishment , when I contemplated such a man being employed upon such a cruel , unjust , unchristian , murderous traffic as that of the slave trade !


I certainly retired to my bed , having ordered the ostler to get my horse ready by three o'clock  but no rest did I obtain .
For the first time in my life , I now learned what it was to go to bed without being able to go to sleep  for two long hours , I tossed and turned about a thousand times , but deep had flown from my eyes .
I heard the quarters strike , and the watchman go his lonely round  my thoughts were all at home , and I was wretched till I threw myself at my poor distressed father 's feet , to claim with a certainty of receiving his blessing and forgiveness .
I , who , but a few hours before , expected and intended to bid farewell to my native land , and to leave behind me all that was dear and valuable to me in this world  I , who was prepared to sail the next morning , almost without regret , and had thoughtlessly undertaken to become one of those who were the most horrid and most unnatural of all unnatural and horrid thieves and murderers  I , who should have gone to bed and slept as sound as a rock under such circumstances till I was called in the morning , could not , now I was about to return to my kindest friends , and to make myself and my father happy , I could not sleep one moment .
Gracious God !
upon what a precipice had I stood !
from what a world of misery was I rescued , by the kind hand of Providence !
for if I had gone upon such an errand , and if I had been instrumental in robbing one human being or fellow creature of his life , or of what was more valuable to him -- his LIBERTY , it would afterwards have been to me a source of never-failing misery .
Thank God !
I was saved from that pang .
Had my father 's messenger come twelve hours later , I should have been sailed , and in all probability have been a participator in such crimes as I should never have forgiven myself , for having joined in committing .


The clock struck two  I could remain in bed no longer  I jumped up , and having found my way into the yard , I roused the ostler , and having got my horse saddled , I passed Temple Gate just as the clock struck three  and without drawing bit more than once , I reached home before nine o'clock , a distance of forty-five miles .
My father and my sister met me at the door  but to attempt to describe the affecting reconciliation would be only doing an injustice to my own feelings .
My poor father , however , would scarcely allow me to offer any apology for my undutiful behaviour  he took all the blame to himself  he had reflected more than I had upon the consequences of my voyage , the full particulars of which I found he knew , he having received an account of my every movement , and known all my plans , which had in confidence been communicated by the honest captain to Mr. Gresley , that he might apprise my father of them and endeavour by all the means in his power to procure for me , if possible , a reconciliation before he sailed  he being resolved to convince himself that all hopes of that desirable object were fruitless ere he permitted me to accompany him .
This was an instance of the most disinterested friendship , and I have every reason to believe that he even delayed the sailing of the vessel for several days , in order to give time for Mr. Gresley to send to my father .
This information Mr. Gresley communicated without delay , and my father no sooner received it , than he dispatched a confidential messenger , his neighbour , Mr. John Coward of Enford , with a strict injunction not to spare any pains to find me , and to hasten my return home .


My Father who had hitherto , since the death , of my mother , conducted himself towards me with a degree of austerity and rigid discipline not altogether calculated to conciliate my hasty disposition , now relaxed his usual strictness , and ever afterwards proved himself not only a kind parent , but an indulgent and sincere Friend .
-- He lamented upon this occasion the severe loss of my mother , in which I most heartily joined  for we both attributed the late dispute and separation to the want of an amiable mediator , which , if my poor mother had been alive , she would have been upon this , as she had been in many former instances , in which she had been of the greatest utility and benefit , as a peace-maker and promoter of family happiness and concord .
My father , who had long since witnessed with some anxiety my aspiring disposition , now began to dread the evil consequences of those lofty notions of patriotism , and that disinterested love of country , which in my earlier years he had taken so much pains to instil into my young mind , and had been so anxious that I should imbibe .
He now viewed my daring spirit with a mingled pleasure and pain  he dreaded the result of such ardent feelings , because he foresaw that they would lead me into the greatest difficulties and dangers , unless he checked them by timely control .
He now freely told me that he was actuated by this motive when he refused to give me his consent to go to Portsmouth , to witness the effects of Lord Howe 's brilliant victory over the French fleet .
He told me , too , that he had the same object in view , when , the summer before , he refused my application , to go and see the grand review on Bagshot Heath .
It was , however , at too late a period that he began to check my patriotic ardour  he had , himself , `` bent the twig , '' and it had grown too powerfully in the direction which he had given to it to be directed to any other .
Although I was no politician at that time , yet my bosom glowed with as sacred a love of country , with as strong a predilection for the rights and liberties of the people , with as pure disinterested love of truth and justice , as ever warmed the youthful heart of man .
-- yet , notwithstanding I was a loyal man to the backbone , I never joined in , or approved of , the persecution of any one , for holding opinions different from those which I , myself , openly professed .
I knew many persons who were called jacobins at this time , and although I thought them violent in their principles and professions , yet I never quarrelled with any of them upon the score of opinion .
I was always the first to stand forward to protect the oppressed  and I began sincerely to sympathise with the labouring poor .
I had now , for some years , worked with them side by side , day by day , week by week , month by month , and year year by year .
I had toiled in the field with the labourers of my father  I had heard their complaints  I had witnessed their increasing privations  and although I often checked the ebullition of their discontent , which I sometimes attributed to disaffection , yet I never mocked their misery , I never persecuted or oppressed any one , because he was considered a disaffected person , or what was a synonymous term a jacobin .
In fact , I sometimes got myself into very disagreeable situations , for expressing my love of fair play .
Once , in particular , I remember I was in the boxes at the theatre at Salisbury , when there was a violent party call for `` God save the King . ''
I was one of the loyal who as loudly demanded this tune to be played as any loyal man in the house  after some trifling opposition the call was complied with , and the performers came forward upon the stage and sung it : there was then a call for hats off , and I have no doubt that I was as zealous in this call as any one , because , in the first place I really was a loyal man , and I was in the side boxes with a very loyal party .
There was , however , one person , in the centre of the front row of the pit , who kept his hat on , and steadily refused to pull it off .
This caused a great uproar , and a general call to turn him out .
At length , some persons near him attempted to pull his hat off by force  but he defended himself for some time with great success , and kept his hat still on his head .
By this time the national air was finished , but still there was a call to pull his hat off and to turn him out  he was surrounded now by numbers , who , urged on by those in the boxes , not only forcibly deprived him of his hat , but likewise began to use him ill .
I was now as loud in my demand for fair play as I had been previously for hats off .
They still persisted in their endeavour to turn him out , which he as manfully resisted , although he was surrounded with a host of foes , without any one , not even his friends who were with him , offering to give any assistance .
I cried shame !
shame !
shame !
as loud as I could , and demanded fair play .
He had by this time at least a dozen assailing him at once , and they had actually got him upon the spikes of the orchestra , with an intention to throw him over out of the pit among the musicians .
I felt enraged and indignant at such unmanly conduct , and at length I sprung out of the box into the pit , and having rushed up to him , I dealt the cowardly crew that were attacking him some heavy falls , and soon cleared off the gang , so that the person , whom they had literally got hanging upon the spikes , was enabled to extricate himself .
In effecting this , I received as well as gave many severe blows  and by some I was considered as very foolish for interfering , while all the loyal loudly blamed me for preventing his being turned out .
Although I very much disapproved of the gentleman 's taste and stubbornness , yet I could not look on and see a fellow man ill-used for expressing his opinion , because that opinion was contrary to my own sentiments .
However , the play now proceeded , and the gentleman , Mr John Axford of Eastcot , was allowed to keep his seat and his hat on , uninterrupted , to the end of the performance .


In consequence of this circumstance , I afterwards became very intimate with Mr. Axford , who was very grateful for my assistance , and I , although I disapproved of his politics , could not but admire his independent spirit .
He was a man of a most amiable character , much intelligence , and a quick penetration  a great reader of the political history of this and the neighbouring countries , he possessed the most retentive memory , and could repeat almost all that he read .
Of the French Revolution , and of Mr. Paine 's Rights of Man , he was an enthusiastic admirer , and a determined enemy to the war that England was carrying on against the people of France .
In fact , he was a lover of truth , justice and liberty , and therefore was of course denominated a jacobin .
He lived and died railing against the unjust and unnecessary war which the ministers of England were waging against liberty in France  and as he was a warm admirer of Mr. Fox , he entered into almost all his views , and joined him in forcibly predicting all that has since occurred , as to the ruin of the country by debt and insupportable taxation .
He was , indeed , a spirited and enlightened advocate of genuine freedom  and he never failed , even in the worst of times , publicly to avow his sentiments .
He certainly possessed more real political knowledge , and a more correct knowledge of the situation and the affairs of the country , than any man with whom I have ever met , with the exception of Mr. Cobbett .
Although I knew him for many years before I concurred in his sentiments , yet I found him a sincere friend , and a most intelligent companion , and his death was lamented more by me than that of any political acquaintance I ever had .
He died before I was much of a politician , and before I appeared much in public life  but from him I learned much which I have never forgotten , and which has been , and ever will be , of the greatest service to me as a public man .
Were I not to pay this well-deserved tribute to his memory , I should prove myself to have been unworthy of his friendship , and undeserving of my own approbation .


He was always denounced as a jacobin by the ignorant , and by the interested sycophants of the day  but his merit and his public spirit were duly estimated by all good and impartial men that knew him , and by no one more than by the late , the first , Marquis of Lansdown , with whom he was particularly intimate .


At this period , 1794 , the whole country was greatly agitated with political discussions  every one having an eye upon the bloody and ferocious proceedings committed under the tyranny of Robespierre in Paris .
This caused great alarm in England , for fear of the progress of French principles , and all the alarmists rallied round the Pitt administration , and war , war , eternal war against French principles , was the watch-word of the day .
The parliament met in January , and the enormous supplies were granted almost without any opposition .
Eighty thousand men were voted for the sea , forty thousand for the land-service , and likewise one hundred thousand militia , and FORTY THOUSAND SUBSIDISED GERMANS .
The estimates for this service amounted to NINETEEN MILLIONS .
In order to keep the people in good humour , and to make them submit to pay the enormous increase of taxation , the threat of INVASION was held out , and described with all its horrors as being about to be realised .
This set the John Bulls half-mad  and , like men half-mad , half-drunk , they were ready to swallow any thing that the minister of the day prescribed .
Voluntary contributions , and volunteer corps were raised all over the country .
In the mean time Mr. Pitt , who had deserted the cause of reform , of which , previous to his coming into power , he had been one of the warmest and most zealous advocates , true , apostate-like , took care to presecute all his former associates , who were too honest to abandon that cause which he had betrayed .
In Scotland , that excellent and worthy man , Mr. Maurice Margarot , and others were transported for fourteen years for having been members of the British Convention .
Mr. Thos .
Walker , of Manchester , was tried on a false accusation of high treason , at Lancaster  but was honourably acquitted .
Messrs Hardy , Tooke , Joyce , and Thelwall , were also indicted and tried upon a pretended charge of high treason , at the Old Bailey in London  but this premeditated cold-blooded attempt of the ministers to destroy these innocent men , their political opponents , by setting on the plea of constructive treason , was frustrated by the verdict of an honest London jury .
Messrs. Tooke and Thelwall were very able , and perhaps the most powerful , advocates of liberty in England at that time  and the ministers of the day might , with some men , have justified the attempt to destroy such enemies upon the score of STATE POLICY  but their attempt upon poor HARDY , who was a simple , inoffensive , harmless , plodding shoemaker , possessing neither talent , influence , nor the smallest power to do them any harm whatever , this was a proof of the vindictive and bloody intentions of the men in office  and it caused a great sensation throughout the country , and the verdicts of the jury were hailed with pleasure by every honest thinking man in the kingdom , who was not under the influence of an unjust prejudice .
The reign of terror was now proclaimed , and a great number of worthy men were imprisoned in dungeons , under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act , which tyrannical proceeding greatly agitated the whole country .
This , therefore , will not be an improper place , to record , and bring to the recollection of the public , who were the men in power , under whose auspices and by whose directions these acts were perpetrated against the lives and liberties of the people , and particularly against those who with patriotic energy opposed those measures which they foretold , with a prophetic warning voice , would bring this country to that wretched state of poverty and slavery to which it is now reduced .
Although I was too young at that time to be much of a politician , and did not enter publicly into any of the measures for or against these proceedings , yet , as I shall henceforward record the particular political occurrences of each succeeding year , I shall also take care to put upon record the names of those who were at the head of the administration , and who took a prominent part in carrying them into execution .
Mr. PITT may be truly said to have been the ruler of the destinies of this mighty kingdom , and by means of British gold and British blood , he ruled also the destinies of Europe .
He was the administration of England .
-- He is gone , but there are some who are still alive , and who I hope will live long enough to be brought to justice , and to answer for the share they had in committing these atrocities upon the people .
During these times LORD GRENVILLE was Secretary of State  the Hon. Henry Addington , now LORD SIDMOUTH , was Speaker of the House of Commons  Sir John Scott , now LORD ELDON , was Attorney General , and conducted these prosecutions in such a way as led to his promotion to be Lord High Chancellor of England , where he has made such an immense sum of money , and accumulated such a princely fortune .
In the early part of this year , the marriage of the Duke of SUSSEX with Lady Augusta Murray was made public , which caused a great noise in the country .


During all these eventful transactions , I was labouring incessantly in my vocation , as a farmer , and I was now become a complete master of every branch of the profession , there being no part of it that I had not performed with my own hands .
Perhaps to speak of my personal exertions in this way may be deemed by many superfluous , but on reflection they will , I hope , not consider this to be the case .
Hundreds , who are now living , were eye-witnesses of what I may almost call the prodigies of strength and personal labour performed by myself , and some of my father 's servants , and I shall merely mention a few of the circumstances to shew the reader that in every thing I undertook I always performed it with such an enthusiasm , and determined perseverance , that nothing could resist the accomplishment of my undertakings .
My father encouraged this desire that I evinced to excel , and to perform unexampled deeds of labour , and feats of strength  although he frequently expressed his fears that I should injure myself by too great bodily exertion , and by too frequently straining my muscular powers to their utmost stretch .
I had undertaken and performed every species of labour , connected with a very large farming business  I had sown more acres of ground with corn in one day than any other man  I had thrashed three quarters of barley , each succeeding day , for a fortnight together , and that too at a time when some of the servants complained of the difficulty of thrashing one quarter per day  I had pitched more loads of corn in a day than had ever been recorded of any other person : in fact , my father confessed that I got more work performed by the same number of hands than he ever did when he was a young man  and for him this was admitting a great deal .
I did this by good words and kindness towards my fellow labourers  by always animating and cheering them on with my example  by always placing myself in the heat of the battle  by taking the most difficult and most laborious part .
I always began every work by saying to those around me COME let us do this , or let us do that , instead of GO do this , or do that .
My poor father always observed that it entirely depended upon which of these little monosyllables , COME or GO , was made use of , whether the work was done well or ill , expeditiously or dilatorily .
When any particular work was doing , my father 's servants were always in the field , and the job was begun , before those of our neighbours had yet left their homes  and in changeable weather we had frequently carried our hay or corn , and finished the rick or stack , before the rain came on , while others had yet scarcely begun and were caught by the rain in the worst situation possible .
I have frequently , in the harvest time , when we anticipated rain , been up , and a mile out in the field , pitching the first load of wheat by two or before three o'clock in the morning , while the carters were harnessing and bringing out the other teams .
While this load was being drawn home I had got my breakfast , and was ready to begin laying the first sheaf of the wheat-rick , which many times I had finished , though consisting of thirty large loads of sheaves , before the middle of the day  by which means , if the rain came , we had secured perhaps one hundred sacks of wheat , and these would prove worth from five to ten shillings a sack more than that which was left out to take the rain .
If it proved a false alarm , and the weather was fine , we got a second rick finished by night , and thereby had secured two hundred instead of one hundred sacks of wheat in one day .
It will be asked by some , how did the labourers relish this extra toil and double work ?
The answer is easy -- perfectly well .
I always took care to have them amply rewarded in proportion to their exertions  and I never failed to add something , besides good words and kind treatment , for the cheerfulness and alacrity with which they approached and performed the task .
I always made the wheat-ricks , and I have many times made two ricks , containing thirty loads in each rick , in one day .
This work of making wheat-ricks , in very hot weather , which is generally the case , is much the hardest and most severe work , if done well , belonging to the farming business  and I was so thoroughly convinced of this , that I always allowed the person who afterwards made my wheat-ricks , a pint of ale as often , during the day , as he chose to ask for it .
For many years had I now made all my father 's ricks of hay and corn , and the wheat-ricks were the admiration of the whole country .
I also thatched many of them  that is , I made the ricks by day , and I frequently thatched them by night , or at least before the common labourers came to work in the morning .
I was never tired of labour and active exertions  and at this period , the labourers possessed all the strength and vigour of the English peasantry of former days .
Notwithstanding they began to feel the effects of war and to suffer some privations , in consequence of the rise of price in provisions , caused by the increase of taxation , they had yet a barrel of good beer to go to in hay-making and harvest time , and the young men at least could gain a comfortable subsistence of the necessaries of life by their daily labour .
Few of them , indeed , could now boast of a `` pig in the sty , '' a treasure which they had , till very lately , always possessed  yet they could occasionally purchase a pound of bacon or other meat , although at a very considerable increase in the price .
They soon , however , felt , and keenly felt , that their condition was altered , and was still rapidly altering for the worse , they consequently grew less tractable and cheerful in their dispositions  they went to their daily labour with more reluctance , and became more sullen and discontented as their privations increased  but still they were not emaciated , and become languid and weak , as most of them now are , for the want of a sufficiency of the common necessaries of life .
As a proof of this , I will mention a day 's work done by myself and three others , all of whom are now alive , and living in the parish of Euford  but , alas !
how altered , how wretched in circumstances , compared to what they were at the time respecting which I write , when they were able and willing to do , and did accomplish , as much work with great ease in one day , as would now occupy them , I am sure , for four days .
In fact , such is the alteration in their state , from having lived so badly , and worked so hard for the last twenty years , that they are become so reduced in bodily strength , that they would now feel more fatigue in doing one quarter of the work in a day than they did in performing the whole at that time .
The names of the men are Barnaby Marshal , Thomas Ayres , and James Pinnels .
These three men and myself have frequently winnowed large heaps of corn in a day , and we once accomplished the winnowing sixty sacks of wheat in one day -- thirty sacks being considered a good day 's work for four men .
In one instance , two men in each of two adjoining barns had thrashed a very large heap of wheat , which had yielded so well , that we estimated each heap to contain forty sacks of the best wheat , and every one calculated upon its being two smart day 's work to winnow it .
However , on the day appointed to winnow one of these heaps , some time in the beginning of May , myself and some young friends in the neighbourhood , had agreed to meet in the evening , for the purpose of shooting rooks  I therefore requested the three persons above named to be in readiness to begin winnowing at or soon after five instead of six o'clock in the morning .
The winnowing tackle was prepared over night , I had got the doors of the barn open before hand , and not one of them was behind the time appointed , they well knowing that the exhilarating jug of `` nut brown ale '' would not be wanting upon such an occasion .
As the church clock struck five every man was at his post , and the merry van went briskly round .
As each well knew his duty , so that no labour should be lost , we had made such rapid progress by six o'clock , that is to say in one hour , that Ayres in a joke said , `` If we continue at this rate , master , we shall be able to finish both heaps instead of one . ''
A joke of that sort was never thrown away upon me , and accordingly , I immediately adopted the idea  for having once conceived a project , I never hesitated , but instantly began to put it in execution .
I said that it was certainly two good day 's work for four common men , but if they would back me , we would see if we could not do two good days work in one day .
My fellow workmen , who were become almost as great enthusiasts as myself , spontaneously replied , `` With all our hearts , master , if you say the word we will try , we are not afraid to attempt any thing you will undertake . ''
Two more men were employed to bring the heap from the other barn , and add it to that which we had begun , and the result was , that when the clock struck six in the evening , we , four of us had completely winnowed and finished eighty-one sacks of best wheat , besides tailing , and had loaded the waggon with thirty of them for market the next day .
I having carried the thirty sacks into the waggon myself , now washed , cleaned , and dressed myself , and had joined my friends in the field , partaking of the sport of rook shooting , before half-past six in the evening  and I took care that my three fellow-labourers should be rewarded with the first three dozen of young rooks that were killed .
As a proof that the corn was well winnowed , my father sold it at the next market-day , at Devizes , for three shillings per sack higher than any other sample in the market .


I now met with a very great loss , as my worthy friend and preceptor , Mr. Carrington , the curate , with whom I had passed so many pleasant hours , and from whom I had received so much valuable information , and such good and useful advice , was about to leave the vicarage of Enford , he having been offered , and accepted , the situation of tutor to the sons of the Earl of Berkley , and as this was the likely road to preferment , I rejoiced in his success , although I very much lamented his absence .
He was , to say the least of him , an excellent neighbour and a very worthy man .
He was cheerful , amiable , and conciliating in his manners  he possessed a very superior understanding , which he had much improved and embellished by his application to the study of the most useful and refined literature , he having received a very liberal education  and though he was an excellent classical scholar he was neither a pedant nor a bigot  he lived a moral , sober , and rational life , worthy the example of his parishioners , and although he was not enabled to be very bountiful , having only sixty pounds a year as his salary , and his house to live in  he nevertheless honestly paid every one as he went , and saved some small trifle for a wet day .
By all his neighbours he was much beloved , and his society much courted by those who knew how to estimate the value of a superior mind , and an enlightened and comprehensive understanding .
He took great delight in imparting to me the knowledge which he had acquired , and when he left the parish of Enford , no one felt his loss more acutely or lamented it more sincerely than I did .
Because he had the sense and the penetration to discover , and the honesty to reprobate the fatal mad-headed measures of Mr. Pitt , he was denounced by the vulgar , the ignorant , and the bigotted , by the venal and by the corrupt as a Jacobin  but he was admired by all good and liberal men of all parties , and his society was courted by every rational , thinking , and intelligent man in the country round where he lived .
The society that I met at his house was my greatest solace and comfort after the fatigues and the labours of the day .
I was always welcome , and I never passed an hour in his society without having gained some useful information , or some substantial accomplishment .


Many of the young people of the village , who did not associate much with Mr. Carrington , and who were neither capable of appreciating his merits , nor of deriving pleasure from his refined society , were delighted to find that there was a gay young buck of a Clergyman , just returned from Oxford , who was to occupy the situation of my worthy friend .
But , alas , what a contrast !
I did not expect to find such another kind and amiable companion and friend as him that I had lost  but I anticipated that he would be a scholar , and a man of the world , and at all events a suitable associate for myself .
But , as he is no more , I shall be very brief : he was , in a word , in every thing the reverse , the very opposite of Mr. Carrington .
The Sunday arrived , and my father , as the principal person in the village , always anxious to be the first to shew his attention to a stranger , and particularly when that stranger was clothed in the dress of Pastor of the parish , waited upon him at the Inn or Pot-House , where he had taken up his quarters , and not only invited him to dine , but also offered him a bed and a stall for his horse till he was better provided at the Vicarage .
I , of course , accompanied my father , and we had little difficulty in getting over the first introduction .
He was a young man of easy manners and address , and without the least ceremony , accepted the invitation to dine , c. but he informed us , that he had made a bargain , and had taken lodgings and intended to board , with the landlady at the Swan , as he could not bear the thoughts of living in a dull country Vicarage House by himself .
We went to Church , where he dashed through the service in double quick time , and `` tipped us , '' as he had previously informed me he would , a Rattling Sermon , as a specimen of his style of oratory .
He appeared a clever thoughtless youth , of Twenty-five  but the rake , as my father said , `` stood confessed in his eye , '' and its effects sat visible upon his brow .
After dinner he took his wine like a Parson , and before he had finished a bottle he was as drunk as a Lord  so much so , that he was utterly incapable of performing the afternoon duty without exposing his situation to the whole congregation .
My father was shocked at his indiscretion , and sent a hasty excuse to put off the afternoon service .
As drunkenness was not encouraged , nor even tolerated , in my father 's house , he was very anxious to conceal the circumstance of the young Parson having become so much intoxicated at his table as to be incapable of performing his duty  and he felt it the greater disgrace , as he was the principal Church-warden , as well as the principal parishioner .
I took the hopeful and Reverend young gentleman , who had been so recently inspired by the Holy Ghost to take Priest 's Orders , a walk into the fields , to recover him a little , as my father thought him a very improper guest to introduce into the drawing-room to his daughters .
In the course of our walk he professed a very sincere and warm friendship for me , and promised himself a world of pleasure in my society  and he frankly and unblushingly informed me , that he had brought with him from Oxford a bad venereal complaint , which , he added , was most unfortunate , as he was fearful that he should inoculate all the pretty damsels belonging to his new flock , which would be a cursed Bore .


I premised by saying that I should be very brief , but I fear that some of my moral male , as well as all my female , readers will think that as to this young Clergyman of the Church of England I have already said too much  but sorry am I to declare that in the little which I have said , I have drawn his character too faithfully .
He lived but a short time  having soon fallen a victim to his profligate course of life .
He was little more than a year , I think , the Pastor of the Parish , and he administered the sacrament , and performed all the other offices of the Curate , when the effects of his drinking did not interfere with it , and during this time he always lodged at the public house .
This was a sad example for the people of the parish !
The young farmers were already too much addicted to drinking , but they had been heretofore kept in check , and under some sort of controul , by the admonition and by the example of their late Clergyman , who , during all the years that he had resided there , was never known to be intoxicated , or in any way , disguised in liquor .
To be sure he was a Jacobin , but he was , nevertheless , a sober , moral , amiable Man  and , although he was no bigot , he most strictly , regularly , and rigidly performed the sacred duty he had undertaken , with great satisfaction to his parishioners , and with great credit to himself , as a Man , a Clergyman , and a Christian .
But , during the life of his successor , they had no Jacobin  he was a furious Church and Kingman , although a complete free thinker over his cups , and would get drunk and roar God save the King with any drunken loyalist in the district  and , to shew his zeal in this way , he entered and served as a private , and dressed in the uniform , of the Everly troop of yeomanry Cavalry just raised .
He was , however , too enervated and too emaciated to acquire any knowledge of the military exercise  and , what was rather remarkable , there was another young sprig of the Church to keep him in countenance , who was also a private in the same troop of yeomanry .
Although I sometimes made one of the bacchanalian party of our Curate , yet I felt most severely the difference between this society and that of Mr. Carrington .


Upon the death of this infatuated young man , another Curate was sent down by the Vicar , who was the Rev. John Prince , the Chaplain to the Magdalen , and who it was thought would be more particular in the choice of those with whom he trusted the care of the souls of his parishioners .
Our new Curate arrived fresh from Oxford , and as he brought letters of recommendation to my father , from the Vicar , who was a very worthy and a most circumspect man , he invited him to his house , and he proved to be a much more rational young man than his predecessor .
Though he did not evince any great knowledge of the world , yet he had mixed in good society , and I promised myself a great acquisition in his acquaintance .
We soon , however , found that he had not been educated at Oxford for nothing  he had acquired a habit of taking his bottle freely , and , as he had not a very hard head , he was frequently very much intoxicated before his more robust neighbours were scarcely yet warmed with their glasses .
This was a dreadful misfortune for my young friend , as well as for myself , for he was an intelligent young man when he was sober  but , the moment the wine began to operate , he was one of the completest fools in christendom  he was then as great as a king , and always when he was the most contemptible , he fancied himself a very great man , and never failed to boast of his superiority of education , and his having taken his degree at Christ Church .
This he was always sure to do when he had lost the little talent and intellect that he possessed when he was sober .
At the very moment that he was looked upon with a degree of mingled pity and contempt by those around him , he was sure to assume a ridiculous superiority over his more rational companions  merely , as he professed , because he was brought up at college .


There was about this time great talk of an invasion by the French .
The ministers , having granted large subsidies , and having imposed new taxes , found it necessary to frighten John Bull with the idea of being invaded .
Great alarm was therefore excited throughout the country  volunteer corps and troops of yeomanry were raising all over the island .
Provisions had by this time increased in price , every article of common consumption was nearly doubled , and great dissatisfaction was evinced amongst the labouring poor  there were riots in many parts of the country , and much mischief was done by burning wheat-ricks , and pulling down mills , in consequence of the high price of bread .
But the dread of invasion was in every one 's mouth , and nothing else was talked of .
I , therefore , was one who anticipated nothing less than an immediate attempt , and I applied to my father , and requested that he would purchase me a proper charger , and let me enter into a troop of the yeomanry cavalry .
He expostulated and strongly urged me to desist , and he repeated his former arguments  but I replied that I was ashamed to stand by and to look on , with my arms folded , while all the youth and vigour of the country were flying to arms in order to repel the expected attempts of a desperate and powerful invading foe .
He endeavoured to convince me of the folly of my enthusiasm , urging that most of those who had enrolled themselves in the yeomanry , were solely actuated by a desire to take care of their own property , that they were impelled to take up arms merely by selfish motives , and without possessing a spark of the amor patriæ .
He recalled to my recollection the immense sacrifices made by our forefather , Colonel Thomas Hunt , in the reign of the Charles 's  he pointed out the noble domains and productive estates that were confiscated by Cromwell , in consequence of my ancestor 's zeal in the cause of his prince , and he begged me to remember how he was rewarded for his services  asking me what reason I had to expect a better fate , or a higher reward , than my forefather had obtained for all his exertions , dangers , and sacrifices , which were the loss of his estates and the ingratitude of the prince that he so faithfully served ?


All this might be , and was very true , but I reasoned with myself thus : My forefather took up arms in favour of a tyrant , to support him in most arbitrary measures against his own countrymen  but my only wish is to arm myself against a foreign invader , whose great object I am told is to enslave after having conquered the people of my native land .
All reasoning with me was consequently in vain .
I had made up my mind not to stand idle and be a looker-on in such times  the fervour of my youth had been worked upon by the delusion of the day , and it would not admit of this restraint  therefore , without farther ceremony , in spite of my father 's expostulations , I enrolled my name as a member of the Everly Troop of Yeomanry , under the command of the gallant Captain ASTLEY .
I knew the Captain to Be a poor creature , and as little cut out for a warrior as any man I had ever met with  he was built like Ajax , but as for skill or valour I believed him to possess neither .
I had , however , no fears of being left to be led into the field of battle by the worthy justice .
In case it should ever come to that issue , I had no doubt that proper and experienced officers would be appointed to lead us on .
I bought an excellent thoroughbred charger , near sixteen hands high  for , although my own horse was a very good one , and better than eight out of ten in the troop , yet , as he was rather under the regulation size , I was determined to be as well mounted as any man in the regiment , and as I was well known to be a good rider , and a bold and determined fox-hunter , the captain was very much delighted with what he was pleased to call a `` wonderful acquisition to his corps . ''
My father also , now I was entered , was as anxious as myself that I should not be outdone by any one .
I therefore immediately employed a drill serjeant , who was engaged to instruct the troop in their exercise , and who had been drilling them for some time past  and before the first field-day arrived for me to attend , my instructor pronounced me fit for service , and as well disciplined as any man in the troop .
Perhaps I had bestowed as much pains , and had spent as much time , as any of them , though I had been drilled only for about a fortnight , for I was at it every day two or three hours .
In truth , I was an apt scholar , and being already an excellent horseman , and extremely active , I could before I had ever joined , perform most of the evolutions , and , as the serjeant said , do any thing as well as himself .
He told me that in many of my brother soldiers I should meet with some stupid heavy fellows , and that he could teach me more in a day than many of them would learn in a year .
The following Monday was appointed for us to assemble and have a field day , when CAPTAIN ASTLEY and LIEUTENANT SIR JOHN METHUEN POORE , who had gone to London for the purpose , were expected to attend , armed cap-a-pie , and dressed complete in their NEW UNIFORM , as a specimen of what we were in future to wear .


The reader will recollect that I am now about to give a faithful history of my military services  and I must therefore entreat his indulgence , while I put upon record some such circumstances , and occurrences as he will be little prepared to hear , unless it have been his fate to be a member of some volunteer corps , under the command of such officers as Captain ASTLEY , Lieutenant Sir John POORE , and Cornet DYKE .
Without farther comment then , the two gallant officers , ASTLEY , and POORE , started the week before to London , to superintend the making , and to arrange with the army taylor the particulars of the uniform .
Having been very particular in getting the taylor , breeches-maker , boot , and even spur-maker , to fit them to a T , on the Friday they both appeared , accoutred from head to toe , at Edmonds 's , Somerset coffee house , in the Strand , and really cut no small `` swell '' as they marched up and down the coffee room .
They would then take a turn down the Strand , as far as Exeter Exchange , and if , luckily for him , Polito had seen them , he might possibly have made a good bargain by chewing them amongst the other wild beasts which he exhibited to the wondering multitude .
They next showed off in full uniform , with their broad swords by their sides , in the front boxes of Drury Lane Theatre  and , as the Wiltshire was one of the first regiments of yeomanry that was raised and clothed , they excited no small curiosity amongst the Londoners .
On Saturday morning they again entered the coffee room in all their trappings , and having each purchased a brace of excellent pistols , they appeared eager to begin the campaign without waiting the arrival of the French troops  and as Clark and Haines , two notorious highwaymen were at [ 10 ] this time levying their nightly contributions upon Hounslow Heath , they more than hinted their intention of capturing or killing these desperadoes , in case they should fall in with them during their march down into the country , which they had given due notice they intended to commence on that afternoon .


About two o'clock , the captain 's travelling carriage and four was brought to the door of the coffee house .
These circumstances were detailed to me by a gentleman present , and who really was rather alarmed at their warlike appearance and war-disposed manner and language .
Having seated themselves with all their military finery in the carriage , they carefully placed their two brace of horse pistols in the front pocket , taking care to leave the butt-ends sticking out , threateningly visible to every eye that surveyed them .
A crowd was collected round the carriage to witness the departure of these mighty warriors , whose appearance denoted a most determined conflict , in case any thing should occur to give them an opportunity of showing how worthy they were to command , and to lead into the heat of battle a body of their countrymen , who were `` seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon 's mouth . ''
About four o'clock they arrived at the Bush at Staines , having taken care to pass Hounslow Heath , the half-anticipated scene of action , by day light .
Having by this piece of generalship escaped the danger so far , they slept that night at Mr. White 's excellent inn at Staines ' Bridge .
The next morning , Sunday , after taking a good breakfast , dressed and armed as before , in all their military array , they took up their pistols , which had been placed by them on the table , and then adjourned into the garden , whence they fired them into the Thames , at once to try how true they would carry the balls , and to give notice to the surrounding and astonished passengers upon the bridge that they travelled like warriors , prepared for any emergency that might arise .
Having re-loaded their pistols in the presence of Mr. Joseph White , and each of them taken a glass of noyeau to exhilarate their spirits , the horses were ordered too , and the carriage was now brought to the front door .
Having taken another turn round the bowling green in the garden , to exhibit themselves to the gaping multitude , who were now collected in considerable numbers upon the bridge , brought thither in consequence of the discharging of pistols on a Sunday morning , and who were waiting to see their departure , they entered the carriage in the same formal manner as they had done at the door of the Somerset coffee house , and having carefully and deliberately placed their pistols again in the front pocket , with their but-ends , as before , appearing very prominent out of the chaise window , they proceeded on their march with a sort of solemn gravity , which excited the surprise of some few , but the laughter of the greater portion , of their beholders .


It was on a Sunday morning , about eight o'clock , when they started from Staines in this warlike attitude  their helmets glittering in the sun , like the peacock vain of his plumes .
They , however , little dreamt of the disaster that was in store for them .
Having passed Virginia Water , and as the postboy was taking them leisurely along up the steep hill leading to Bagshot , who should ride up to the side of the chaise but a single highwayman , who , having ordered the boy to halt , deliberately demanded their money and watches .
The yeomanry heroes looked at each other , and then at their pistols  but neither of them had the power of putting forth a hand to grasp either of them .
The highwayman again hastily demanded his prize , which was immediately granted , our heroes handing over to him their purses , containing about sixty guineas and two valuable family gold watches .
It is said that Sir John Poore , after having recovered a little from the fright , endeavoured to raise his inconsolable companion from the stupor in which this sad misfortune had left him , by repeating the following lines of Hudibras :


`` He that fights and runs away , May live to fight another day  But he that is in battle slain , Can never live to fight again , ''


Capt. Astley , who was too much absorbed in ruminating upon his melancholy situation to give his friend any other answer than a long and deep sigh , could not but most sensibly feel that they were in a still worse plight than the knight of the rueful countenance ever was  for they had run away without having made any fight at all .
So ashamed were they of their misadventure , that they would not have mentioned it to any one , had they not been compelled to disclose it to the landlords of the various inns they had to pass  for the unmannerly fellow had not even left them a tester to pay the turnpikes .


When they arrived at Everley , Sir John was ashamed to face the troop to tell them the story , although we were already in the field anxious to see our commanders dressed up in their new uniform .
All the golden dreams of glory seemed to Sir John to have vanished by this unlucky affair , and nothing  could induce him to shew himself off to his troop , though his charger was ready to convey him to the field , and he was urged by all the expostulations and intreaties of the captain .
He therefore sneaked off home to Rushall , and left the gallant captain to make the best of a bad bargain by himself .


In the mean time we had been manoeuvring , charging , and wheeling , till we were almost all tired , waiting for this exhibition .
At length we were informed of the disaster by one of the serjeants , Mr. William Butcher , of Shercot , who had called at the captain 's house to know what was the matter .
The mighty hero at last appeared in view , mounted upon his charger , riding solemnly towards the troop , dressed in full uniform , the same which he had worn down from town , with the exception , perhaps , of some trifling change , which might have been rendered necessary by the disastrous fright he had received upon the road .
Some admired the dress , some pitied the loss sustained by the poor captain , but myself , and many of those who surrounded me , though we felt the deep disgrace which had befallen our commander , could scarcely contain ourselves with laughter at the ridiculous figure he cut , particularly when the event of the robbery came across our thoughts .
I had often heard of a hog in armour , but I had never before seen any thing that appeared to convey the representation so much to my mind as the ridiculous figure of our captain .


The very first field-day called to my recollection the sentiments of my father and the worthy clergyman , Mr. Carrington , as to the patriotism of these yeomanry corps .
Their conversation was entirely about keeping up the price of corn , keeping down the price of wages , and at the same time keeping in subjugation the labourers , and silencing their dissatisfaction .
As I rode home from the field the first day , I felt that there was too much truth in the assertions of Mr. Carrington and my father  I was , however , determined to do my duty to the best of my power , without troubling myself about the views and motives of my comrades , and likewise at all times to resist with all my influence , any act of aggression or oppression that might be attempted , come from whatever quarter it might .
Nor was I less resolved to be always ready at a short notice to meet the enemy whenever I should be called upon .


Within one month after I had been in this troop , the labourers of Enford and the adjoining parishes , smarting under the privations and sufferings they had to endure , in consequence of the rise in the price of provisions and the low rate of wages , which latter many of the farmers had decided to keep down to the old standard , and urged on also by those who ought to have known better , and who instead of secretly exciting their poorer neighbours to acts of desperation , ought to have come forward manfully to advocate their rights  the labourers , under the secret influence of a designing man or two , all struck their work , and , having assembled in a large body , they openly avowed their intention to pull down several mills , which were pointed out , as well as to burn the corn ricks of several obnoxious individuals .
I had been from home , and when I returned , I found several of the neighbouring farmers assembled at my father 's , in the greatest consternation .
Some of those whose premises had been pointed out for destruction were present  and , although none of my father 's property was threatened , yet several of our servants had joined the rioters , who , we were informed , were assembled to the number of two or three hundred .
and that they were proceeding towards Netheravon , where they meant to regale themselves at the public house till the evening , when the work of destruction was to begin .
Each farmer fled to his home , in order to save what he could , but all were in the greatest dismay .
A servant now came to inform us that our carter , Jerry Truman , who looked after the team at Weddington farm , had left his horses and joined the rioters , and that two men had been dispatched up to one of our shepherds upon the down , who had refused to join them in the morning , to compel him to leave his sheep , and to join them immediately .


My father , who , as well as myself , had been devising means to prevent , if possible , the threatened mischief , now said , `` though none of our property is threatened , though we have had no share in oppressing the men , and though those who by their arbitrary and overbearing conduct to their servants , have greatly contributed to produce this state of things , are , now the danger approaches , the first to fly from it , and consequently , for their past infamously bad treatment of their labourers , and their recent cowardice , almost deserve what they have brought upon themselves , and that they should be left to their fate , yet , my son , it is our duty , even if it were only in pity to the poor misguided men themselves , to endeavour to avert by some prompt measure , if possible , the threatened calamity . ''
He added , `` but we must be prompt or our efforts will be in vain . ''
I said in answer , that I had made up my mind to proceed instantly to rescue the shepherd , who was unwilling either to leave his flock or to join the rioters  but my father advised me not to waste my time by encountering two such ruffians as we knew were gone for him  he would , he said , take his horse and proceed to put the sheep in the fold to prevent their getting into and destroying the corn  and he would have me ride with all speed to the only efficient magistrate in the neighbourhood , Mr. Webb , of Milton , to procure a warrant for the apprehension of Truman , there being no pretence for his rioting on account of the high price of provisions , because he was a young unmarried man , and had for wages ten guineas a year , and all his eatables and drink found for him in the house .
`` For , '' said he , `` if we are armed with a warrant from the civil power , I think we shall stand a much better chance of preventing mischief , and perhaps bloodshed , than by any thing that will be done by the yeomanry , but I very much doubt whether the latter will muster at all , although the alarmed parties are flying in all directions to the officers , Astley of Everly , Poore of Rushall , and Dyke of Syrencot [ 12 ] , for that purpose : '' all of whom were also magistrates .
I merely asked my father , whether I had better not apply to Mr. Astley first for a warrant , as he only lived four miles off , and in the road to Mr. Webb 's , who lived eight miles distant .
His answer was , `` certainly not , we must not trust to chance , proceed at once to Mr. Webb 's , for , while you are humdrumming with Mr. Astley , who will either be afraid or not know how to act , you will have obtained what we want from Mr. Webb in half the time . ''
I then sprung on my horse , which , ready saddled , had stood at the gate during this conference , and , putting him to full speed , I was out of sight in a twinkling .


As I passed up the field I saw my two gentlemen striding over the fallows towards the shepherd , whom they had approached within about two hundred yards .
Though I had made up my mind not to interfere with their scheme but go direct to the magistrate , yet , as they were not a quarter of a mile out of my road , I could not resist the inclination I felt to check their progress .
I therefore galloped up to them , to demand where they were going over our private property .
They at once boldly avowed their object to be to make our shepherd leave his flock and join them at Netheravon .
I briefly expostulated , asking if they meant to compel the man to go against his will  they replied , certainly , that he had refused to accompany them in the morning , but they had now come to a determination that he should go .
As I found them determined , any further parley was in vain , and I therefore jumped from my horse , which was in the habit of standing without being held , and , placing myself before them , I demanded that they should instantly desist , for they should proceed no further without violence .
They , nevertheless , advanced boldly and were instantly knocked down with two blows of my fist  one of them remained quietly on the ground , the other rose to commence a conflict , but he was instantly levelled to the earth again , and they then both declared they would return with all speed and leave the shepherd unmolested if I would spare them .
I only demanded that they would brush off in double quick time , with which they complied , never staying to look behind them .
This certainly was a very hasty although a very successful method of taking the law into my own hands  but the case was desperate and would not admit of any common remedy .


My horse almost fled to Milton , where luckily I found the worthy and truly efficient magistrate at home .
The oath was administered and the warrant made out in a few minutes , while his servant gave my panting steed a little hay and a drop of water , which enabled him to carry me back as quickly as he had brought me .
As I returned , our flock of sheep were grazing , and the shepherd , having placed himself in my way , as I passed him , he gratefully thanked me for rescuing him from the danger with which he had been threatened .
I reached home within one hour and a quarter , having ridden a distance of sixteen miles and procured a warrant , besides rescuing the shepherd , in that short space of time .
I found my father waiting for me with the tything-man of Littlecot , Mr. Davis , who kept the Swan , an old gentleman upwards of 70 years of age  and as I was made a special constable to execute the warrant , we lost not a moment in proceeding to the scene of action .
My father having got a poney ready for the old gentleman to ride with us , and a fresh horse saddled for me , we soon reached Netheravon , where we learned of the Rev. Mr. Williams that the men , to the amount of about two hundred and fifty in number , had taken possession of a large skittle ground at the back of the Red Lion  that they had been drinking for an hour , having already taken two quarts of strong beer each , and were preparing to take another quart each before they sallied forth , to put in execution the devastating scenes that they had contemplated .
I contrived to communicate with the landlord , who said that they were so far intoxicated that he dared not refuse them beer , and that they had taken forcible possession of his cellar , and that nothing would give him greater relief than to get quit of such troublesome and desperate customers .
I immediately formed a plan to get them out of the skittle ground , and then to lock the doors and keep them out of the public house , away from intoxicating liquors , of which they had already taken too much .
I proposed to go into the skittle ground with Davis , the old constable , and seize Truman , for whose apprehension the warrant was granted  and if I could get him into the street I had no doubt but the others would follow in order to rescue him -- As soon as this was effected the people in the Red Lion were to bolt and lock all their doors , and keep them out of the house .
This was thought to be a desperate and a dangerous plan , but it was a desperate affair , things were drawing fast to a crisis , and it was of no use to doubt or deliberate .


Having formed my plan , I insisted upon it that my father , who was sixty years of age , should remain without with the horses .
Followed by the old constable with his staff of office in his hand , I entered , and we had got up to Truman , who was in the midst of them , before we were as yet scarcely perceived by many of the groups , who were drinking , and busily arranging their plan of operations .
I shewed the warrant , and having seized Truman by the collar , who turned as pale as ashes , I told him he must come instantly with me , and before he had time to reply , or even say a word , I hurried him through his companions , and I had already brought him to the door of the yard when they came rushing after him , and had actually got hold of him , before he was quite out of the door .
With one determined struggle , however , I dragged him by main force into the street , and , as I had anticipated , the whole of the rioters rushed forward into the street , and made a desperate effort to rescue him .
I knew them all , and notwithstanding they began to use violence , I held him firm , till I saw that they were all clear of the yard , and all the doors of the public house were closed , My father and Davis were unable to come to my assistance , as I was now surrounded by the whole gang .
Though I never felt more confident or more cool in my life , yet the situation was one not only of difficulty but of danger .
But the principal object being attained , and the plan having succeeded almost to a miracle , I had only to identify some of the most determined and violent  and four of those that I knew perfectly well , two of them being my own work-people , having proceeded to collar me , while the others used considerable force to release him from the grasp I had taken of his collar , I yielded him up to their overpowering numbers  at the same time earnestly recommending to them to disperse and retire to their homes , as the military were sent for and expected every moment .
Truman was one of the first to fly , and he returned to his occupation immediately  and in a very short time afterwards the whole of them had dispersed in different directions , though they might have proceeded with impunity for aught the yeomanry did , they never having assembled at all  and , in fact , although I was in the troop myself , I never thought of sending for them .


My father , and the old constable , Davis , and myself , now returned home , not a little elated with the success of our exertions in dispersing these deluded and desperate men .
But my father observed , that it would not do to let the matter rest there , that the persons whom he had seen use great personal violence to me , who was acting as a peace officer , must be taught that they were not to violate the laws in such a daring manner with impunity  and he urged the propriety of my obtaining a warrant to take them before a magistrate , to answer for the breach of the peace which they had committed by assaulting me in the execution of a warrant .
My father added , that their leaving their work , their assembling at the public house , and even obtaining beer almost by force , might have been overlooked , particularly as no serious mischief had followed  but the forcible and violent rescue and resistance to the execution of the warrant of a magistrate could not be overlooked  for , if we were disposed to do so , it would be an insult to Mr. Webb , the magistrate who had granted it  and if we treated him , who was the only real efficient magistrate in the district , with disrespect , we could not expect that he would be disposed in future to attend so promptly to our representations .
I therefore took my horse the next morning , and rode to Milton before breakfast  and , having made the necessary depositions , he granted me a warrant for the apprehension of Truman and four others , who had been particularly prominent in the rescue , namely , Hurcot , Hale , Sheppard , and Rawlings , all of whom had either struck or laid violent hands upon me .


I had returned and taken my breakfast by ten o'clock , and had just got the old constable , Davis , and was about to proceed with him to apprehend the said persons , when four of the gentlemen of the yeomanry cavalry of the Everly troop , rode boldly into the yard , and up to the door , like brave troopers , saying that they had heard of my having a warrant for apprehending some of the rioters , and that they were sent by Capt. Astley to aid and assist in the execution of the warrant , adding , that they were provided with ball cartridges , c. , and some to spare for me , if I chose to saddle my charger and take my holsters .
I could not avoid asking the heroes , with rather a sarcastic smile , where they had kept themselves over night , and why Captain Astley had not either come or sent some of the troop when there was some real danger , and not waited till all the parties were separated , and when there was little difficulty in securing the most desperate of the rioters ?
I added , that as I had not made any military show , by dressing myself up in my regimentals , when there was a real riot , I should at all events trust to the constable 's staff now it was all peaceable  and I begged them to return to their officers with that message .
I however requested one of them , Richard Pocock , of Enford farm , who now lives near Warminster , and whom I knew to be a tything man , to doff his regimentals , and then I would admit him to aid and assist in his civil , but I would not accept of him in his military capacity .
This he immediately complied with , and we took the five persons before the magistrate , Mr. Webb , of Milton , who insisted upon committing them all to prison the same night for want of bail , though they begged very hard for mercy , in which petition I most heartily joined  but the worthy magistrate would not listen to any such thing , it wanting only a month to the Autumn Assizes , and I was therefore bound over to prosecute them , very much against my inclination , as I thereby lost at least three valuable servants during the harvest  and , as they appeared sensible of their error , I , for my own part , was contented to let them depart to their homes , but the magistrate was inexorable , declaring it to be too serious an offence to be pardoned , without the interposition of a jury .


A true bill was found against them by the grand jury at the assizes , and they were put to the bar .
I appeared against them , but employed no counsel  they had engaged Mr , Jekyl , at that period one of the most eminent counsel upon the western circuit .
After the court had heard the evidence of myself and Mr. Davis , Mr. Jekyl made a most eloquent appeal to the jury , a common not a SPECIAL jury : he called some witnesses to their character , but no one appearing , I offered myself to give three of them , who had been my father 's servants , a character for sobriety and industry , with which the court and counsel appeared much pleased .
Their case went to the jury , who instantly found them all guilty of the rescue and assault , upon which I addressed the Court as the prosecutor , and petitioned that they might be restored to their afflicted families , and I promised to take them back immediately into the situations which they had before occupied in my father 's service .
The humane judge , who participated in my feelings , after having given them a suitable admonition , and called their attention to my disinterested kindness , telling them they were entirely indebted to my humanity for the lenity he should shew them , and having paid me a most gratifying compliment , dismissed them with the punishment of a fine of a shilling each , which I immediately paid for them .
The whole court were loud in their praises of my behaviour upon the occasion  but I felt ten thousand times more satisfaction in doing a generous act than I did in all the compliments which were bestowed upon me .
I took the men into my father 's service directly , and I can safely say that I never for one moment since had any reason to repent the exertion I made to save them from punishment .
Some of them lived many years in my service , and Truman remained with me as long as I was in the farming business , and actually was one of those who followed me out of Wiltshire into Sussex , when I went to reside there , a distance of a hundred and twenty miles .
Four out of the five men are still alive , and I would cheerfully trust my life in either of their hands , if it were necessary  and I sincerely believe there is not one of them but would willingly risk his life to serve me .


I am writing this account in my dungeon , at eleven o'clock at night , on the 20th of September , 1820 , and it is impossible for any one who reads it not to draw a comparison between my conduct and that of my persecutors .
I would not part with the sweet delightful reflection which the remembrance of this ONE act of my life conveys to my mind , for all the wealth in the possession of those who have been concerned in consigning me to be incarcerated without mercy in this dungeon for TWO YEARS and SIX MONTHS  according to common calculation full one quarter of the remaining part of my natural life .
Let the reader only consider the spirit in which I acted towards those who had violated the laws of their country , by resisting with force the warrant of a magistrate , and who had violently assaulted the peace officer in his duty in executing that warrant , and then contrast it with the vindictive proceedings against me , for having attended a public meeting , legally and constitutionally assembled , to remonstrate with the throne against the cruel privations and sufferings of the people , where no breach of the peace was committed , where not even the slightest resistance was made or even premeditated against the civil power .
`` Look at this picture , and look at that . ''
I have had the consolation of being repeatedly thanked in the most earnest manner by these poor fellows , for my humanity in interposing with the court to spare them from punishment  but I have felt still a much higher pleasure when they have offered up their thanks to me for having ventured my life `` to snatch them from the jaws of the gallows , '' when they were incautiously about to rush into them , by pulling down mills , and burning wheat ricks .
These might well have been called poor deluded creatures .
These men were literally deluded , and those who urged them on were deluded by what was then called the liberal part of the press .
In fact , almost the whole daily press of that period united in a conspiracy to delude the people , by railing at and exciting the multitude against BUTCHERS , BAKERS , and FARMERS , to whom not only the fools , but the knaves of the daily press attributed the high price of provisions .


The liberal part of the press was so ignorant and so besotted as to vomit forth its daily denunciations against the avariciousness of millers , butchers , bakers , and farmers , and to endeavour to inflame the suffering people , by teaching them that these persons conspired together to keep up the price of provisions to an unnatural height , solely to put money in their own pockets .
The ministerial press of that day , under the controul of Pitt , ( and he was cunning enough to contrive to bribe almost all the talent belonging to the press , ) chimed in ding dong with their less cunning opponents  for they knew that it was Pitt 's policy to draw the public attention from the real cause of the distress , from the real cause of the high price of provisions , which they were well aware was the enormous increase of the taxes  and by the joint efforts of the Whig and Tory press , ( for there was no other at that time , ) they contrived to delude the poor people , the lower orders , to such a degree , that there was seldom half a year passed away without a considerable number of persons being consigned to an untimely end , for having been concerned in wreaking their vengeance upon some miller , farmer , butcher , or baker , or other dealer in human food .
These poor fellows might truly be stiled the deluded multitude  and the deluders , the conductors of the public press , were but too successful in their efforts to continue them in ignorance .
Let any sober-minded , rational , sensible man only look back to the columns of the public press , in the years 1795 , and 96 -- the Times for instance  let him take a file of the Times of that day , and for many many years after that , even up to 1815 and 1816 , and compare the language , the stile , and the tenor of their articles with the language of the present day in the same papers .
How many riots , how many hangings , how many special commissions we can trace back , all proceeding from the delusions of the public press !
How many persons have lost their lives for plundering , pulling down , and burning the property of millers , butchers , and bakers  how much blood has been spilt , every drop of which blood may be fairly placed at the door of those who urged these poor fellows on , and instigated them to acts of violence against those classes of persons , by falsely accusing them of being the cause of the high price of provisions .


There is as much difference between the Times of 1795 and the Times of 1820 as there is between a drunken riotous Church-and-King-mob of 1791 to 96 , pulling down and burning the property of Dr. Priestley at Birmingham , poor Campbell of Bath , burning mills , wheat ricks , destroying machinery , c. c. , and the peaceable , sober , rational , constitutional , assemblies of the people in 1816 , 1817 , 1818 , and 1819 , deliberately petitioning the legislature to remove the burthens of the people , by abolishing sinecure places , and unnecessary pensions , and praying for a constitutional reform in the Commons ' House of Parliament .
My readers will excuse the digression I have made  this subject can not be too often dwelt upon , but , as I shall have repeated opportunities of calling the attention of my fellow countrymen to this particular point , I will now proceed to the more immediate object of these memoirs .


I was now incessant in my application to every branch of the farming business , and , as I have before intimated , I performed prodigies of labour upon various occasions .
My father had now taken another very large adjoining farm of nearly a thousand acres , Chisenbury farm , and was therefore become one of the largest farmers in England , yet we managed this business with the greatest ease  and what others called very severe labour , I practised as a relaxation from business , such as learning the cavalry exercise , in which I had now become a considerable adept  in fact , I bore the character of being one of the most active , and at the same time one of the most powerful , young men in the county  and my feats of activity and strength were proverbial .
I would mix in the frolicks of a country wake , or revel , as they were called in Wiltshire , and contend , generally successfully , with the first proficients of the day , in wrestling jumping in sacks , backsword , or single stick playing , and have borne off many a prize .
I once went to a Whitsuntide revel , with my friend and partner , Jesse Caster of Upavon , and I believe we bore off every prize -- the gold-laced hat , the wrestling prize  the gold-laced hat , the backsword prize  a pair of buckskin breeches , the prize for jumping or running in sacks  the old cheese , the bowling prize  and eleven half-crowns , the prize played for at cricket in the morning : indeed I and Caster obtained every prize  and , as I gained the majority , of course I had the choice of the fairest damsel in the village at the dance in the evening .
There was no exercise , no exertion , no labour that ever fatigued me .
I could and did often work all day and dance all night  and this , at particular festive seasons of the year , I have followed for a week or ten days together without ever taking off my clothes to go to bed .
There was no excess of labour , heat or cold , winter or summer , that ever hurt me .
I remember once going up stairs , about ten o'clock , with the rest of my father 's family , but , instead of going to bed , I dressed myself , descended the window by a ladder , mounted my horse and rode to Upper Collingborn , where I had been invited to a dance , a distance of ten miles , and having danced till three o'clock in the morning I returned home , mounted the ladder into the window , and had just changed my best for my working clothes when my father called me , as the clock struck four , to get up , upon which I was out the first of the family , time enough to remove the ladder before any one saw it , so that the circumstance was never known to any one .


The young parson of the parish was generally my companion on these occasions , but as he was his own master , he went to and returned from the dance at his leisure , in fact , he generally got too top heavy before the evening was over to return home , and therefore usually slept out .
I could tell some of the most ridiculous stories and curious adventures that happened to my young friend , when he was under the influence of Bacchus , but as I shall have occasion to say a great deal of this personage hereafter , I will pass it over for the present .
But as , from my having lived a very great part of my life in country places , I have spent a considerable portion of my days in the society of clergymen , and as it is one of my principal objects in giving a faithful history of my life , to be particular in shewing my readers the sort of society that I kept , as well as how I was enabled to form my opinion of mankind , I shall faithfully delineate these characters , to the best of my judgment , always taking care to lean on the charitable side , and to draw occasionally a veil over the infirmities of human nature , as they were exemplified in the clergy of the church of England .
I understand that some of my readers have already attributed to me a desire to lower the character of the clergymen of the established church , and they instance my description of the character of the Rev. T. Griffiths , the master of the free grammar school at Andover .
But , as a proof that I have not done him any injustice , I have had confirmed , by the living testimony of many of my school-fellows , the truth as well as the lenient description that I gave of his character .
Mr. Cotton of Edgerly , my tenant , and steward of my manor of Glastonbury , has been to see me since be read the account , and he says it is a most faithful picture as far as it goes  but he called to my recollection the tyrant pedagogue having pulled off the ear of two boys , one in his presence , and one in mine .
John Butcher , whose father then lived at Westcombe , was one of them , and he [ 11 ] has reminded me also of Griffiths having taken a very thick heavy slate , and with both hands broken it over the head of Dr. now Sir -- Gibbs , of Bath , physician to the late Queen , who very fortunately had a thicker scull than boys in general , or he would in all probability have fractured it .
It will therefore be seen that I did in no way exceed the truth , and , so far from wishing to degrade the clergy , I shall only reprobate those acts in which they degrade themselves .
I have known many excellent clergymen , Mr. Carrington to wit , and I know many most worthy clergymen now  and I have also known some of the most abandoned of human beings , who have been a disgrace to that holy office .
In due course I shall shortly detail the moral character of two clergymen of this diocese , as a specimen of human depravity , both of them living under the nose of the bishop .


I will now proceed with my narrative .
The price of corn was by this time considerably enhanced , and in consequence of a new duty , malt had risen from 2s .
6d .
to 7s .
6d .
a bushel .
Labourers three years before could purchase with a week 's wages , two bushels of malt and a pound of hops , enough to make a nice little cask of good wholesome beer , for them to carry with them into the field , in grass mowing and harvest .
That quantity was now nearly doubled also in price .
Three years before they could purchase with their week 's wages twelve quartern loaves  they could now only purchase with their week 's wages six quartern loaves instead of twelve , the quartern loaf having now risen to one shilling .
The labourers that used before to be very well off , and consequently very well satisfied , complained loudly of these hardships , and demanded higher wages  the answer of the farmer was , `` it is very true that we sell our corn for a much higher price than we did , but we can not afford to raise the wages of the labourers , for we pay all the increase of price away in taxes , and the increase in our rents , as well as in every other necessary of life , our tea , salt , iron , leather , c.  you must , therefore , have patience , and wait for better times .
Our rulers , and Mr. Pitt particularly , says we may look forward with a confident hope that we shall soon have better times for us all . ''
Thus the poor man , from the very first year of the war , began to feel the cruel effects of high prices , and he was made to suffer this for many years without any rise in his wages .
Almost all the common necessaries of life were doubled , while he was told to wait with patience from day to day , from week to week , from month to month , and from year to year , still buoyed up with the false hope of better times , which were eternally promised with matchless impudence by the prime minister , who constantly boasted of the wealth and power of the nation , which he was wasting , and which he lavished with an unsparing hand , to carry on an unjust , an unnecessary , cruel , and vindictive war against the people of France , because they had made a hold , a manly , and a successful effort to throw off the galling yoke of one of the most infamous and detestable tyrannies that ever disgraced the character of an enlightened people .
It was very true the landholders grew rich from the great advance in the price of land , and the farmer grew rich from the advance in the price of grain  but , alas !
the labourer began to suffer , and has continued to suffer  his privations have increased in the exact proportion to the increase of taxation , from that day to this .


In the beginning of this year , ( 5th of April , 95 , ) the Prince of Wales was married to his first cousin the Princess Caroline of Brunswick , a match which was very much approved by John Bull , as she was young and beautiful , possessing all those attractions which were likely to render the marriage state happy  although there was something that John grumbled a little about , as he had not only to pay the piper , by an additional yearly salary for his Royal Highness , which was raised by the parliament to ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND POUNDS PER ANNUM , but he was likewise called upon to pay the Prince 's debts , which amounted to SIX HUNDRED AND NINETEEN THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY POUNDS  -- DEBTS on securities , THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND , and tradesmen 's bills , THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN THOUSAND POUNDS , was the amount of the account laid before parliament .
John , however , was then in comparative prosperity , and the money was paid with great good humour , in the hope that this wild prince would , now he was married to an amiable and a lovely woman , become more rational , and less debauched and extravagant .
At this time also the trial of Mr. Hastings was brought to a conclusion  this had been going on seven years before the House of Lords , and he was now acquitted .
There were considerable riots and disturbances in various parts of the country , in consequence of the high price of corn  wheat having now , for the first time in the eighteenth century , risen as high as ten shillings a bushel .
The wages of the labourer in the parish of Enford still remained at six shillings a week , which caused much grumbling and many complaints , as they were become now tired of `` waiting with patience for better times . ''
The country was considerably agitated too , by a report of a mutiny in the Oxford Militia , who were quartered at Newhaven , in the neighbourhood of Brighton .
This also arose in consequence of the high price of provisions .
The privates of this regiment had seized a quantity of flour , and sold it to their comrades and others , at a reasonable price .
I remember that this caused great alarm amongst the farmers , as they knew that without the aid of the soldiers they would not be able to keep up the price of their grain .
The riot , however , was soon quelled , and those concerned in it were tried by a court martial , many of them were severely flogged , and , to the great joy of the yeomanry , two of them , COOK and PARISH , were shot .
In the carrying of this sentence into execution there were great doubts entertained , by many of the officers , whether the other regiments of militia and fencibles , which were in camp there , would not join the Oxford regiment , and rescue their comrades .
The greatest precautions were therefore taken .
The Prince 's regiment , the 10th dragoons , was marched from Hounslow and Windsor , where it was stationed to perform king 's duty .
The men had ball cartridges served out to them , and they were drawn up in the rear of the militia regiments , which were all flanked by the artillery with lighted matches , ready to rake them if they made the least movement  and the 10th light dragoons were supported by the Lancashire and Cinque Port fencibles .
But the sentence was executed without any resistance on the 1st of June  the riot having occurred on the 17th of May .


I mention this circumstance , because it caused great agitation throughout the country , and because I am enabled to speak of the particular facts from the information which I receive from him who is now acting as my servant , and who was present doing his duty as a corporal of the said 10th regiment of dragoons , in which regiment he was a warrant officer for many years  and I find his information as to these matters most valuable to me .
Gracious God !
what scenes has he been an eye-witness of !
This persecuted man was promoted to the 18th regiment of dragoons , commanded by Col. CHARLES STEWART , the brother of Lord Castlereagh  from thence he was removed , or rather removed himself , and was made adjutant to the Somersetshire volunteers , which were commanded by HILEY ADDINGTON , the brother of Lord Sidmouth .
But , having detected his commanding officer , and exposed his peculations , he was dismissed without a court martial , and by unheard-of persecutions driven to that extremity which sent him here .
He has indeed a tale unfolded to me , enough to harrow up the soul of any one who has not the heart of a savage .
I now know what were the feelings of the British soldiers , even at that epoch .
Having arrived at that period of life which may fairly be called manhood , I felt an interest in all the political occurrences of the day , and had by means of the society of our worthy curate , Mr. Carrington , been enabled pretty clearly to judge of the views of the different political parties and factions in the country .
I was a most decided advocate for the general measures of the government , although I abhorred some of the tyrannical acts of the ministers .
I was an enthusiastic admirer of our beautiful constitution , the history of which I read at that time with great avidity , believing that it was in all its material points carried practically into effect , notwithstanding my friend and tutor had so strenuously endeavoured to convince me that it was only the theory that deserved any admiration .


About this time a great many public meetings were held , and a clamour for peace was very general throughout the country  and when the king went to open the parliament he was grossly insulted , hissed , hooted , groaned at , and pelted , and one of the glasses of the state carriage was broken , supposed to have been done with a ball from an air-gun .
Five hundred of the Tenth Dragoons escorted his Majesty from Windsor to Piccadilly , where the whole regiment of the Fifteenth Dragoons was assembled to conduct the King to the House of Peers to open the Parliament .
After the Fifteenth had relieved the Tenth , it returned from Piccadilly , and halted at Knightsbridge barracks , which were then first occupied by it : the men had orders to remain in readiness the whole night with their horses standing saddled , and they themselves sleeping in the stable with them .
That was the first time the King had ever been escorted by more than a serjeant 's guard , and I think we may set it fairly down that from that time the laws of England have been passed under the protection and the influence of the military .
This enabled Mr. Pitt to execute measures hostile to the liberties of the people .
Two bills were immediately passed  one to prevent seditious meetings , and the other called Lord Grenville 's gagging bill .
The British minister was , in fact , become the ruler of the destinies of Europe  he had contrived , by means of British gold , to procure in France the committal of the most atrocious and bloody deeds that human nature is capable of , and this was inhumanly effected in order to delude mankind with the idea that any change in the form of any government , however bad and tyrannical , must always be followed by such deeds .
In this he was too successful  for , by these means alone , he was enabled to alarm the timid , disgust the more rational , and prevail upon the great mass of his suffering countrymen to submit to these arbitrary acts , and to endure their present ills , however galling , rather than run the risk of greater by a change .
This was the policy of the British ministry , and I sincerely believe that all the atrocities that had been committed in Paris , all the blood that had been spilt , all the massacres that had been perpetrated , were hired and paid for by British gold , drawn from the pockets of the gulled and besotted people , for the purpose , as they were made to believe , of preventing the commission of similar atrocities in our own country .
In fact , the labour , the industry , and the talent of the people , the industrious and hard-working people of England , were now heavily taxed to subsidize every despot of the continent  and the wealth of the nation , drawn from the sweat of the poor man 's brow , was squandered with a lavish hand , to hire and to pay every assassin and every cut throat by trade in Europe , to enable them to prolong the war against the liberties of France , and thereby to prevent a reform and redress of grievances at home .
In the mean time the National Convention of France were boasting of their victories  it was asserted that they had gained twenty-seven pitched battles , taken one hundred and sixteen strong places , ninety-one thousand prisoners , and three thousand eight hundred pieces of cannon .
During this year the son of Lewis the Sixteenth died in prison , and on the twenty-eighth of July , the army of emigrants which landed at Quiberon bay was totally destroyed .
A most curious circumstance also happened : Hanover made peace with France , so that our amiable allies , the good people of Hanover , made peace with the King of England 's most deadly enemy .
It was also in this year that Stanislaus , King of Poland resigned his crown , and his kingdom was partitioned among his rapacious neighbours , Austria , Prussia , and Russia .


This year was a very turbulent one for Great Britain , there being riots in many parts of the kingdom in consequence of the high price of bread , the quartern loaf of which continued above a shilling , during the whole year .
At Salisbury symptoms of rioting broke out one market day  some of the farmers , attending the market , were hustled and insulted  some of the sacks of corn were also cut by the rioters , and the corn let about the marketplace  and the Cornet of the Everley troop of cavalry , Mr. William Dyke , of Syrencot [ 12 ] , near Amesbury , one of the largest farmers in the west of England , who attended the market at Salisbury with his corn , was insulted and ill-used by the people .
The windows of his carriage were broken , and the vehicle was otherwise injured , as he was escaping out of the town towards his home in the afternoon .
The antipathy of the people was directed towards him particularly , because he had been very instrumental in causing the little bushel , of the Winchester measure , of eight gallons , to be introduced generally in the county of Wilts , instead of the old bushel , which contained nine gallons , and in some instances ten gallons .
My father 's district contained full ten gallons , and when the little bushel was established , four of our bushels made exactly five of the Winchester measure such was the aversion of my father , as well as of myself , to the , new regulation , that when the law was enforced to compel every one to use it , even then we ever afterwards , to this day , put 5 bushels into each sack , so that they were always of the same size and weight as they were before the measure was altered .
However , Mr. Dyke , our cornet , was singled out , on account of his being the ring-leader , in what the poor called a conspiracy to lessen the size of the bushel , and at the same time to keep up the price of corn .
The mob , as they pelted his carriage with brick bats , as his horses galloped , or rather fled , through the town , intimated that if he came the next week they would serve him still worse .
This was a great offence , and which was not to be borne .
To pelt ` Squire Dyke , the gallant cornet of the Everly troop , was such a heinous and daring outrage , that it could not , consistently with our honour , be suffered to pass with impunity , and every one in the neighbourhood was made to tremble for the fate of the rioters .
Every member of the troop , and I of course , among the rest , received a formal summons to be in readiness to join on the following Tuesday , to march to Salisbury , to quell any riot that might take place  and , at all events , to guard our gallant commander Mr. Dyke , while he went to the market to sell his corn  for it was very properly considered , that , in case the cornet of a troop of yeomanry was allowed to be deterred from attending the market to sell his grain , no farmer would in future be able to attend without being in danger , not only of losing his corn , but of having his head broken into the bargain .


The thing got wind and was the general topic of conversation all over that part of the county .
The rioters had publicly intimated their intention of assembling on the next market day at Salisbury , and compelling the farmers to sell their corn at a moderate price , or abide by the consequences  and it was blazoned all over the country that the Everly troop had received orders and meant to march to Salisbury on that day , to join the Salisbury troop , for the purpose of chastising the temerity of the disorderly multitude .
The bloody conflict that was anticipated caused many a manly heart to palpitate , and many a rosy cheek to lose its blooming colour and to be overspread with a pale sallow hue .
The mighty battles that had caused such a sensation throughout the whole of the civilized world , the terrors that had been created by the combats which had been fought by Moreau , by Jourdan , by Wurmser , and all the other great generals upon the continent , were entirely forgotten , or thought but little of , in the vicinity of Amesbury and Everly .
Nothing was talked of , or meditated upon , but the expected dreadful battle of Salisbury : the quivering and almost bloodless lip of every one who ventured to speak upon the subject , showed visible signs of terror and dismay  every face , indeed , seemed to give `` dreadful note of preparation . ''
This was my first campaign  and , as it was the only opportunity I ever had of distinguishing myself in the active service of my country in this way as a soldier , and as a volunteer yeomanry cavalry man too , I must entreat the indulgence and particular attention of the gentle reader , while I give a faithful narrative , an unvarnished tale , of the whole affair .
This being the solitary instance in which I was called into the field of battle while I was in the service , I must entreat those who do me the honour to read my Memoirs , to extend their forgiveness to me if I should prove somewhat tedious  but to my fair readers , my female friends , I will promise before hand , that there shall be no over-strained description of the bloody work of war , c. : I will faithfully relate the particulars as they actually occurred , without fear or favour  being willing to take my share of the honour as well as the odium of the fate of war .


It will be recollected , that Mr. Dyke was only a Cornet as yet in the troop , and of course it was contemplated , as is usual upon these occasions amongst the subalterns of the army , previous to an engagement , that in case of a warm contest there would be promotion .
Mr. Dyke , or rather Cornet Dyke , rode over early on the Wednesday following to Captain Astley , to inform him of what had happened , and requested him to give an order for the summoning of the troop , to muster on the following Tuesday  and the place of rendezvous was fixed at the Cornet 's house , as that was on the road to Salisbury .
The gallant Captain complied immediately , and the orderly man was hurried off to inform the different members of the corps in time , that they might be prepared and well equipped by the important day  so that we had all of us nearly a whole week to ponder upon the probable chances of the impending conflict .
The whole week was spent in surmises how it would all end  some longed for the fray , others , as I have since understood , were preparing for the worst , and occupied their time in settling their worldly affairs , so that making of wills was the best trade going for that week .
My father , who knew all the parties well , kept up his spirits  for he at once confidently asserted that there would be no blood spilt , while the troop was under the command of his neighbour , Captain Astley  and he really carried his jokes so far , that I was sometimes almost disposed to be angry myself .
`` Ah , my dear boy , '' he used to say , `` it is very well for you that our friend Carrington in gone to Berkeley Castle  for if he were here he would laugh till his sides cracked to hear what is going on . ''
I demanded , why so ?
`` Why , '' said he , `` your gallant Captain is run away already  he is gone to Boreham . ''
The fact was , that , as soon as Dyke had left the Captain , he called his favourite servant Douse , without whose advice he never did any thing at that time , and having related the object of Cornet Dyke 's visit , he said , `` What say you , Douse , to this affair ? ''
`` Why , '' replied Douse , `` Damn the Cornet !
he is got into the scrape , and let him get out of it himself in the best way he can . ''
Douse gave this advice more for the safety of his own carcase than for the honour of his master  for Douse , who was the groom and the constant attendant of the Captain , fancied that he himself began to smell powder already  besides he knew his man well , and he knew that his advice would be acceptable .
He was right in his calculation  for the Captain , drawing himself up , said , `` Right , you are right , Douse !
damn the fellow , as you say , let him fight his own battles , and get out of his own scrapes , as well as he can .
But what shall I do , Douse ?
What excuse shall I make ? ''
-- `` O '' says Douse , `` order your carriage and go to Boreham , and then you know you will be from home , and that will be a sufficient excuse . ''
A beam of pleasure sparkled in the Captain 's eye , and he at once adopted the faithful groom and valet 's advice .
He then wrote to Sir John Methuen Poore , the Lieutenant , and honestly told him that , as he was not concerned in Dyke 's keeping up the price of his wheat , he should not attend at Salisbury , as he was going to Boreham , where he had particular business .
Boreham was near Warminster , not more than 20 miles from Salisbury , and Everly was 16 miles .
However , it was soon buzzed about that the Captain was from home , and that he was gone to Boreham -- which was ever afterwards a byeword amongst the members of the troop when any one had sneaked out of performing his duty  the exclamation then was , `` he 's gone to Boreham ! ''
Sir John Poore took the hint , and wrote to his friend Cornet Dyke , to say that he had particular business that required his presence in London , where he was going the next day .
This desertion in the hour of danger , of our Captain and our Lieutenant , flew like lightning through the district , and I shall never forget my father when he related the latter circumstance to me  he could not get it out for the life of him for laughing .
`` However , '' said he , `` you have got the Cornet left , and he is a prudent man , and I 'll warrant you there is no harm will come to any of you . ''


At length the awful morning arrived , and by this time I really had imbibed a great deal of my father 's notion of the thing , and began to think that it would , after all , turn out very little better than a hoax , or something for the public to laugh at .
I own I did not like the object of the expedition much  neither did I relish the idea of going to draw my sword upon a defenceless , unarmed multitude  but my father turned it all into ridicule -- he said we were only old-woman frighteners , and he quoted first some farwell lines of Pope 's Homer , addressed by Hector to Andromache , before he went out to meet Achilles  then he quoted Hudibras , and then he would give a few lines of the character of Falstaff , the then again of Bobadil .
The fatal day was , however , come , and I mounted in good time to proceed to the rendezvous at our Cornet 's house at Syrencot .
[ 12 ] As I rode along with some of my comrades , I could not avoid cracking a few jokes about the nature of our expedition , and the unsoldier-like service on which we were about to be employed .
I shall never forget the serious or rather gloomy appearance of my neighbour and friend , honest John Coward , of Longstreet  his naturally long dark visage was extended to a more than usual length , and the tender pathetic way in which he took leave of Jenny at the door , as he mounted his charger , was a genuine specimen of the mock heroic .
At length he entreated me not to make fun of such a momentous and solemn undertaking  then fetching a deep sigh , he said he prayed to God that it might all end well , and that no lives might be lost .
In this mood we arrived in front of Mr. Cornet Dyke 's house , where we found the horses being led about of some few of the troop , who had got there before us .
Being invited to alight , and take some refreshment , we dismounted , and gave our horses to the care of the men who were attending in considerable numbers , for the purpose of walking them about while we regaled ourselves .
They were the thrashers , carters , and other labourers , of our Cornet , and , as they well knew the errand upon which we were going , they eyed us with no slight degree of suspicion and ill-will .
We had to be sure lost our Captain and our Lieutenant , but we consoled ourselves with the idea that we had got our Cornet safe  that he could not run away and leave us in the lurch  although my friend Coward had thrown out some dark hints , as we came along , by which it appeared to me that there was a hope in his mind , that something would yet turn up , to prevent us from marching at once to danger and to glory  and I could see plainly enough that he was quite willing to forego all the flattering rewards of the latter , if he could only be sure of escaping from the former .


When we entered the house , we found such of our comrades as had arrived before us , seated round a table , enjoying a handsome cold collation , which was spread thereon for the occasion .
There was cold ham , fowls tongue , c. c. tea , coffee , wine and beer in great profusion  and , if I recollect right , there were no less than three rooms furnished with the same substantial proof of our Cornet 's hospitality : so that , as he arrived , each member of the troop was provided with a liberal allowance of good old English cheer .
This being the first time that our hero had ever given a treat of any sort to the troop , it was hailed by some as an auspicious omen  and I could not help observing , to my next neighbour at the table , who was Mr. William Butcher , junior , that the brick-bats which had been levelled at our Cornet 's bead had at all events opened an avenue to his heart .
A general laugh was caused by this remark  though it drew on us a reprimand from Butcher 's uncle , who was a sergeant .
I also observed to Butcher , that my friend and neighbour , Coward , not only played a good knife and fork , but did ample justice to the Old October .
An unusual flush about the gills shewed , indeed , that his blood was beginning to circulate pretty rapidly , and by the time he had taken another glass or two he began to talk big , and crack his jokes with the best of us .
As some of the party , in endeavouring to keep up their spirits , were already `` half seas over , '' Mr. Serjeant-major Pinkey now very properly interposed  and as every one had taken what was at least quite sufficient , the things were removed , and we began to look at our watches , which showed us that time was gliding pretty quickly away , and that we ought to recommence our march .
On our entrance we had been desired by the servants to make ourselves welcome , but our Cornet had not yet made his appearance .
Having waited a considerable time , I took the liberty to ring the bell and desire the servant to inform his master that we were all in readiness to start , and waited only for our commander .
Although generally speaking , this was considered as very proper , yet some of the older members thought it was very impertinent in me , who was a mere stripling at the time .
The servant went up stairs to deliver the message , but still we remained without an answer  and my new acquaintance , William Butcher , having whispered to me loud enough for many of our comrades to hear , `` That he should not be surprised to see our leader come forth by-and-by , like Hamlet 's Ghost , armed in complete steel , '' this was received by some with a smile , by the more discreet with a frown .
Still , however , no Cornet appeared .
At length , in spite of sour looks and rebukes , I rang the bell once more , and begged the servant to let us know whether his master was coming or not .


All my father 's observations now came forcibly across my mind  I began to thing that his quotations from Hudibras and Shakespeare had too much truth in them  and I prepared myself for some extraordinary conduct on the part of our Commander .
It was well I did so , amazed indeed should I have been .
My last message had the desired effect .
After we had been anxiously waiting for more than an hour , the door at length opened , and in walked the Cornet -- but , instead of being dressed in armour , he had not even got on his regimentals .
To our utter astonishment , confusion and dismay , instead of marching firmly forth armed `` cap-a-pe '' with nodding plume , and his bright and trusty steel girt round his loins , eager for the fight  lo and behold !
he crept slowly and solemnly along , clad in a long flannel dressing gown and a pair of scarlet slippers .
Notwithstanding all my father had prepared me for , this scene so far surpassed all that his ridicule had anticipated , that I can solemnly aver that I had never before felt such a sensation , and as I have never since felt any thing like it , I am totally unable to describe my feelings .
We were all struck motionless , and every one , as he involuntarily rose , appeared to dart a look of eager enquiry without being able to open his lips .
The trembling -- at length broke silence , and in a faultering under tone he spoke , or rather whined as follows : -- `` Gentlemen , I am very sorry for having kept you waiting so long . ''
One of the troop , who had been plying the Cornet 's old stingo pretty freely , interrupted him , in a voice as opposite to that of the Cornet as the roaring of a cannon is to the chirping of a cricket , and replied `` Never mind , Sir , about any apology , but put on your regimentals as fast as you can , or we shall get to Salisbury after all the mischief is done . ''
The Cornet proceeded -- `` I am very sorry , Gentlemen  it is very unlucky  but , about three o'clock this morning , I was suddenly seized with such a violent pain in my bowels , that Mrs. Dyke says it will be very imprudent for me to leave the house in my present state , for fear of catching cold  and in fact I think so too , and she insists upon it that I shall not go with you . ''


In the midst of this affecting scene I too was seized suddenly , but in rather a different way  for an appropriate couplet which my father had repeated in the morning , and with which I was very angry then , now came so forcibly across my memory , that not being able to suppress my feelings , I burst out into what is vulgarly called a horse laugh  in which I was joined by Butcher and some of my comrades .
The poor Cornet , however , pitiously proceeded , as well as a man could do with such a twinging belly ach , and said , `` That he really was very sorry for it  but as it could not be helped now , he trusted that we would proceed under the command of Serjeant-major Pinkney , and he was quite sure that we should conduct ourselves in a manner that would do credit to the troop .
He added that he would send a servant with us , who would return and let him know how matters stood , and in case his presence was absolutely necessary , he would endeavour to come over to Salisbury in his carriage , provided that Mrs. Dyke would permit him to leave home . ''
Heaven and earth , here was a catastrophe !
I sincerely believe , if I had not been an eye witness of this transaction , that I should have thought to this hour that some of the characters drawn by Shakespeare were ridiculously absurd and unnatural  but this scene in real life so far exceeded any thing I had ever seen represented upon the stage , that I have never since disputed the correctness of our inimitable bard , in his conceptions of human nature , and the justice with which he has delineated its various characters .
Squire Dyke now returned up stairs to his inconsolable lady , and his amiable anxious family  and having mounted our chargers we marched off towards Salisbury , with the gallant Serjeant-major at our head .
As we rode along , or rather marched two a-breast , my comrade was Mr. William Butcher of Urchfont , with whom I that day contracted an intimacy which lasted as long as we remained together in the same county , and which was continued by a friendly intercourse up to the period of his premature death a few years back .
We were passing Bulford , about two miles before we reached Amesbury , when we observed the Serjeant-major and Butcher 's uncle , who was another Serjeant , in deep and serious conference , upon which I exclaimed , by G-d , Butcher , your uncle and Pinkney are holding a council of war  and I will bet my life that some new difficulty will arise , so as after all to prevent our marching to the scene of action .
I had scarcely spoken the words before our then Commander fell back , and joined myself and Butcher , who were heading the troop next to the officers : and Pinkney addressed me as follows : -- `` We have been considering the matter over , Hunt , and Butcher thinks that we are proceeding not only upon a hazardous but a very foolish expedition  for he says that , as there is no commissioned officer with us , any act of ours will , in the eye of the law be deemed illegal .
What say you to this ? ''
Having given the wink to my friend , I replied as follows : -- `` I believe that Serjeant Butcher is quite right as to his law , and that in case any person should be killed , there is no doubt but we shall every man Jack of us be tried for murder .
But , if you ask my opinion .
I am for proceeding immediately  for we had much better be tried and hanged to boot , than live to be pointed at as fools and cowards for the remainder of our days . ''
`` Ah ! ''
exclaimed Serjeant Butcher , `` that is very pretty talking for you , young fellow  but we are too old to be caught tripping ( I suppose he meant swinging ) in such a way .
We have made up our minds to halt at Amesbury , where we will dine  and in the mean time we will send over Mr. Dyke 's servant to Salisbury , and should there be any riot he can return and let us know , and we can quickly be there , as Amesbury is only seven miles from thence . ''
He likewise very prudently observed , that `` it would be exceedingly foolish to march there to create a riot , when , by staying away , all danger or mischief might be avoided . ''


As the council of war had settled [ 13 ] the business , all my sarcastic observations merely tended to irritate , without the least chance of changing their final determination  and we , therefore , gallantly marched into Amesbury , where , having halted in front of Mrs. Purnell 's house , the sign of the George and the Dragon , our commander gave the word for the landlady to advance , from whom he boldly demanded , whether she thought that she could provide beef steaks for sixty in half an hour , as the troop could not halt longer than an hour , they being extremely anxious to reach Salisbury .
Mrs. Purnell , who was an excellent landlady , as well as an excellent woman , was too good a judge of business to turn away such a spanking order  with an engaging smile she replied , that she could hardly undertake to supply us all with beef steaks , but that , if we would dismount , she would do the best she could .
The offer was hailed and accepted without further ceremony , and every man got as good a birth for his horse as circumstances would admit .
Another council of war was then called , and another very grave question was discussed with all the solemnity of a camp scene , immediately preceding a battle .
This momentous question was , how much each man should be allowed to drink after dinner , and , on due deliberation , it was at length resolved , and proclaimed aloud , that every one might take what beer he liked at dinner , but that no person should take more than a pint of wine after dinner .
The reader will recollect that we had only marched about three miles and a half since we had all taken such an EXHILIRATING luncheon at our Cornet 's house .


At the expiration of an hour the steaks were pronounced to be ready , and we all fell to without ceremony .
Mrs. Purnell at that time brewed her own ale , which was very different from the nauseous and deleterious trash that is now supplied to such houses by those common pests of society , common brewers .
As many of the young farmers belonging to the troop had not got rid of the effects of what they had taken at their luncheon , they plied the tankard of good old nappy freely with their dinner  so much so , indeed , that before the cloth was removed there were never less than eight or ten talking loud at a time  and , long before each man had finished half a bottle of wine , three-fourths of the troop were drunk .
The following scene ensued .
Two of the gallant heroes , being deprived of the chance of making war upon the old women and boys at Salisbury , who had the week before pelted their Cornet , actually stripped and had a pitched battle .
All command was at an end .
The Serjeant-major fruitlessly endeavoured to call them to order  they were all now become too vain and too valiant to be under the controul of any one .
Some had mounted their horses , and swore that they would immediately proceed to Salisbury , as they were sure Dyke 's servant was killed , or he would have returned long , before  others were grinding their swords  and one , having more courage or more wine aboard than the rest , was actually seen setting his weapon upon the hone of the barber of the place .
But as the servant of Cornet Dyke had now returned , to say that it was all peaceable , and no chance of a riot , some of the party actually proposed to march over to Salisbury , to shew that they were not afraid .
As there was no danger , and the major part of the troop were three parts drunk , it only required a CAPTAIN BIRLEY to lead them on , and a SQUIRE HULTON to give the word , to have caused a scene in which , though it would not have been equal in atrocity and cruelty to the murders of the 16th of August , at Manchester , the blood of innocent and unarmed , although misled persons , might , and in all human probability would have been spilt .
However , by the advice of myself and a few other , who had retained our senses , and who felt degraded in our own estimation by the whole of these proceedings , the Serjeant-major ordered all present to be dismissed , and each to depart to his home in the best way he could .
This was done , but the whole of this little town of Amesbury was thrown into confusion by the drunken and ridiculous proceedings of some of the men before they left it -- and thus ended the battle , that was to have been , of Salisbury !


I returned to my father thoroughly abashed and ashamed of the transaction  but , when I related to him the account of the belly-ach and long faced , dressing-gown scene , I really thought he would have cracked his sides with laughing  and , as I had entered the troop against his wish and better judgment , he did not spare me in some of his remarks .
`` And now , '' said he , `` young man , I hope you will another time be more disposed to attend to the advice of your father , who has lived so many years longer than yourself , and has been thereby enabled to form a much more correct judgement of mankind than you can possibly do . ''
`` But , '' added he , `` that wisdom which is gained by experience is always the most lasting , and generally the most advantageous , so that it be not purchased too dear . ''
I own I did not profit so much as I ought to have done by the sound advice of such an excellent father  but , as he used frequently to say , as an excuse for any indiscretion of mine , produced from the enthusiasm of my disposition , `` Well , it can not be helped  there is no putting old heads upon young shoulders . ''
This was not only very liberal in him , but perfectly true  and the wise Supreme has very properly ordained that it should be so .
I have , however , never ceased to regret my own imprudence and folly in not listening more attentively to the kind advice and prudent admonition of one who was so capable and so anxious to bestow it upon me .


I had now been labouring incessantly in my avocations on my father 's farms for five years , in acquiring a competent knowledge of and clear insight into the farming business  and I must say that my father was at all times fully disposed to give me credit for my exertions .
This season I had taken upon myself to make one of five mowers who cut down all my father 's spring corn , consisting of very little short of three hundred acres of barley and oats .
It being a perfectly fine harvest season , we had not , the whole time , one day sufficiently wet to stop mowing  and on a Saturday night it was all down , with the exception of one piece of oats , consisting of seventeen acres and a half  a very heavy crop growing upon newly broken or burn-baked ground .
On Saturday night I proposed to my partners that we should make an effort to cut down this piece of oats on the Monday , although it lay three miles and a half from home , adjoining Everly field .
This was thought to be an impracticable undertaking  each , however , promised to be there by four o'clock in the morning , and to start from home as the clock struck three .
As it would take an hour to walk three miles and a half with the scythes on their backs , it was agreed that they should carry my scythe , and that I should bring the bottles and bag upon my poney .


On the Sunday I was engaged to dine and pass the day at Heytesbury , a distance of nearly twenty miles from my father 's house , where I was going to meet a young lady , who was on a visit there , and to whom I was betrothed , without the consent of my father .
How this betrothing came about I must now inform my readers .
I had often heard my father speak in very high terms of Miss Halcomb , the daughter of his old acquaintance , Mr. Wm. Halcomb , who kept the Bear Inn at Devizes , well known to be one of the very best inns between London and Bath , which inn had been previously kept by the late Mr. Lawrence , the father of the present Sir Thomas Lawrence , who I believe was born there .
My father was always talking to my sisters in praise of the industry and the accomplishments of this young lady , particularly when any thing was not quite so well managed as it ought to be  he would then exclaim , `` Ah !
How much better Miss Halcomb would have done it ! ''
My eldest sister used sometimes to reply , rather petulantly , `` Why do you not invite this lady to come and see us ?
perhaps I should then be enabled to acquire some of her talent to please . ''
`` Well , '' said my father one day , `` I have no objection .
You shall ride with me to-morrow , and call upon her , and I will then invite Mr. Halcomb to bring his daughters and return the visit . ''
My sister agreed to this , and , as she herself told me , she was prepared to dislike this lady , merely because my father had so often made such severe comparisons , that she had almost become a bugbear to her .
Not so with me  I was already half in love with her from my father 's description , although I had never seen her  and upon their return was eager to know when we should have the pleasure of seeing her and her family .
The day , however , was not fixed at that time  but a remarkable circumstance ultimately produced the so much longed-for interview with this young lady , and I own I had made up my mind secretly to admire her person , as much as from my father 's description , I admired her good qualities .
Had my father but even slightly guessed what was working in my breast , he would never have invited Miss Halcomb to Littlecot  he having a much higher object in view for his son , both as to fortune and rank .


It is rather extraordinary , but I longed excessively to see this lady .
At length the following occurrence led to the event which I had anticipated with so much anxiety .
My father had ridden to London , and taken his friend Coward with him as a companion .
On their return , having started early on a Sunday morning , they rode , as was my father 's custom , twenty miles before breakfast , which brought them to the Windmill , at Salt Hill .
They rode into the yard , and having called for the hostler , the landlord , Mr. Botham , came up to them and made his bow .
Having learned , in the course of his conversation with them , that they came from the neighbourhood of Devizes , he enquired if my father knew Mr. Halcomb who kept the Bear Inn , to which my father replied , that he not only knew but was particularly intimate with him  a reply which led to a more familiar conversation .


As soon as they had finished breakfast , the landlord entered the room , and invited them to walk into the garden and take some fruit  an invitation which was accepted .
From thence they had a full view of Windsor Castle , which being admired by Coward , Mr. Botham enquired if they had ever seen Windsor .
The answer being in the negative , -- `` Well , Gentlemen , '' said he , `` If you will favour me with your company to dinner , I will take you over in a chaise , shew you the King 's farms , the Queen 's dairy , c. after which we will walk over the Castle , and go to the Chapel Royal where you will have an opportunity of seeing all the Royal Family , who are at Windsor , as they scarcely ever fail in fine weather to attend divine service . ''
Coward 's eyes sparkled with joy at the proposal , and he looked with anxious expectation for my father 's answer .
The latter replied that it would have been a great treat to him , particularly to have inspected the King 's farms  but that he was , nevertheless , reluctantly obliged to decline this polite offer , as they were under the necessity of reaching home the next morning , and had made arrangements for sleeping that night at Newbury , a distance of nearly forty miles from Salt Hill , much too far for their horses to take them after dinner .
`` If that be all the objection you have , '' replied Botham , `` we will soon settle that : I will send a steady man on to Reading with your horses , who shall get them well cleaned and fed , and after we have seen Windsor , and you have dined and taken one of the best bottles of old port my house can produce , and drank the health of my friend Halcomb , I will put the best pair of horses I have in my stables to a post chaise , in which you shall be taken to Reading in such style as will give you a specimen of the way in which we conduct posting at the London end of the Bath road .
By the time that you arrive at Reading your horses will have had good time to feed , and will be fresh to take you on to Newbury as early as you have named . ''
Coward begged my father to accept so very excellent a proposal , and declared that it would not only be a great deal better for their horses , but a great accommodation to them  and in this Coward was very sincere , for he did not altogether like my father 's long rides on horseback , as my father seldom travelled less than sixty miles a day , when upon a journey .
But my father , who was a man of the world , looking Botham firmly in the face said , `` I assure you , Sir , that your proposition staggers me a little .
Your offer is most polite and very generous  but , as I am not in the habit of receiving such liberality from strangers , how am I to account for the pressing manner in which you have offered it ?
I can not for one moment believe that a person in your respectable situation can have any unworthy motive  but you must excuse me for declining to assent to your proposition , unless you will inform me in what way I may have an opportunity of returning the compliment , or , at any rate , point out some probable motive that has induced you to proffer it . ''
`` Sir , '' said Botham , I will do both  in the first place , I have received many civilities , and in fact great acts of kindness , from Mr. Halcomb which , as he has never been here , I have never had an opportunity of returning .
I have , therefore , seized this occasion of being civil to one of his friends .
In the next place , if you will fix a day , when I can meet Mr. Halcomb and his daughters at your house , I will pay you a visit in return with pleasure , although it is a distance of sixty miles .
We innkeepers , you know , travel not only expeditiously , but very cheaply .
`` Enough , '' said my father .
`` Give me your hand , we will chearfully place ourselves at your disposal till four or five o'clock in the afternoon . ''
The business was thus settled , to the great joy of poor Coward , who was almost dumb with fear , lest my father should decline such an opportunity of seeing Windsor and the Royal Family .


To Windsor they accordingly went , and were greatly entertained with what they saw , which was every thing that was to be seen about the Castle , as Mr. Botham was well acquainted with the upper servants in attendance there  they also got a seat at the Chapel Royal , very near the Royal Family , and having spent a pleasant day , Mr. Botham kept his word , by conveying them in a post chaise to Reading , a distance of twenty miles , in about an hour and a half .


When my father returned he related this circumstance to me and my sisters  and Coward overwhelmed us with his praises of Mr. Botham .
My father then said that he would fix an early day , for Mr. Halcomb and his daughters to come and meet him .
Coward observed that he must have a very great regard for his friend , to travel one hundred and twenty miles , merely to dine with him .
`` Ah !
Coward , '' said my father , `` You know little of mankind !
it did not require any very extraordinary degree of penetration to discover that Mr. Botham entertained a greater friendship for one of the daughters than he did for her father . ''
-- `` Why , yes , '' replied Coward , `` I now remember that he devoured your praises of Miss Halcomb with great avidity . ''
`` To tell you the truth , '' said my father , `` Mr. Botham informed me that he wished for an alliance with the eldest daughter of his friend  and , as I think it a good match , and Salt Hill will be an excellent home for her , I will do every thing that lies in my power to promote their union . ''


For the moment , this information was death to my hopes , and seemed to strike daggers to my heart  for I was literally over head and ears in love with this unknown lady , merely from what I had heard my father say of her .
But as I could not learn from my father that she had in any way encouraged the hopes of Botham , I felt , after a little reflection , no fears for the result , and without farther consideration , resolutely made up my mind to be his rival .
This furnishes a striking example how liable young persons , possessing minds of a sanguine nature , are to be talked into any thing .


The day was fixed for the party , and my poor father little thought that his son , who could not by any process of reasoning be supposed to have any thing more than the common feeling which actuates the minds of young people when they anticipate meeting some friends of their own age , he little thought that his son looked forward to the day with a much more intense anxiety than either of the individuals that he expected would play so prominent a character , and on whose account the party was solely made up .
The day at length arrived , and my father had made such preparations as he conceived were due to the polite attention and hospitality that he had received at the hands of Mr. Botham .
My father was not one of that class of personages who are so very common , and who pride themselves upon being match makers  this being the only instance in which I ever knew him to interfere in any thing of the sort  but he , nevertheless , really appeared to enter into this scheme with all the ardour of an old proficient .
I believe , however , that he did it with the best of motives , under the full impression that he was serving all parties , as it struck him that it would be an union which bid fair to promote the mutual advantage and happiness of the two families .
The reader will indeed perceive that he was not an adept in the art of match making , as , had he been so , he certainly would not have communicated the secret to us young folks .


The dinner hour now approached , and a chaise drove up to the door  containing the two Miss Halcombs , accompanied by their brother , on horseback .
My father having introduced them to me , Mr. Halcomb made an apology for the absence of his father who was ill , and presented a letter , which had been sent to him by the coach from Botham , directed for my father .
The latter having opened and read it , he looked very grave and disconcerted , and said , addressing himself to the young lady , `` I am very sorry to inform you , Madam , that I find by this letter , which I have received from Mr. Botham , that we shall be deprived of the pleasure of his company , in consequence , as he informs me , of his unexpectedly having a large party from town , who have ordered a dinner , which totally precludes the possibility of his leaving home . ''
This caused a slight blush upon the cheek of Miss Halcomb , who very modestly replied , `` that she was sorry my father was deprived of the company of his friend  but , '' looking round to me and my sister , she added with a smile , `` we will endeavour to bear the loss with fortitude , and spend the day as pleasantly as we can without him . ''
It might have been very natural for me to feel an inward pleasure at the absence of one whom I had expected to meet as a rival  but to tell the truth , I felt very differently , for I at once set him down as an opponent not worth contending with , and I could not help despising him for his want of gallantry .
I had also eagerly watched the countenance of the lady , to endeavour , if possible , to collect whether this Mr. Botham had made any impression upon her heart or not  and from the apathy which it manifested , I felt very little fear on his account .
My father was sadly mortified at the circumstance  both at the absence of his old friend Halcomb , and his new acquaintance Botham .
However , we spent a very pleasant day , and , as I had already made up my mind to be , I was over head and ears in love with the lady .
My attentions , in fact , were so pointed and unreserved , that I saw that my father began to repent that he had ever had any thing to do with match making .


I found Miss Halcomb not only to possess all the good qualities that my father had ever described , but in my estimation she possessed ten thousand times more charms than my fervid imagination previously formed .
My attentions were received with that politeness which was becoming an amiable , a virtuous and an accomplished female , on the first interview with a young man , to whom she had never given one thought before  but it was very flattering to me to find that those attentions were not considered obtrusive or disagreeable .
I perceived that my father sat upon thorns , and that he was very much pleased to find that the young ladies declined the invitation of my sister to remain all night , although I added my intreaties to those of my sister , and this too in so earnest a manner , that my father could not refrain from saying that he should be very happy if the young ladies would remain all night with his daughter , but really he was fearful that my homely way of pressing them to stay would be considered as being very rude .
Notwithstanding they had made up their minds to go , yet I could see that they were not offended at the homely way ( as my father called it ) in which I enforced my suit .
I enlarged upon the darkness of the evening , the badness of the roads , and a thousand other obstacles which I presented to their view  but when I found that all was in vain  I seized an occasion to withdraw , while they were at tea , and taking off one of the wheels of the chaise I conveyed it unobserved into the rick yard , where I secreted it under some straw .
I then returned and took my leave , saying that I had an appointment to meet some friends at a neighbouring fair , which was actually the case .
Then , mounting my horse , off I rode .
It happened as I had anticipated .
When the horses were brought out to be put to the chaise , the boy was astonished to find that one of the hind-wheels was gone  and as it was a physical impossibility for any one to find it that night , the young ladies were obliged to accept my sister 's offer , in which my father now sincerely joined , since he found that I had left home : though he did not hesitate to pronounce me to be the culprit who had , in one of my ridiculous frolics , stolen the wheel off the chaise .
Upon my return , I was charged with the act , which I freely confessed , assigning as an excuse , my fears for the safety of the young females , travelling such bad roads in such a dark night .


Within a very few days after this event , I gained Miss Halcomb 's consent to ask her father 's permission to pay my addresses in form  and within a week from that time , I demanded her hand in marriage .
The old gentleman , however , very properly replied , that , although he had no objection to me as a son-in-law , he could not give his consent to any such hasty measure , till he had seen my father , to know if it met with his approbation .
I frankly told him that he might save himself the trouble and mortification of applying to my father , who , as soon as I mentioned my attachment to Miss Halcomb , and that I had offered her my hand and heart , ( which at the same time I informed him she had kindly accepted , ) had thrown himself into a violent passion , and swore , that unless I gave up my prize , and abandoned all further intentions of marrying an innkeeper 's daughter , he would disinherit me , and cut me off with a shilling .
This was quite enough to fix my determination , and I at once told old Mr. Halcomb , that I hoped he would act a more considerate part , for , as I had gained his daughter 's consent , and as I was of age , and his daughter very nearly so , all the fathers in Christendom , nor all the powers on earth , should prevent me from making her my wife .
The old gentleman very clearly saw that it was of no use to endeavour to deter me from my purpose by vain vows or threats  he therefore took a more rational course  he endeavoured to win me over by persuasion  and at length , by this conciliatory conduct , and by an assurance that he would not stand personally in the way , but that he would take every means consistent with the feelings of a man of honour to soften down the rigour of my father , he prevailed upon me to give up all intention of taking any hasty or premature step , which might involve us all in very unpleasant difficulties .
This was a course which was sure to succeed with me , and I promised him that I would do nothing without his knowledge .
Now , I am convinced that if Mr. Halcomb had acted in the same way that my father did , if he had forbidden me his house , and endeavoured by force to prevent my access to his daughter , such was my spirit of opposition , such an abhorrence had I of being driven into or out of any measure , such an innate hatred had I of every thing like tyrannical force , that I am quite sure if he had so acted , I having got the lady 's consent , I am quite sure I should have run away with her in a week , in spite of all that could have been done to prevent me .
If my father , on the contrary , had taken a similar course with Mr. Halcomb , if he had kindly advised me , and endeavoured to prevail upon the by mild and gentle means , I do not say that he would , or that he ought , to , have succeeded in making me give up the lady , but I am quite clear that he would have had a much better chance of success .
Nay , if he had appeared careless , and left me to myself , I was at that time of such a volatile disposition , that such a hasty attachment might possibly have been weakened , or it might have worn off by time  but the very course which he took , irrevocably fixed my fate as to marriage .
I was of age , and I had always made up my mind that I was , and ought to be , my own master upon this subject .
I am still of the same opinion  I still hold that parents have no right to make their children miserable by any arbitrary dictation upon a question of such vital importance as that of whom they shall marry .
Parents have an undoubted right , nay it is an imperious duty which they owe to their children , to direct their choice with respect to suitable connections , and they have a right to interpose the authority of their advice and recommendation to their children .
But the law of God and of man says [ 14 ] , that the parties about to be united ought to exercise their own free choice .
The law says that no person shall marry who is under age , without the consent of his or her parents  and the law has very justly drawn this line .
The law , therefore , very properly contemplates that no parent shall have the absolute controul over the person of a child in this matter after that child has come of age .


I have , probably , detained the reader much longer upon this subject than is either entertaining or edifying , but as this occurrence paved the way for that important part of my history , my marriage , I feel it a duty which I owe to myself , and to those who do me the honour to read these Memoirs , and more particularly to the Radicals , to be more explicit than I otherwise should be , if the venal press , and particularly the profligate Editors and Proprietors of that press , in order to gratify their political employers and partisans , had not , upon so many occasions , and with such brutal and savage coarseness , when they could neither answer my arguments nor contradict the truths that I promulgated , sought to cover their defeat and their infamy by accusing me of having deserted my wife , and left her to starve .
Fearless of the consequences , I shall , therefore , as I go along , place the circumstances fairly and honestly before the public , and leave them to draw their own conclusions , as to the correctness , not to say any thing of the honesty , of the base assertions which are made by the toots of my political adversaries .
At this moment , however , I will merely state briefly this fact , that , in the year 1802 , more than eighteen years ago , I was separated from my wife by mutual consent .
We had three children  two sons and a daughter .
It was agreed that the daughter should live with the mother , and the sons with me  but that both mother and father should have free access to each of the children , and the children the same access to the parents  and as I made a most liberal settlement upon my wife , ( the particulars of which I shall not withhold , ) there has been no complaint uttered by either party  no living creature ever having heard me make even the slightest insinuation against my wife , or ever cast the most remote reflection upon her character or conduct  neither has it ever come to the knowledge of myself or any of my friends that my wife has spoken one disrespectful word against me .
As we have both always lamented , as a misfortune , the circumstances which led to our separation , so we both have carefully abstained from heightening and adding to the poignancy of that misfortune , by mutual accusations , revilings , and recriminations , which would have been as base as they would have been proved to he unfounded .
If , on the contrary , I had deserted my wife , after having , when I was first married , surrounded her by prostitutes and courtezans  if I had been intriguing with every loose and abandoned female that came within the precincts of a profligate circle  if , after having driven her from my home , friendless and unprovided for  if , after having personally insulted her , I had hired spies and informers to traduce her character  if I had employed and paid the most abandoned characters , and had suborned them to swear away her life and her honour  if , when this plot had been detected and exposed , and her innocence had been proved by the very means that I had employed to blast her reputation and to destroy her  if I had still , in the most unfeeling and unnatural manner , separated her from , and cut off all communication with , her child , under the hollow and false pretence that she was not a proper person to be entrusted with the care of her own daughter  if , I say , I had driven her out of the country , and , having done this , if I had hired another gang of base villains , not only to dog and watch her steps , but to seduce and bribe her servants to betray her  if I had rewarded these villains , even with my own money , to fabricate and propagate all sorts of calumnies against her abroad , while their infamous agents at home were reiterating and magnifying those falsehoods  if I had bribed the dastardly hireling press to libel and villify her  if in fact , I had carried my persecutions and deadly hatred so far as at last to break the heart of her daughter  if , upon her return , I had made another atrocious attempt to destroy her by means of hired , bribed and suborned foreign witnesses  if I had done these things , or any of them , I should have been an execrable and detestable villain , and I should have merited the scorn of every man and woman in the universe : but , even then , even if I had been guilty of all these horrible and unnatural deeds , it would , even under these abhorrent circumstances , have been base in the extreme in the doubled-faced , black-hearted villains of the Courier , the dull Post and the mock Times to attack me in the way they have repeatedly done about my wife  because there are not three such abandoned profligate unprincipled monsters under the canopy of heaven .
Even the virtuous Mr. Perry , of the Morning Chronicle , has , when an occasion offered , endeavoured to varnish over his own character by attacking me about my wife .
But , when I remind Mr. Perry that his wife , or at least the person he called one of his wives , was a Miss HULL , a butcher 's daughter of the above-named town of Devizes , and that I know that those `` who have glass heads , should be very careful how they throw stones  '' I trust he will be more guarded in future .


I now request my readers to accept my apology for this long digression , and , without further comment , I will resume the thread of my narrative .
I have now introduced the reader to Miss Halcomb , who was destined to be my wife  and I also have before said that I event to send a Sunday with her at Heytesbury , a distance of nearly thirty miles from my father 's house .
The reader will recollect , too , that I had engaged with my father 's mowers to meet them at four o'clock on the Monday , morning upwards of three miles from home , in order to attack a field of oats , of seventeen acres and a half , a very heavy crop , to see if we , ( five in number , ) could not cut them down the same day .
The time , however , passed so delightfully and so rapidly in the society of an amiable and lovely female , to whom I was betrothed , that the clock had unobserved by me struck twelve more than half an hour  and , before I could muster up resolution enough to tear myself from the clear object of all my hopes , the respectable family , with whom my intended wife was visiting , had given me more than one hint of its being past their usual time of retiring to rest .
However , upon another hint being given by the prudent matron of the family , I took my leave , and having mounted my faithful steed I bent my course over the downs , twenty miles across Salisbury Plain .
As I quitted the village , or rather the rotten borough , of Heytesbury , the church clock struck one  Which for the first time recalled to my recollection the promise I had made , as well as my resolution to perform an uncommon day 's mowing , which was to commence at twenty-three miles distance at four o'clock .


With a heart as light as a feather , I reached home at three o'clock , when my father 's servant informed me that the mowers had been gone forward nearly half an hour , and that they had left the bottles to be filled and carried to the field by me .
Finding that I was rather behind my time , I merely then pulled off my coat and waistcoat , and put on my frock .
I did not wait to take off either my tight leather breeches , ( which were the fashion at that time , ) or my boots  but as soon as the servant had filled the bottles with ale , I mounted a poney , and reached the field of oats , just as the other four men were stripped and whetting their scythes in order to begin  a thing which they had never before had an opportunity of doing , throughout the whole harvest , as the first stroke was uniformly struck by myself .
They waited while I threw off my frock and took off my spurs , and having unbuttoned the knees of my breeches , we set to  and in ten minutes after the sun had sunk below the horizon , the last swarth was laid flat , and not an oat left standing  a day 's work which stands unrivalled in that country , and which is the more uncommon , as , in fact , there were only four scythes at work during the greater part of the day  for , it being excessively hot , one of the men , the worst mower of course , was principally employed in riding to and from the Inn at Everly , to replenish the bottles .
This was indispensible , every man being allowed as much ale as he could drink , with the exception of the two last bottles , containing three quarts each , which I was obliged to prohibit from being tapped till the oats were all down , as some of my partners by this time began to discover evident symptoms of inebriety .
As we finished the last stroke , a very severe flash of lightning announced the approach of a storm , which had been gathering for several hours .
I advised the men to hasten home , but they declared , now that the mowing was finished , they would finish the bottles before they left the field , and they kept their words .
I hurried home as fast as my pony could gallop , and got in doors just in time to escape one of the most tremendous thunder-storms I ever witnessed  my four companions got jollily drunk , and slept upon the open down , drenched in rain all night  and although I met two of them returning home , the next morning at four o'clock , in a most wretched state , yet such was their hardy nature that neither of them took the least cold .


I have detailed this day 's work as the last perhaps of the sort with which I shall trouble the reader .
It was , as I have already intimated , such a day 's work as had never been accomplished by five mowers before , or has been since , in that part of the world  and it will be recollected that I performed my share with out having had any sleep or rest .
But to me , at that time , I never appeared to want any rest -- I frequently worked till ten o'clock , and after taking my supper , and conversing with my father , arranging the proceedings for the next morning , I was very often not in bed till after eleven  yet I was very commonly up and dressed again by half past 3 , and never in the summer time was in bed after four .
It is a very extraordinary fact , that those who labour hard in the fields all day require the least sleep  at all events the smallest quantity of time in bed  for when they get thither , they enjoy and receive as much real sleep , they receive as much real refreshment in four hours , as the indolent , the idle , or the sedentary do in double the time .
When the mind is active and well employed I now find it has the same effect upon me as laborious bodily exercise , for I sleep as sound as a rock here , and when my mind is fully occupied , and kept upon a proper stretch during the day , six or seven hours rest in bed is quite ample  but when my mind is less employed , or occupied by light reading , and not exerted in its usual way , then I require more rest in bed , and I can sleep eight or even nine hours .
It is , however , very seldom indeed that I give way to such negligence and sluggishness .
I go to rest usually between eleven and twelve , and I am always up before seven .
I was always instructed by my father to consider indolence as one of the greatest faults  it was , in fact , a sin of the first magnitude in his vocabulary .
-- Indolence , he always said was the harbinger of every vice , of every evil .
And the Songs of Solomon and his Proverbs were on every occasion ready to support his opinion .
He would say to the sluggard , `` Go to the ant , thou sluggard , consider her ways and be wise . ''
He would forgive many a fault in a servant , but at habitual lyer in bed , he would get rid of immediately , unless he could break him of the bad habit .


My father for some time was very positive , and very determined to prevent me from marrying an Innkeeper 's daughter  and at length I undertook to reason with him upon the subject .
I demanded if he knew any thing in the slightest degree affecting the character of the young lady ?
His answer was `` No  quite the reverse . ''
I asked if he had not , at all times , and perpetually , spoken in the highest terms of her conduct , and whether he had not , in my hearing , held her up as a pattern of propriety , and an example to my sisters ?
All this he admitted to be true : but she had no fortune , and he had expected me to marry a lady of fortune and family  at the same time he pointed out several , whom he should have been pleased to acknowledge as his daughter-in-law .
I then demanded , whether , if she were , fit to be held up by him as a pattern for his daughters , she were likely to degrade his son as his wife ?
But , then , she had no fortune , and she was an Innkeeper 's daughter .
I begged then to know if he had any thing to urge against her father ?
No , indeed , he was a truly honourable and upright man .
Then I would reply , `` how often , Sir , have I been taught by you , in the language of your favourite author Pope , to look upon `` an honest man as the noblest work of God . ''
[ '' ] This would make him fly off , and , although he would admit this to be very true , yet he would not give his consent .


At length , having found that I persevered in my visits to the young lady , and having ascertained from my sister that I was preparing for the wedding , he addressed me as follows , one evening when we were alone : -- `` So , I find from your sister , that you are determined , in spite of my remonstrances , to marry Miss Halcomb ?
It is very true that , as you are of age , I can not prevent your union with that young lady  the law empowers you to make your own choice  but , recollect the law does not compel me to .
If you had selected Miss -- or Miss -- , '' naming several young ladies of fortune , `` I would have come down handsomely , and you might have lived like a gentleman  and if you had chosen to be a farmer , you might have occupied your own estate  but if you ` make a hard bed you must lie upon it . '
Although this is a vulgar saying , yet it is a very just one  and you may rely upon it that it applies to your case most pointedly . ''
I began to be impatient , and replied warmly , that I had to thank God for a sound body and an ardent mind , and I also had to thank him , any father , for the best of instruction and example  and that he had given me a proof , by his own industry and perseverance , that a man might not only be happy , but that he might also acquire wealth , without having much capital to begin with  and that I was not in the least afraid of the effects of lying upon a hard-bed by night , so that I had peace and comfort by day .
-- `` Ah , my dear son , '' said he , `` it is very true that I have devoted my life to business , and by incessant application and industry have acquired a considerable fortune  '' and with tears in his eyes , he added `` alas !
you are now going , by one false step , to blast my fondest hopes : by this match you are going , in one hour , to beat down and destroy all the bright prospects , all my plans for promoting your future well-being and consequence in life !
Do you believe , can you for a moment be so silly as to imagine , that I have toiled from morning till night , that I have laboured with such incessant assiduity , scarcely giving myself time to enjoy even my meals  and do you think that I have been so anxious , merely to get money , merely to acquire riches ?
Believe me , my dear son , I have never been led away by any such grovelling notions  I have had higher and more noble objects in view .
In fact , and in truth , my great , my sole aim has always been to make you a man of consequence in the county  and although I know that riches alone will neither make a man happy nor respected , yet without wealth I know not how a man in this country can acquire any celebrity in it .
With wealth , if a man have but a common share of understanding , he is at once pronounced a wise man , and he is looked up to as a prodigy  when his own native talent alone would not more than fit him for a menial office .
Look for instance at our neighbours  there is .
Mr. Astley of Everly , who is surrounded by every comfort  he has at his command not only horses , servants , and carriages , but he has a numerous body of tenantry , who submit to be his mere vassals , and will do any act , however dirty or mean , at his nod .
He is your commander of the troop of Yeomanry  he keeps hounds  and has many manors well stocked with game  and he is a Magistrate of the county , and ignorant as he is , yet he dispenses the laws , or rather issues his arbitrary mandates to the whole surrounding neighbourhood .
In fact , he possesses great power , and all his power is derived from his wealth alone .
Let me ask you , who know him well , what would he be without his wealth ?
Strip him of his estates and his riches , what would he be fit for ?
I wait , '' said he firmly , `` for your honest reply . ''
-- The question was put so home and so unexpected , and when I turned my thoughts towards our gallant captain , without wealth and power , he presented to my imagination such a forlorn , helpless , wretched being -- that I actually burst out a laughing .
`` Really , '' said my father , `` I am not in a laughing mood  but tell me , seriously , if you know of any situation in life in which , either on the score of his talent , his knowledge , or his ability of any kind , he would be capable of keeping his wife and family from starving ?
Tell me honestly whether , if he were left to provide for himself , you do not think he would be upon the parish books in a fortnight ? ''


I answered that , in my opinion , no one who knew the captain would , for a moment , dispute the correctness of the conclusion which he had drawn  but , I added , `` I hope , Sir , that you do not compare me to such a man as Captain Astley  and I hope , too , that you will allow me to ask you a question in return .
Do you not believe , Sir , that if I , your son , were obliged to go to day-labour to-morrow , I could earn sufficient to support , not only myself , but also a wife and family , by that sort of industry and zealous application which I have always shewn in your business ? ''
The reply was , `` I know you are able and willing to do as much as any man  but , do you consider that I have given you an education which cost me upwards of five hundred pounds , and have you spent ten years and a half of your life at the best schools , under the best masters whom I could procure you , only to enable you to earn twenty or thirty shillings a week as a day-labourer  have you , no higher ambition than that ? ''


I rejoined warmly , `` Yes , Sir , my ambition made me always aspire to much higher things and so did the treatment which I always received from you heretofore  but now , that you talk of abandoning me to ` lie upon a hard bed , ' and intimate that , unless I give up the object of my choice , I am not to expect any thing from you , the scene is changed , and , under such circumstances , my spirit would , I trust , never suffer me to be dependent upon any one , while I have health and strength to obtain an honest though a plain livelihood . ''


I plainly perceived that this sort of reasoning did not suit my father , he reddened , and sneeringly exclaimed , `` your spirit , indeed !
I suppose your spirit will ultimately induce you to drive one of your intended father-in-law 's coaches  or , perhaps , you may be promoted to the situation of head-ostler , and that will be a post considerably above a day-labourer . ''
This was said with a degree of bitter ironry that was little calculated to lead me into submission .
By such a course he meant to work upon my pride , but his language produced a contrary effect to that which he intended : for I found any indignation arise to such a pitch , that I sternly answered `` No , sir !
whatever you may think of my spirit , you will find that I inherit too much of my father 's character either to degrade myself by any such course , or be intimidated by any false notions of pride , from doing that which is honourable . ''


Having said this , I quitted the room , without waiting for a reply , and retired to bed much earlier than usual .
I was , however , too much ruffled to go to sleep , and , after having tossed and turned about for half an hour , I suddenly rose , dressed myself , walked quietly down stairs , and going into the back kitchen I put on my boots , and then went deliberately into the stable , where I saddled my horse , and in a few minutes I was on my road to Devizes .
I arrived at that place just as the family were locking up to go to rest , and , while a bed was preparing for me , I explained to Miss H. the object of my visit , which was to demand her hand from her father in the morning , and to fix the day of our nuptials before I left the house .
The lady had often before witnessed , with some degree of pain , the warmth of my disposition , for I was , as I have already hinted , of a sanguine , volatile nature  and she had always observed , that , when bent upon any particular object , I was never deterred , and seldom persuaded , from attempting to accomplish it  but she had never before seen me so determined and resolved upon any point as I now was .
She endeavoured , nevertheless , to persuade me from so rash a step  arguing that she had little hope of her father being brought over to comply with my wishes , by means of any such peremptory arguments as I had used to her .
But it was all in vain .
I assured her that before I left the house , I would solicit her father 's consent to fix the day for our wedding  and that , if he refused to comply , I should demand the performance of her promise , to consent at once to our union without it .
She first reminded me of her being under age , and next , with a degree of firmness that I did not expect , she expressed considerable doubts about acceding to my demand , under such circumstances .
I hastily , and as firmly , added , that the day should be fixed before I left the house , or never .
She started at my vehement and peremptory manner , and with much good sense , began to reason with me , and to shew how ill-calculated such overbearing proceedings were either to prevail upon her father , or , what was of more consequence , to secure her love .
If before marriage I evinced such an arbitrary disposition , and uttered my commands in such a peremptory tone , what security , she said , should she have for my not playing the tyrant afterwards ?
She , therefore , not only felt it to be her duty to refuse , but really I had so alarmed her , that she could not give her consent under any such sort of threat  as her compliance would appear to come rather from terror than inclination .
This was followed by her bursting into tears , occasioned by the exertion she had made to tell me her resolve .
I repeated my protestations , and did every thing to soothe her fears , and , as she was now summoned by her sister to retire to rest , we parted for the night , both of us in a very wretched state of mind .


Affected as I was by her agitated feelings , my composition was of too determined a nature to allow me to give way  having once determined , nothing but death could have deterred me from persevering , and , while I was going to bed , I deliberately resolved to keep my word .
Nor was this only the start of the moment  on the contrary , I am quite sure that had not the parties complied with my wish , to fix the day before I left the house , I should never have been the husband of Miss Halcomb .


I was resolved to be plain and honest with the father , and to disguise nothing from him , and in case he should refuse his consent , I was equally resolved to leave nothing untried to gain the consent of the lady  if she withheld it I had brought myself , much as I loved her , to give up for ever all hopes , all intention , of being united , or of having any further communication , with her .
With this determination I went to sleep , though with full confidence that I should succeed , notwithstanding the repulse I had received from her before we parted .
My fair readers , will , I fear , call me a conceited puppy for my pains  but I assure them it was not vanity  it was part of my nature to be sanguine and determined in any thing , in every thing , that I undertook  for I believed that success seldom completely crowned an enterprise , unless he who wished to obtain it had confidence that he should succeed .


When I came to the breakfast table in the morning , I could perceive that the fair object of my hopes had not enjoyed so much repose as I had done daring the night .
Her heart appeared to be ill at ease .
I had never slept better or sounder in my life .
This is another extraordinary part of my composition , or rather of my constitution  namely , the physical operation of the Mental power over the animal frame .
The more intense the operation of my mind during the day , the better do I sleep at night  the greater the object which I have to accomplish in the morning , the more serene is my sleep  so that when I have any weighty business to perform that requires the exertion of my whole mental as well as bodily powers , instead of being agitated with the anxiety arising from the importance of the undertaking , I am quite the reverse , I am perfectly tranquil , I am sure to sleep well  and to awake so much refreshed in the morning , as to enable me to commence the business of the day not only with vigour , but also with my senses quite collected , and with the greatest calmness of mind .


I appeared upon this occasion so easy and so quiet , yet altogether so determined , that I often afterwards heard my wife say that she , for the first time , began to suspect the sincerity of my passion  its ardour she never doubted .
The fact was , that if I had harboured all the doubts that she did , as to the success of my application to her father , I might have felt as uneasy as she did  and should have been thereby rendered incapable of successfully combating his arguments or objections .


The moment the breakfast was over I requested a private conference with him , when I honestly told him every thing that had passed between my father and me , and that I had given up all hopes of gaining his consent , adding , that I had come to the resolution of laying the case fairly before him , but that I was determined to have his answer at once whether he would consent to our union , so that a day might be fixed , or whether he would leave me to do my best to obtain his daughter 's consent , which I was resolved to do in case of his opposing my wishes .


Seeing my determination , the old gentleman answered that , although he lamented the absence of my father 's sanction , yet he would keep his word with me and his daughter , and would not withhold his consent , if it were her desire that he should give it .
He valued the happiness of his child he said , and , as he thought I had always acted a fair and open part with him , he would do the same by me .
He would , however , leave it entirely to his daughter  if she chose to fix the day he would not object to it  and if it were so , he would do all in his power to render us happy .
He likewise expressed a sincere hope that his old friend , my father , would do nothing to make us otherwise , and that he would become reconciled to the match hereafter , even if he would not give his consent before .
Mr. Halcomb then , for the first time , hinted what sum he intended to give his daughter as a portion .
I told him that , for the present , I would hear nothing of the sort  that , as my father would not enable me to make a settlement upon his daughter , I would trust entirely to him , and that I never wished him to mention the subject to me till we were married .


I now flew to the young lady with the joyful tidings , and was received , as I expected , with open arms  and before ten o'clock that evening the day was fixed for our wedding , about six weeks from that time .
Thus was I , at the age of twenty-two , and very young and inexperienced of my age also , about to take a wife against the consent of my father , without a house , a home , or twenty pounds in the world and perfectly careless whether her father gave its five or five hundred pounds .
To have a wife was my determination , and , now the day was fixed , I returned to my father 's house , and entered into his business again with all my usual zeal and assiduity .


The first opportunity I informed him of the arrangement that was made , upon hearing which he flew into a violent passion , and vowed vengeance .
Nor did he fail to try the last effort , which was to endeavour to make Mr. Halcomb 's pride operate , so as to prevent the match .
The next market day he had a private interview with him , and did every thing in his power to accomplish his object .
His opponent had the best of the argument , but he retorted his insinuations with such a degree of spirit , that , for a while , my father had hopes of success .
Mr. Halcomb , however , soon crushed his hopes , by telling him that he had given me and his daughter his word , and that nothing which he had said in his anger should induce him to break it .
My father when requested to see the young lady , which was readily assented to .
In the course of his interview with her , he made every effort to persuade her to abandon such a `` mad project , '' as he was pleased to term it , and she listened to , and answered , all his arguments with great modesty and forbearance .
He urged the folly of such a match , and told her he was sure she would live to repent it  he warned her that such sudden and inconsiderate unions seldom if ever turned out well  he pointed out to her my hasty , enthusiastic , volatile disposition  he said that I had seen nothing of the world , and that , whatever might be her charms , when I got into the world I might see other objects that might induce me to repent of having been so hasty  he mentioned the probability of a large family of children , without the means of supporting them  in fact , he tried every thing that man could do  he begged , he prayed , and he threatened .
All was in vain .
The only promise that he could obtain from her was , that she would inform me of all he said , and that she would leave the decision to me .


This to him was worse than no promise at all , and he retired to the market room and took his dinner , perfectly dissatisfied with the little , or gather no progress which he had made .
However , when the evening came , instead of calling for his horse to go home as usual , he sent for Halcomb , and told him that , as it was a dark evening , and he was not very well , if he would permit him , he would drink tea and spend the evening with his family , and take a bed there that night .
Mr. Halcomb , who was a warm-hearted , generous , forgiving fellow , readily pardoned all the insulting language that he had heard in the morning , accepted his offer by a hearty shake of the hand , and without further ceremony introduced him into his private room to his family .
Mrs. Halcomb , however , the mother-in-law of the lady , having learned what had passed in the morning , and expecting nothing less than a fresh attempt to frustrate the match , no sooner fixed her piercing eyes upon him , after he was seated , than she drew up , and without waiting for any explanation , began to resent the insult which he had offered to her profession .
He , however , demanded a parley , and a truce to all hostility , as he was come to offer the olive branch  assuring her that as a match could not be avoided , he was determined to make the best of what must be endured .
In the course of the evening he had a private interview with the young lady , and after extorting a solemn pledge from her that she would not inform me of it till we were married , he gave her his consent and promised to acknowledge her as his daughter-in-law .
This solemn pledge to keep silence till our union was completed he made her give , because he wished to see how far I would go without his consent  and she kept her word  although the fact certainly came to my knowledge through a third person .
My father took the first opportunity of telling me that , as I was determined to marry against his will , he should do but little for me , compared to what he would have done if I had married to please him .
He would , he said , give me , or rather he would lend me , the stock upon Widdington farm , and I might begin to furnish my house as soon as I pleased  but I must do this out of the fortune which I was to have with my wife .
There was a most excellent stock upon this farm , the rent of which was three hundred pounds a year .
There were [ 15 ] fifteen or sixteen hundred of the finest Southdown sheep , the very best in the county , as this was a fine sheep farm , in fact , principally so  twelve cows  six most valuable cart horses , and all other live and dead stock complete .
With this arrangement I was perfectly content , and indeed it was much better than I had any reason to expect .
The farm was , in reality , a very beautiful one , with a very good house , and all necessary appendages attached to it .
I now seemed to be in a fair way of obtaining the height of my ambition .
This happy intelligence I lost no time in communicating to the family at Devizes , and the necessary orders [ 16 ] were given without delay .
I left it all to the lady , as it was to be paid for out of her fortune .
Few young men entered into life with fairer prospects in the farming line  very few farmers in the county had such a stock of all sorts  in truth , nothing was wanting .


The happy day at length arrived .
It was the twelfth of January .
My sister , who was to be one of the bride-maids , and my friend the clergyman of Enford , who was to marry us , [ 17 ] went over with me in a chaise .
Upon retiring to rest , having undressed myself , I sat down in an easy chair , meditating upon the serious engagement into which I was to enter on the morrow .
In this situation I fell fast asleep , and did not awake till three o'clock in the morning , when I had caught a dreadful cold , and was in a shivering fit , which I could not get rid of till I arose in the morning .
I was excessively ill the whole of the day .
We were taken to the church in a post coach , and being married we returned to breakfast , where a large party was assembled to greet us .
We were engaged to dine at the Castle , at Marlborough , which Inn was kept by my wife 's brother .
We , the married couple , in a chaise , and two post coaches , each with four beautiful grey horses , with the rest of the party , accordingly set out to Marlborough , where we spent the day , during the whole of which I suffered great pain , being all the time extremely ill .
We returned to Devizes to tea , after taking which we were to go home to Widdington .
Just as we were about to start , Mr. Halcombe took me aside with his son into the next room , and holding out a canvass bag , he said , `` here , my son , is all that I can afford to give you with my daughter .
In this bag is a thousand pounds .
I wish it were ten times as much  but , such as it is , may God grant you to enjoy it !
I have no doubt but it will wear well , as it was got honestly . ''


This again was more than I expected , as the only time I had ever permitted him to speak about money , the old gentlemen hinted at no more than five hundred pounds  but I believe my father had said something which made him double the sum .
I thanked him most heartily  not forgetting to add , that his daughter was the prize at which I had aimed , and not the money .
He replied , that he should give his other daughter the same , without trenching upon what he meant to give his sons .
In fact , he had at this time provided for them .
However , before we parted , one of his sons , William , who was then the manager of the Bear , called me on one side , and said , that as his brother James was just going into business , if I had no particular use for the money , he should be obliged if I would lend him 500l .
of it , upon their joint notes .
I instantly complied , told out half my wife 's portion , and lent it to her brother , upon his word to give me a note for it , which he did the first time that I saw him afterwards .
I believe , if they had asked me for the whole thousand , I should cheerfully have parted with it to them .
The five hundred pounds remained in their hands for nearly ten years , and was not withdrawn by me till several years after my separation from my wife .
I mention this circumstance merely to shew how these gentlemen felt as to my separation from their sister .
In fact they as well as myself considered it to be a misfortune which ought to be lamented on all sides , rather than as a reason for entertaining any vindictive feeling towards me .


We now set off in a coach towards our future residence , Widdington Farm , a distance of ten miles .
The company consisted of myself , the bride , her sister and mine , who were the two bride maids , and the clergyman .
I had , by this time , completely recovered from the effect of my cold  but , what was rather remarkable , before we had accomplished half our journey , we discovered that the bride had suddenly lost her voice , without feeling any pain or illness .
So completely had she lost it , that she could not articulate a single syllable , otherwise than in a whisper .
I was very much alarmed at first , but as she assured us it was only a cold , and that she felt not the least pain or uneasiness whatever  and as , with perfect good humour , she congratulated me on being about to take to my home `` a quiet wife , '' the alarm gradually passed off .


Widdington Farm lies about a mile from the turnpike road , and when the carriage turned out of the high road I was obliged , as it was dark , to get on the coach box to direct the post boys  and , after considerable difficulty , we reached the house  it being a road over which a chaise probably had not passed since my father left the farm , twenty years before this period .
Although every thing was prepared comfortably for our reception , yet a lone farm , in a valley upon the downs , which compose Salisbury Plain , and not a house within a mile , was quite a different thing from the cheerful scenes to which Mrs. Hunt and her sister had been accustomed .
A deep silence reigned around  not a tree nor even a bush was to be seen  and , since we left the turnpike road , the carriage having passed over the turf for nearly the last mile , the well-known sound of wheels rattling over the stones had never once vibrated upon the ears of those who were so much accustomed to it  altogether , it was so very different from every thing to which the ladies had ever before been habituated , that , even after I had introduced them into the parlour , which was well lighted up , and where the hospitable board seemed almost to invite their welcome , yet I could see that Miss Halcombe looked at her sister almost in a state of despondency , as much as to say , `` God of Heaven !
what enchanted castle are we come to at last ? ''
However , when we were once seated round the table , with the door closed , the solitary gloom speedily vanished , for we soon made it appear that there was as much cheerfullness to be obtained in a lone farm house as there was in one of the most public and best frequented inns upon the Bath road .
Miss Halcombe , as a matter of delicacy , had always declined to see this residence before she was married , notwithstanding I had repeatedly pressed her to ride over and give orders about the arrangement of the house , and other domestic affairs .
During the first fortnight that we were married , my wife never spoke one word louder than a whisper .
At the end of that time her voice returned , to the great joy of myself and all her friends .
The honeymoon passed with uninterrupted felicity  in fact it was a honeymoon all the year round , and we were blessed with an endearing pledge of our loves before the honeymoon appeared even in its wane .
Nearly a year had now gone by in one unbroken scene of pleasure and gay delight .
My wife was of a cheerful disposition , and fond of company , in which I most cordially participated , and consequently we were seldom without plenty of visitors .
As soon as we were married I purchased two more horses and a gig  thus my establishment at once consisted of three horses and a gig , and when to these are added grey-hounds and pointers , c. c. the reader will perceive that I cut a dashing figure , whether at home , at the table , in the field , or on the road .
I drove two thorough-bred mares in a tandem , with which I could and did accomplish , in a trot , fourteen miles within the hour  I was almost always the first in the chase , having become a subscriber to a pack of hounds  and my pointers were as well bred , and as well broken , as any sportsman 's in the county .


I was now become that of which my father had always entertained the greatest dread  namely , a complete sportsman .
Frequently when he called , I was from home , either hunting , shooting , or partaking of the social society which is the concomitant of those who delight in the sports of the field .
He would ride round my farm , but there all was in the most regular order , and he could find no other fault with any thing he saw going on there than the absence of the master .
Yet he was uneasy  for he well knew that the profits of Widdington Farm would not support such extravagance and revelry as he was pleased to call it .
The stock , it is true , was in good order , and the crops were well cultivated , and thriving  never better .
Still he was not ignorant of the expense attending a house always thronged with visitors , a stable and kennel full of horses and dogs , and the master entering with ardour into the sports of the field .
He remonstrated  but I was young , thoughtless and giddy  my wife was the same .
Rent-day came .
Three hundred pounds was due to Mr. Wyndham for rent  my father knew I was not prepared  he was certain , from the manner in which I had lived , that [ 18 ] I could not have saved any money .
Without saying one word to me on the subject , he paid the rent himself .
But he did not fail again to urge the strongest remonstrances .
No farm in the county was in better condition , or better looked after  the times were good  and if the farm had been my own , I could just have managed to live in a very respectable way  for no man knew better how to make the most of every thing , and very few put it into practice more rigidly than I did  yet , on the other hand , I could very well manage to spend all the gains whatever they were , and as my father paid the rent , as well as stocked the farm , it was quite as good as if it were my own .
My father , however , threatened me , and remonstrated with my wife , on our keeping so much company , and being guilty of such extravagance .
But she could not be induced to think that we did any thing in a more extravagant way than we were bred up to , which was very true  and , as I was full as prone to the enjoyment of society as she was , we seldom refused an invitation , and never failed to return it .


Christmas arrived , and with it , of course , the social merry-making that at this time was kept up with the greatest spirit in this part of the country  where every one gave a Christmas feast , which was attended by all the neighbours for several miles round .
We were invited to the first .
Some difficulty presented itself with respect to Mrs. Hunt 's accepting the invitation , as our daughter was only two months old  but this impediment was soon removed .
The little child was in excellent health , and the nurse , it was thought , would take great care of it in the mother 's absence .
This was settled as much to my satisfaction as to that of my wife : for I enjoyed little pleasure unless she was with me to partake of it .


When the day came , we mounted our horses and she being an excellent horsewoman , we galloped off to meet our friends at a distance of four miles , and we reached the place without the slightest accident , though it was one of the most severe frosts I was ever out in .
About three o'clock the next morning we returned in the same way .
I shall never forget the look of my father , when he saw her come into the room , and involuntarily exclaimed `` for God 's sake , Mrs. Hunt , where is your child ? ''
She answered it was at home .
He turned his eyes up and said no more  but I felt this as a most severe rebuke , and for the , first time I began to think that a mother leaving her child was not quite so proper .
He soon took an opportunity to speak to me aside , and having asked me whether I was mad , to bring my wife away from a young sucking child in such weather , he added , `` you acted very prudently and firmly , I understand , when , your child was born , as to her suckling it , but now you are going to destroy the child by suffering the mother to remain from it twelve or fourteen hours at a time . ''
I listened , indeed , to this wholesome advice  but , in the thoughtlessness of my heart , unfortunately , I passed it of without paying it that attention , to which , coming from one with such experience as my father had , it was so well entitled .


What my father alluded to , about my firm conduct when my child was born , was this .
My mother having always nursed her own children , I was bred up with the notion that it ought to be so , and I still entertained the greatest antipathy to my offspring sucking any other woman but its mother .
[ 19 ] My father had , on his side , already guarded me against all the arts and tricks played off by gossips , upon such an occasion .
Upon this subject , therefore , I had always expressed a strong and decided feeling to my wife , in which she appeared to participate .


When the child was born , the mother was attended by the mother-in-law , and two or three matrons , besides the midwife , c. c..
They all knew my determination about the mother nursing the child , and every attempt was apparently made to carry it into effect .
At length a hint was given of some fears as to its practicability .
I would not listen to it [ 20 ] for a moment .
Another hint was given , and then a broader and a broader hint  but I still made light of it , and said we would persevere .
On consulting with my wife I found there was no natural impediment , and that she was well disposed to exert herself , to comply with my wishes  but I found that the gossips , and particularly the mother-in-law , had been labouring to impress on her mind , not only that there was a difficulty , but that there was an inconvenience , and even impropriety .
I was not to be deterred from my purpose , and did every thing in my power to persuade her to persevere .
I saw that the child enjoyed the breast very much , and that it did not give the mother so much pain as I had apprehended  and my mind was , therefore , more resolved than ever to carry this point  although I had never before had to contend with such powerful antagonists as the gossips , who affected to treat my knowledge upon such matters with ridicule , and my interference in them as preposterous and indecent .
I ways , however , twattle proof  I heard all they had to say , but I stuck to my point like a hero  and I took care not to leave the house long at a time , for fear some scheme to thwart my views should be put in execution .


At the end of two days , in the evening after supper , the grand attack was made , by three matrons and the nurse , with the Dr. or mid-wife , whom they appeared to have enlisted into the service  though as he was a reasonable , intelligent man , I was not in the least afraid of his hostility , and particularly as I had previously consulted him upon the subject , and found that I was perfectly correct as to there being no natural impediment in the mother .
While the Dr. was taking his grog with me , they all , according to their previously settled scheme , came down stairs in a body , and all burst upon me at once  loudly declaring , that they would not force the poor weak mother any longer to destroy herself by such a course , that the child must certainly die , that it was starved already , and that , unless I would suffer them to send for a wet nurse in the morning they would leave the house , and I might stay and kill the child myself , for that they would not remain to be witnesses of the murder .


I saw through the premeditated assault , and was immoveably silent .
One said that it was cruel  another said that it was indecent  a third that it was hard-hearted  and a fourth that I did not deserve such a wife or such a child , for I wished to kill the one and break the heart of the other .


Had I not been cautioned by my excellent father , who , even to the very letter of this attack , had told me what was likely to happen , I should never have been able to withstand the treble-toned battery of their tongues .
The doctor , meanwhile , said not a word , unless it was in reply to a question put by some one of the ladies , and then he took care to answer in a very equivocal manner , for he saw my usual determination settled upon my brow .
I told them at last  that if they would remain below , I would go up and consult my wife  I found her bathed in tears  for they had not only prepared her for the occasion , but they had actually worked upon her fears for the safety of the child , so far as to persuade her that the child would be starved , and that she had not milk enough to keep it alive .
I soothed her  I reasoned with her  for I dearly loved her .
I assured her that the child was in the most perfect health , as was evident from its having never cried a minute since it was born  which was now nearly three days  that it was contented , and I was sure it would do well  and that she herself would ultimately thank me for persevering against the will of the gossips .
Her tears were soon dried up , and the pretty babe being again placed by her side with my own hands , she was quite convinced that it was neither necessary nor prudent to give way always , even to gossips .


Having left the child comfortably asleep , and the mother happy , her fears being now dissipated , I returned down stairs to the enraged matrons .
I found them all on the tip-toe of expectation , to hear what I had to say , I told them that I had no doubt but the mother and child would do very well , if they would leave her alone  but this enraged them more than ever .
They insisted that the mother should at least have the help of a wet-nurse .
`` Well , '' said I , very calmly , but very determinedly , `` if it most be so , it must .
If you are of the same mind to-morrow , and the doctor confirms your opinion , that the child requires more milk , I will kill the puppies , and it shall suck my beautiful setter Juno , with all my heart  but , by G -- d !
it shall never taste the milk of another woman , while its mother is alive , and as well able to nurse it as she now is . ''


I said this in such a tone , and with such a manner , as would not admit of any further reply , and the gossips all marched off to bed , abusing me for a great brute  but , as they afterwards told me , applauding me for displaying so much resolution , in spite of their cabal and plot against me being frustrated .
When they were gone , the doctor , Robert Clare of Devizes , most heartily congratulated me upon my success  adding , that he never saw such a complete victory gained against such fearful odds , since he had been in the practice  which was upwards of twenty years .
I have related this circumstance as a matter of duty , for the information and guidance of all young persons , who may he placed in a similar situation , and who may not have had the advantage of such good and able advice , as that which was given me by my excellent father , rather than as boasting of any merit of my own .
Never was a child born that was nursed better , and thousands of blessings did the mother afterwards bestow upon me , for my perseverance , by which she was enabled to enjoy the most delightful of all sensations , that of nursing her own offspring .


Let us now return to my story .
The very first time that this child ever had a moment 's illness was the day after my wife returned from the first Christmas party .
This illness was very severe , and it caused great restlessness  the infant was , indeed , so unwell , that Mrs. Hunt sent an excuse to the party the next day by me , she being determined to stay at home and take care of her child , in which resolution I concurred .
Still I had no idea that the dear little thing would not do very well again , though I was now convinced of the propriety of my father 's rebuke , and had not the least doubt in my own mind that the illness was occasioned by the mother 's long absence from her child .
I went to the dinner , and my father was the first to applaud Mrs. Hunt 's prudence in remaining at home  although , when he heard of the illness of the child , he observed , `` The experience that is bought is the best , so that it is not purchased too dear . ''


About eleven o'clock at night a message was brought me by a servant , to say that my child was very ill , and to beg that I would immediately return home .
I mounted my horse , and reached my house half as hour before the servant , who was upon another horse .
When I entered the room -- Oh God !
the child was lying dead in its mother 's lap , and that mother was sitting speechless , with her eyes riveted upon her lifeless offspring .
-- I instantly caused the little delicate corpse to be removed .
It had a smile upon its lip , and looked as transparent as alabaster  for it had died without a groan or a struggle .
My wife sat petrified  she had never moved nor spoken since the infant had breathed its last , which was nearly an hour .
The servants were fearful even to touch her or the child  she still sat motionless with her eyes fixed upon her lap , the spot whence her child had been removed , and where she had seen it breathe its last .
She took not the least notice of me , neither did she oppose the removal of the child .
Her look was vacant and heart-rending .
I tried in vain every means to rouse her  at length I carried her to her room , and having bathed her feet in warm water , I was ultimately blessed by witnessing the return of her reason , which was accompanied by a copious flow of tears .


During the round of gaiety and pleasure which I had enjoyed since I was married , this was the first check that I had received  but young , thoughtless , and giddy , as we were , it was a most severe one , both to myself and my wife .
Nor was it merely the loss of our offspring that occasioned the sorrow of my wife .
Her grief was rendered infinitely more poignant by the circumstance of the deceased infant never having been baptised .
The babe had , in fact , been so healthy , so perfectly free from the slightest appearance of disease , that we had never thought of sending for the clergyman of the parish to have the ceremony performed  particularly as we intended to have it christened so soon as the nineteenth of January , which was the first anniversary of our wedding day .
The delay will , I am sure , be thought the more excusable , even by the most scrupulously religious persons , when I inform them , that the clergyman lived at Milton , a distance of eight miles , that he seldom came into the parish except on a Sunday , and that even then his visit was generally a flying visit , as he had two or three churches to serve on that day .
He was besides an excellent sportsman , and consequently it would have been considered by me at any rate , if not by him , as a sort of crime to have broken in upon a week-day for any such purpose .
But I now sincerely repented of my folly and thoughtlessness , for my wife was inconsolable .
She was bred up strictly to attend to all the forms as well as the duties of religion , and she , therefore , accused herself of a heinous crime , even that of having sacrificed the soul of her infant  and then the very thoughts of having the little corpse committed to its dreary dwelling without the rites and ceremony of a christian burial , was so dreadful to her that it almost made her frantic , and she would sometimes break out into the most piteous wailings , nearly bordering upon desperation .
I was myself most wretched , not so much from the loss of our child , as from the sorrow and anguish of my wife , whom I most dearly loved  but I found it necessary to stifle my own feelings , and exert all my soothing aid and persuasive powers , to calm her agonized mind .
At first I was but a poor comforter .
I had never thought at all of these weighty matters , and therefore I felt myself very incompetent to reason upon them in such a way as was likely to convince and console her .
I had been taught , by my excellent mother , to lisp the Lord 's Prayer , the Belief , and the Catechism , before I at all knew the meaning of it , and almost before I could speak plainly  I had been bred up in the Christian faith , a strict church-goer , and , such was the force of custom , that perhaps I had not ten times in the course of my life closed my eyes , after retiring to rest , without repeating the Lords Prayer and Belief  though it is probable that during all that period I had not ten times seriously directed my thoughts to investigating and reasoning upon the true import and meaning of these prayers .
Such is the strength of early habits and early imbibed notions , arising from the repetition of a certain number of words and sentences thrown together , and imprinted upon the young memory , before the mind is capable of appreciating the meaning or sense of them !
I had also , soon after our marriage , received the sacrament with my wife , because I was told that to go through this ceremony was proper and necessary .
I did this , as thousands and tens of thousands had , I believe , done before me , from a conviction that it was right , without ever having reasoned upon the matter .
And now , for the first time , at the age of twenty three , in spite of myself , or rather in my own defence , I was compelled to think and to reason also , that I might bring comfort to my almost heart-broken wife .
I reasoned thus -- can this be possible , that a little innocent creature , only two months old , totally incapable of having committed any offence against God or man , having , indeed , been incapable of acting or thinking at all , can the all-wise Creator have doomed such an unoffending being to eternal punishment , because its parents have neglected to have certain forms of prayer read by a clergyman , and because it has not had performed over it the ceremony of sprinkling its forehead with water ?
It was not necessary for me to question farther , for I at once pronounced it to be not only preposterous but impious to believe such a thing for a moment .


Having thus satisfied my own mind , I now set about the task of convincing my wife .
I found her hanging over the corpse of our child , and bathing it with her tears .
The first thing which I did was to lead her from the endearing object of her inexpressible woe .
I then not only used the foregoing argument , but many others of the same reasonable and natural tendency .
She was , however , not easily to be brought over to my opinion , and besides , in spite of all I could say to remove the impression , she blamed herself for having left the infant at such a tender age .
I also felt that in this respect I was not less censurable than she was  and I endeavoured to take all this blame upon myself , by persuading her that she would not have gone , had she not been desirous of obliging me .
In striving to tranquillize her , I had a most arduous duty to perform , yet , painful as it was , it was at the same time the most delightful occupation that can be imagined .
To console , to comfort , to cheer the drooping spirits , to heal the wounded sorrowing heart , to remove the dark and gloomy doubts , and at length to inspire and provoke a smile upon the quivering lip of her I fondly loved , was to me an entirely new scene .
I could now fully comprehend the poetical expression of `` the joy of grief , '' for this was the most extatic joy , it was a hitherto untasted pleasure , and although it was of a more sober nature than any of those pleasures in which I had till then participated , yet it made a deeper and more lasting impression than any of them had made .
So strong was it , that the very recollection of what I then felt , on the first dawn of my wife 's return to something like her usual serenity and cheerfulness , gives me a pleasure , even while I am locked up in my solitary dungeon , that I believe it is not the common lot of man to enjoy .
Those who really know what bliss it is to communicate as well as receive true plea sure will never voluntarily inflict pain .
I think I hear some of my more sceptical or prejudiced readers ask , could these be really the feelings of this man ?
Is this the man who only two short months before proposed to suckle his child with his setter ?
Yes , I answer , the very same man  nor , in fact , is there , to the eye of reason , any thing contradictory in his conduct on the two occasions .


Let me now revert to my narrative .
Though partly won over by the reasons which I had advanced , my wife , nevertheless , was anxious to have some confirmation of them from one of greater knowledge in such matters , and she accordingly hinted a wish to converse with the clergyman .
I told her I had not the least objection if she desired it  but at the same time I could not help enquiring , what consolation she could expect to derive from one of those whom she had frequently seen inebriated at my table , and some of whom , when they were in that state , had incautiously expressed their opinions upon such matters with so much levity as to disgust her as well as myself .
This was too true , but yet the sanction of a clergyman carried great weight  custom , early-initiated custom , still proved predominant  and as I saw she had set her mind upon seeing a clergyman , before she parted with the little corpse , I did not think it either kind or prudent to throw any impediment in the way .


For three days I had scarcely left her during a single moment , and , very fortunately , as we lived in the country , we were not pestered with any formal , and worse than officious , calls of condolence .
I now took my horse and rode to a friend , a neighbouring clergyman , and invited him to dine and take a bottle with me .
He pleaded a previous engagement  but when I told him the object of my visit , after having , with a most enquiring eye , looked me full in the face for half a minute , to discover whether I was quizzing him or not , he burst forth with an exclamation , and then into a laugh , almost hysterical : which , having enjoyed for some time , without any interruption from me , he said , `` Why really , my good fellow , I hope you have too much sense to listen seriously to the trash that is preached up upon such occasions ! ''
I replied that he might make himself easy not only about me , but almost so with respect to Mrs. Hunt , as I had nearly argued her out of all the ridiculous notions that she had imbibed  but that yet , notwithstanding this , I should be obliged to him , as he was one of the elect , who had been inspired to take holy orders by `` the Holy Ghost , '' if he would ride with me and confirm the good work which I had begun .
To this he agreed , on condition that I would first go with him to course a brace of hares , of which he had just been informed by a shepherd .
This offer I readily accepted , and we returned to dinner together to my house .
Unfortunately , the parson took nearly a bottle of wine before he made up his mind to say any thing to Mrs. Hunt upon the subject for which he had been invited  and as a bottle always set his head a `` wool-gathering , '' he made one of the most ridiculous exhibitions that can possibly be imagined .
Between his desire to make Mrs. Hunt believe that he was a learned and pious divine , and at the same time his equal desire to impress upon my mind that he did not believe a word that he was preaching to her , he got into such a mess , that it was with no small trouble I was enabled to help him at all out of it  and at last the tea coming in , put an end to one of the most ludicrous scenes that ever was witnessed .
It happened , very luckily , that Mrs. Hunt was a woman of good sterling sense , and a firm mind , accompanied by a very quick penetration , or he would , in his bungling desire to remove , have at least revived , if he had not confirmed , all her former doubts and scruples .


On the following evening , with considerable difficulty , I prevailed on the mother , to suffer the clerk of the parish to convey the mortal remains of the little infant in a neat coffin , and deposit it in the church-yard .


Instead of partaking in any of the long round of Christmas merry-makings which we had so unpropitiously commenced , we now spent our evenings at home  truly enjoying the greatest of earthly blessings , domestic felicity .
How it is possible for those who have once tasted this , the sweetest of all human delights , how it is possible for any rational mind afterwards to submit to be whirled round in the vortex of dissipation , to tolerate , to endure , the empty , vain , comfortless , nothingness of fashionable amusements , now appears to me to be almost inexplicable .
The real felicity imparted and received in a happy domestic circle , in one evening , far , very far surpasses all the pleasures derived from the gaze and throng of crowded routs and fashionable parties in a whole year .
And yet it is not practicable to convince young minds of this  perhaps it would be improper to attempt it .
May we not believe that few persons , if any , can enjoy domestic bliss to its fullest extent , unless they have previously experienced all the wearisomeness , all the unmeaning bustle of the crowded , fashionable , common-place society of routs and balls ?
Happy , however , are they , if such there be , who have minds so constituted as to enjoy the one , without having been exposed to the previous probation of the other .


The usual serenity and cheerful disposition of my wife soon returned .
She was young , blooming , fair and sprightly  and whatever pleasure I had in view , I never half enjoyed it unless she were a partaker of it .
I have always been one of those mortals who think that women were formed to participate in all our rational pleasures and amusements  and therefore , with the exception of hunting , I seldom formed any scheme of pleasure where my wife could not make one of the party .
Young , gay and thoughtless , as I was , and prone to enter into all the scenes of hospitable and cheerful society , ( one fault of which I admit , at that period , consisted in general of much too free an indulgence of the bottle after dinner ) yet , however unfashionable it might have appeared , I never admitted any such visitors at my table as rendered it necessary for females to leave the room almost as soon as the cloth was removed .
No language or conversation was ever tolerated at my board , to which the most chaste female ear might not listen without a blush .
In fact , no man was ever permitted to enter my door a second time who once dared to utter an indelicate double entendre in the presence of a female  even if that female were only a servant .
It was , therefore , always the practice at my table for females to stay as long as they found it pleasant , without being liable to a disgusting hint to depart , in order that the men who remained might have an opportunity of disgracing themselves by obscene and loathsome conversation .
What a disgrace this to the national character !
what a blot upon the very name of polished society !
what an everlasting stigma upon British hospitality !
what an indelible stain upon English manners !
I always found that young men who had been bred at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were the most difficult to keep within the bounds of decorum .
The life which these men lead at college is so dissolute that few of them ever know how to relish the sweets of domestic virtuous society .
This is the greatest drawback upon the religion of the country , and I blush for the name of religion while I relate it .
I have , in one hour , heard more blasphemy and more lewd language at the table of one of these clergymen of the established church , than ever polluted the walls of my house in all my life .
I have heard more obscenity flow from the lips of one of these hoary-headed dignified pastors of the church of England , aye , one who resides in this county too , than I ever heard come from the lips of all the reformers I was ever acquainted with in my life .
I can point out half a score clergymen of this county , some of them magistrates , who are in this respect a disgrace to human nature , whose debaucheries would fill a volume , and whose daily conversation over their bottles , after they have driven their wives and families from their tables , is so degrading , and consists of such obscenities , that it would even be scouted at the table of the bribed , queen-slandering Italian witnesses in Cotton Garden .
Yet some of these canting hypocrites , I understand , now begin to prate about morality !
But I ought , and I do apologize to the reader for this digression , which I was led into by the circumstance of a gentleman , who dined with me yesterday , having given me a description of one of these monstrosities , who does not live a hundred miles from this place .
More , however , of this hereafter .
Should it please Providence to guard me from poison and the poniard , I will plainly shew who are the violators of all morality , who are the blasphemers not only of God , but of Nature also .


My wife , as I have already said , soon recovered her wonted cheerfulness , which was in no small degree gratifying to me  and as there was also a prospect of our being blessed with another increase of our family , the loss of our first child ceased to weigh so heavily upon our spirits .
My father could not refrain from expressing his satisfaction at the salutary improvement in our manner of living .
We kept less expensive company , and , as he said , we appeared to live more for ourselves .
Although he admitted the loss which we had sustained to be a severe one , yet , as it had operated as a check upon our giddy and extravagant mode of living , he confessed that he did not so much regret it , especially as he saw there was no great danger of the name becoming extinct .
-- He now often paid us a visit , and I began not merely to look upon him as a father , but likewise to enjoy his society , as one of my most valued companions and confidential friends .
At my house he was always a welcome guest , and we were always received with the greatest kindness at his .
I was now beginning to experience what it is to enjoy true and substantial domestic comfort , and I promised myself the greatest pleasure , as well as the greatest advantage , from this friendly intercourse with my intelligent and much-valued parent .
Among other things on which he kindly admonished me , he once more pointed out to me the folly as well as the unprofitableness and ingloriousness of remaining in the yeomanry cavalry , which he strongly advised me to quit , while I could do so with credit to myself -- `` for , '' said he , `` I can not be insensible to your situation  I view with a considerable degree of alarm your sanguine disposition  and I fear that your enthusiasm will some day lead you into some serious scrape with the selfish and unpatriotic officers under whose command you have placed youreself .
I know that you entertain a proper feeling upon the subject  that you are actuated by the most laudable and disinterested motive , to serve your country  but , when I reflect upon the sinister views of those who are your commanders , I dread some disagreement with your officers , that may prove very unpleasant , and then you may not be able to get rid of your engagements , without their endeavouring to fix a stigma upon you , in some way or other .
I see that , already , they are all jealous of your independent spirit .
Most of your comrades are the dependants and mere vassals of their officers  you are almost the only one amongst them that can say you are free from any obligation to any of them .
The officers dread your spirit , and the privates envy your independence  they are most of them actuated by selfish views , while you , on the contrary , are glowing with the amor patriæ , and think of nothing but how you can best serve your country .
Such opposite qualities will never amalgamate together , and you may rely upon it that there is great danger in your situation . ''
I listened more attentively to my father 's reasoning than I had heretofore done , because his predictions had proved so true that I was convinced of the correctness of his judgment , and that his superior knowledge of mankind had taught him how to estimate the views and objects of these men much better than I could .
But yet I could not bear the thought of leaving the yeomanry at a time when an invasion was threatened by the French , and I therefore determined not to quit the troop till the return of peace .


During the first year of my marriage I had attended very little to the great political events which had occurred , on the continent as well as at home , but I shall slightly touch upon them here for the information of the reader .
-- On the 7th of Jan. 1796 , the Princess Charlotte of Wales was born .
Alas !
poor unhappy , ill-fated , cruelly-treated princess !
On the 7th of February the notorious Daniel Stewart circulated in London , for stock-swindling purposes , a forged French newspaper called l'Eclair .
For this fraud he was tried and convicted in a penalty of 100l .
on the third of July .
In this year Bonaparte gained the most signal victories over Wurmser and other Austrian , Piedmontese , and Italian Commanders , and at the battles of Lodi , Castiglione , Rivoli , c. established his character as a brave and consummate general .
Spain had already , towards the end of 1795 , concluded not merely a peace with France , but also entered with her into a treaty of alliance , offensive and defensive , which was this year followed up by her declaring war against Great Britain .
In Germany , a suspension of arms was concluded between France , Bavaria , Wirtemburgh , and Baden  and Saxony and Hesse agreed to a neutrality , while in Italy peace was made by Parma , Sardinia , and Naples .
Bonaparte and the republican troops under his command took not less than sixty thousand prisoners in the course of this campaign , and repeatedly drove before them all the enemies of their country .
Pitt was intriguing with the Court of Russia , but the Empress Catherine being a decided enemy to him , she died suddenly , and her son PAUL , who was more friendly to his views , ascended the throne .
Pitt seemed determined at all hazards not to make peace on any terms  but his cunning friend Wilberforce , and his partizans , being alarmed at the continuance of the war , the minister was obliged to please them , and delude the people .
For the purpose of temporising therefore , he sent Lord Malmsbury to France , under the hollow pretence of making peace , when at the same time he had orders not to accept of any terms .
But the French being aware of the true nature of his errand received him coolly , and after a stay of eight weeks he was sent packing with a `` flea in his ear . ''


The parliament having been dissolved , the new parliament met on the 9th of October .
A fresh cry of invasion was now raised , and Pitt brought forward his plan of defence .
These preparations caused great alarm throughout the country , and a great bustle amongst the various corps of yeomanry .
Bread had sold at a moderate rate all the year  the average price being eightpence halfpenny the quartern loaf .
The loan , which was called the loyalty loan , was eighteen millions , and the amount was subscribed in fifteen hours .
General Washington this year resigned the presidency of America , and retired into private life , amidst the blessings of his countrymen  a pure and spotless patriot  a friend to the liberty of mankind  and the brave assertor of those of his fellow countrymen .
Thus ended the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety six .


The next year another attempt was made to negotiate a peace with the French , but as the minister , Pitt , was not sincere , Lord Malmsbury having been sent to Lisle to treat , the French Directory soon discovered that the measure was only a cheat intended to keep down the dissatisfaction at home .
The negotiation was therefore soon broken off , like the last .
Ireland was in a very disturbed state , bordering upon rebellion .
In the early part of this year many provincial banks stopped payment , in consequence of a demand on them for gold , and , to complete the climax of this country 's degradation and disgrace , an act of national bankruptcy was declared on the twenty-seventh day of February  an order in council being issued on that day , by virtue of which the Bank of England stopped payment in cash .
From that fatal hour , swindling , the most barefaced swindling , has become legalized !
On the eleventh of March , the King , for the first time , refused to receive the petition of the Common Hall of the City of London upon the Throne  those who took the lead in the liveries at that time , basely surrendering the right of their fellow-citizens without a struggle  and from that hour their boasted privileges were lost , and they have ever since been degraded to the level of any common assembly .
As they have never made an effort to recover this their natural right of presenting their petitions or addresses to the king upon the throne , it must be owned that they have richly merited all the taunts and sneers of the ministerial press , which have been invariably levelled at them since that period .
To add to the wretched state of the country , a mutiny broke out amongst the seamen at Spithead , and then at the Nore , the latter of which proved most formidable , and some blood was shed  but at length , through the means of promises and bribes , the mutineers were induced to compromise for some additional pay .


The alarm of invasion having been renewed with redoubled zeal , the officers commanding yeomanry corps received letters or circulars from the Lord-Lieutenants of counties to enquire if , in case of the enemy landing , they would volunteer their services to the full extent of their respective military districts .
Our district was Wilts , Hants , and Dorset .
The day was appointed for the Everly troop to assemble , and to give their answer to this application .
In the meanwhile , the officers were very busy amongst the men , particularly Cornet Dyke , who was our most active officer .
My father informed me of this  and he at once declared that they , the brave Everly troop , would , now they were put to the test , refuse to go out of their county .
I , however , stoutly maintained , that although the officers might be so disposed , it was impossible that the men in a body could prove themselves such despicable cowards  as , if they did refuse to extend their services , they would ever afterwards be ashamed to look each other in the face .
My father 's reply was , `` mark my words .
Shameful and disgraceful as it will be , yet I have heard quite sufficient to convince me that a great majority of them have been spoken to , and that they have made up their minds to refuse to comply with the request of the government  and now , young man , as I before told you , disgrace will be the lot of the Everly Troop .
I know the officers too well to be deceived , and I should have thought that the specimen you had of their VALOUR , in the Salisbury affair , would have completely opened your eyes , unless , indeed , you are intentionally blind . ''
I told him that I hoped they had been so gibed and scouted , in consequence of their behaviour upon that occasion , that they would be ashamed now to give an open refusal to stand forward , when they were called upon in such a public manner .
`` Why , '' said he , `` one would think it is almost impossible  but I know my men so well , that I entertain not the least doubt upon the subject  and therefore you must get out of it as well as you can  but let me give you one word of advice . ''
I , however , began to be impatient of advice upon such a point  for , while we had been in conversation , I had , as was usual with me , made up my mind how to act , and I at once told my father that , in case they should refuse to go , I would resign , and enter instantly into some other troop , who had volunteered to extend their services .
`` Oh ! ''
said my father , `` what you are again ready to rush headlong into fresh difficulties !
If they refuse to extend their services , it will , I own , be a very fair ground for your resignation , and then you may thank God you have had an opportunity of saving yourself from disgrace , for disgrace I was always convinced such playing at soldiers must come to at last , especially when I know what sort of officers are at your head .
If you should resign , why not stay at home with your wife , and attend to your business ?
Depend upon it , this mode of acting will prove not only much more profitable to you , but much more honourable in the end .
What can you expect if you go into another troop ?
Even though they have volunteered , yet you will find that ninety-nine out of a hundred of them have entered into the troop from some interested motive .
Your disinterested patriotic intentions will consequently only raise you enemies in those who will not know how to appreciate your motives , and those who do comprehend those motives will only be jealous of you , because you out do them in devotion to the cause which you wish to promote .
If you must be a soldier , give me up the farm , and I will buy you a commission in some regular regiment at once .
You may thus chance to gain renown or an honourable death  but even there , never expect to obtain promotion , unless you can conquer your unbending spirit .
Promotion is not gained by merit , but by parliamentary interest , and by servility to your superior officers .
Take my advice , therefore , and if the Everly troop disgrace themselves , quit them , and think yourself well out of what I always thought was a scrape . ''
This wise and salutary advice was not followed by me , though I could not but admit the propriety of it .


The field day arrived , and I was one of the first upon the ground , which was a beautiful sheepdrove upon the Downs , between Everly and Amesbury .
I will call this my second campaign .
As the several members of the corps arrived upon the ground , I eagerly accosted them , to know their determination  but most of them appeared shy , and gave evasive answers .
I could , however , discover that some of them had got their cue  and these began boldly and manfully to inveigh against the want of good faith in the government , in thus striving to draw the troop into a snare .
Some of them even swore that it was as bad as kidnapping  for that the terms upon which the troop had been raised were , that its services should not be required out of the county without the consent of the persons who composed it .
`` Aye , '' said I , `` that is very true , and we are now , I understand , called together to be asked if we will consent , in case of an invasion , to go out of the county . ''
My speech was broken short by some of them espying our gallant Cornet , moving majestically but slowly along , over the adjoining hill .
As he approached us , he was saluted by each of the members in their turn  but , when he came up to me , I fixed my eye upon him with a scrutinizing glance , and so intent was I in endeavouring to trace if possible his thoughts , that I actually forgot to offer him the accustomed salutation , till he reminded me of my inattention , by saying , `` good morning , Mr. Hunt . ''
I apologised for my absence of mind , but the fact was , that as I eyed our gallant commander , the dressing-gown scene had involuntarily crept across my brain , and for the moment had so absorbed all my attention , that I was conscious of nothing but the ludicrous appearance of the mighty hero on the morn of the battle of Salisbury .


The bugle now sounded , to announce the approach of the gallant captain Astly , and the troop fell in and was passed through the various manoeuvres by the cornet .
This being over , the cornet , after a short conference with the captain , formed us into a circle , within which , as far as I recollect , sat on their chargers , the captain , the cornet , and the Rev. Mr. Polhill , the chaplain to the troop , who held the principal farm at Everly , which he rented of our captain .
Having read to us the copy of the Secretary of State 's letter to Lord Pembroke , the lord-lieutenant of the county , which stated that an invasion was meditated by our implacable enemy the French , that the government anticipated almost daily an attempt to put it into execution , and that his lordship requested to know whether , in case an invasion actually occurred , the Everly troop would extend their services to the military district of Hants , Wilts and Dorset , the cornet addressed us in a long speech .
In this speech the orator did not content himself with leaving the decision to our unbiassed judgments , nor even with hints of his dissatisfaction at the proposal  for he boldly expressed his decided hostility to the measure , and strongly reprobated the idea of farmers leaving their business by going out of the county .
His very luminous harangue appeared wonderfully successful in convincing a great proportion of the troop that , by staying at home and looking after our farms , and protecting our own wheat ricks , we should not only be serving ourselves , but should also be supporting the government and opposing the invasion , much more effectually than we should be by marching forty or fifty miles to the coast , to meet the enemy .
He proved to demonstration to his willing hearers , that it was our duty to stay at home , and consequently to send an answer to say that , as we had entered the troop for the purpose of keeping in order the turbulent in our own district , we did not feel ourselves justified in leaving the county under any circumstances .
He , however concluded in a most heroical strain , by declaring that , in giving this advice to the troop , he was not actuated by any fear , ( oh no ! )
of meeting the enemy  on the contrary , he lustily threatened that if ever they should dare to come into the county of Wilts , at least near Everly or Syrencot [ 12 ] , they should receive an exemplary chastisement for their temerity , and all the world should know of what sort of men the Everly troop was composed .


I listened to this address with considerable impatience  for such was the effect of example , that I found several of those who , in the morning , had expressed their determination , at all hazards , to vote for going  now drew back  and when I looked at them during this speech I perceived that their eyes dropped down upon their holster pipes .
As soon as the Cornet had concluded , I put spurs to my charger , and darted out of my place into the centre of the circle , where , having doffed my helmet , for the first time in my life I addressed myself publicly to a body of my fellow-countrymen .
I began with these words : `` Comrades , if not fellow-soldiers , at any rate fellow-men , fellow countrymen . ''
I then implored them to reflect upon the consequences of sending such an answer as had been recommended by the Cornet  and I warned them , that , if such an answer were sent , an eternal stigma would be fixed upon the character of the troop .
Our conduct upon the Salisbury affair was , I told them , little known out of the county , and we had now an opportunity of wiping off the stain from our character  but if we publicly and deliberately refused to go out of our county to meet the enemy , in case of invasion , we should justly deserve to be branded as poltroons and cowards to the latest posterity .
This language excited considerable signs of disapprobation , some few laid their hands upon their swords , and I recollect two of the troop , Gilbert and Workman , threatened aloud .
I was , however , not to be deterred .
I proceeded in my address to them , and explained the nature of the law in case of invasion  my father having taken down Blackstone 's Commentaries , and read to me an extract respecting the posse comitatus .
I pointed out to them , that the law compelled every man to bear arms against invaders , and that the Yeomanry Corps , who had been trained , would of course be among the first who would be compelled to act whether they would or not  and that consequently , if they did not feel a desire burning within their breasts either successfully to resist the invader , or fall gloriously in the attempt , if they did not possess any of the amor patriæ , yet sound policy ought to induce them to offer voluntarily those services which the law had the power of inforcing against their will .


Although this was my first attempt to speak in public , yet , as my sentiments flowed from my heart , as they were the spontaneous effusions of an ardent spirit , burning with impatience to evince by deeds , as well as words , that I really loved my country , and was willing to lay down my life in its defence , and as I felt indignant at the attempt that had been made by the Cornet to seduce them , as I thought , from their duty , I did not want words to express myself , and I believe that it was quite as eloquent a maiden speech as is made by some Honourable Members in the Honourable House .
At any rate it was prompted by a conviction of public duty , and I have never regretted it , though I believe that it made me some rancorous enemies , who have never lost an opportunity , from that day to this , of speaking ill of me behind my back , and doing me an ill turn when they had it in their power .


The Cornet scowled , and many of my comrades looked black , and muttered dissent  but no one seemed inclined to debate the question .
At length , after having in vain waited a short time , to see if any one would come forward to second my proposition , our worthy Chaplain , the Rev. Mr. Polhill , gracefully took off his hat , and stepped up between me and some of those who , unable to refute me , and dreading the result of my appeal , were almost disposed to draw their swords upon me for the lecture which I had given them .
I shall never forget the venerable air of this truly pious man , who was upwards of seventy years of age .
It commanded instant attention , and as he fixed his eye steadily upon me , the most solemn silence reigned around .
All the angry passions that my speech had excited were now calmed into the most serious and silent attention , in the expectation that he was about to give me a severe reprimand for my intemperate , and , as some considered it , not only indiscreet but audacious speech .
After some short pause he began .
I was , at first , rather in doubt what course he meant to pursue , though , from his well known honourable and independent character , I was not in much dread .
To the vexation and astonishment of the troop , his first sentence was a warm eulogium upon what he was pleased to call my eloquent appeal to their feelings as men , and to their hearts as Englishmen  and this compliment to me he followed up with a strain of impassioned eloquence , enough to have made the veriest coward brave .
He repeated all my arguments , but in a style of language far superior  and , while the tears flowed down his furrowed cheeks , he implored them to save their character from the disgrace which appeared to be hovering over them .
He said , that however galling had been the words which had dropped from the lips of his young friend , yet , as he could not find any others that were more appropriate , he himself must repeat them  and must plainly tell them , that , if they returned such an answer as was recommended by the Cornet , they would deserve to be handed down to posterity as poltroons and cowards .
He would , he said , go still further  they would not only deserve to be thus branded with infamy , but they would actually be so  and their pusillanimity would be a taint in the blood of their children 's children .
He begged , he prayed , he intreated , he implored that they would not disgrace the name of man by conduct at once so cowardly and so foolish .
But he begged , prayed , intreated and implored in vain -- his venerable character protected him from the boisterous disapprobation that they had shown towards me , but they heard him unmoved , or rather as hogs would have listened to the harmonious notes of Orpheus , with a grunt .
Still persisting , however , in his efforts to wake a spark of courage in their cloddish bosoms , he declared that , when the day arrived that a foreign foe set foot upon British ground , if he could procure no other conveyance , he would crawl upon his hands and knees to the coast to meet them , and there , old and feeble as he was , he would make a bulwark of his shattered frame , to check in the first onset their daring attempt to destroy our rights and liberties .
In fact , he did every thing that man could do , to persuade them to perform their duty , and to save their character from such foul irretrievable disgrace .
It was , however , all in vain  for with the exception of myself and the venerable chaplain , they all held up their hands against going out of the county , and it was decided that they should send an answer to that effect to the Lord Lieutenant .
I made one more effort , in a short but spirited appeal to their honour as men , to their character as Englishmen  but all remonstrance was thrown away .
With one accord they stamped the degrading name of coward upon the colours of the Everly troop of Yeomanry , and I immediately handed over my sword and pistols , or rather indignantly threw them upon the ground , declaring that from that hour I no longer belonged to them , and adding that I would , the next morning , enroll my name in any corps which had extended its services to the military district , unless there was one that had volunteered for unlimited service , in which case I would enroll my name in that corps .
I then shook bands with the worthy chaplain , who warmly applauded my conduct , saying that he never would attend them again upon any occasion , and that he would much rather have sacrificed his life than have lived to see so fine a body of his fellow-countrymen desert , at such a moment their duty to themselves and their country .
I felt so ashamed of their conduct that I put spurs to my horse and galloped from the field in disgust , lest , by my remaining even for a short time , I should become contaminated by some portion of their vile spirit .
Thus ended my military career in the Everly troop of Yeomanry , among the members of which were many private friends , for whom I entertained a very sincere regard , and who would never have disgraced themselves in such a way had it not been for the unworthy recommendation and advice of their officers .


As my father 's house lay in my way home , I called on him , to inform him of the result of the meeting .
As I rode into the yard he met , me , and seeing I had left my sword behind , `` Ah ! ''
he exclaimed , `` I see that it is just as I predicted . ''
When I had related to him all that had passed , `` Well ! ''
said he , `` this is really too bad to laugh at .
The expedition against the old women at Salisbury was truly ludicrous  but this deliberate act of cowardice they never can get over  it must and will be blazoned throughout the whole country .
You have done rightly , you had no choice  the man who after this decision remains a moment in that troop must expect to be laughed at and despised as long as he lives .
But mark my words : prepare yourself for all sorts of ill nature and slander .
They who have not had the spirit to follow your example will never forgive you , and to gloss over their own baseness , they will load you with all possible calumny , and will miss no opportunity to do you an injury .
As by your resignation you have exposed Astley and Dyke to great odium , be careful how you get into their clutches , or they will squeeze you , rely upon it . ''
I demanded how they could injure me ?
`` Oh ! ''
said my father , `` you know but very little of mankind  they that seek an opportunity will seldom want an occasion to do a malicious act .
You have been a great sporting crony of Astley 's , and have frequently hunted with him  he keeps a pack of hounds , and has hunted over my property , and my farms , for many years , and we have sometimes , though sparingly , sported in return over his .
Depend upon it , this will all be put a stop to now . ''


I replied that upon an average Astley had hunted ten times over my father 's farms , where we had sported upon his estate once  that Mr. Astley 's hounds met once a week all the season at Littlecot Furze , and that he could not start a hare upon his own estate , or any part of it , without a great chance of her running over some part of my father 's property .
`` That is all very true , '' said my father , `` but , if he can not be revenged of you in any other way , he will give up his own hounds , in order that he may prevent you from coming over any part of his estate . ''
I had often heard of a man cutting off his own nose to spite his neighbour , but I did not think that , in this instance , it was very likely to happen .
`` Trust me , '' said he , `` within one month he will forbid you from going over his lands  therefore be on your guard  for be assured that I know the littleness of his soul better than you do , and he will spare no pains to be revenged upon you . ''


I dined with my father , and returned home in the evening , whither I found the news of the disgrace of the Everly troop had flown before me .
My wife heartily approved of my conduct  for she came from the wrong stock to approve of any thing dishonourable .
I was received with open arms , as I always had been  but if I had returned and told my wife that I was one of the number that had refused , in case of invasion , to go out of the county to oppose the enemy , I sincerely believe , that I should , for the first time , have met with a very different reception .
At all events I should have deserved it .


On the following morning , before I was quite dressed , a messenger came with a letter from Lord Bruce , the colonel of the regiment of Wiltshire yeomanry .
I broke the seal and read a very flattering eulogium from his Lordship , on my gallant conduct in resigning my situation in the Everly troop , in consequence of the troop having , as his lordship expressed himself , disgraced itself in such a way as rendered it impossible for an honourable man to remain in it .
After paying me many very high compliments , he solicited the honour of enrolling in his troop , ( the Marlborough troop , ) the name of a gentleman who had acted such a gallant part .
After I had breakfasted , I sat down to write an answer  but before I had finished it , another messenger arrived , from an officer of the Devizes troop , to request that I would honour that corps with my name .
As , however , Lord Bruce had applied first , and as in that troop I happened to have a particular friend , Mr. Thomas Hancock , the banker of Marlborough , I complied with his lordship 's pressing invitation , and enrolled my name in the Marlborough troop the next day .


How true the prediction of my father was , will be seen hereafter , and it soon began to be verified .
Before the week was out , I was honoured with a visit from old John Sainsbury , the Everly keeper , who served me with notices from Mr. Astley and all his vassals , not to trespass upon any part of his estates  or from henceforth I should be treated as a wilful trespasser .
At the same time he informed me , that his master was grown exceedingly fond of seeing the hares very plenty upon his manors , and that he had disposed of his hounds .
This was so precisely what my father had anticipated , that I almost began to think that he possessed some extraordinary means of becoming acquainted with the intentions of men , more than those furnished by common observation .
I sent my compliments to the gallant Capt. and desired him to mark his hares , by burning them in the horns , and to teach his keepers to persuade them to stay at home  for if I caught any of them straying upon my father 's property , I should certainly make them pay forfeit , and would , if I could , prevent a single one of them from returning to tell the fate of their companions .
The reader will understand that the property at Everly belonging to Mr. Astley , joined my father 's , without any other division than a mere furrow struck with the plough , between the arable lands  and that the division between the down lands consisted of old bound balls , which were merely small heaps of the sod thrown up together , perhaps some hundred years before  so that those who were not aware of this circumstance , might pass over the plain twenty times , without ever observing that there was any thing to mark the separation  so slight and imperceptible are the landmarks that divide all the estates that are situated upon Salisbury plain .


The first field day of the Marlborough troop came and I joined their ranks .
I was fully equipped  the whole of the regiment being dressed in the same uniform as that which was worn by the Everly troop , no alteration was necessary  and as each person supplied himself , at his own expence , with uniform and accoutrements , the arms alone being given by the government , I required nothing but a sword and a brace of pistols , with which I was instantly provided .
My new comrades had all volunteered to extend their services , which was my inducement for joining them  but they cut a very sorry figure in the field , both as to their accoutrements and regimentals , and they were not half so well mounted as my late comrades .
I could have selected half a score of horses out of the Everly troop that were worth the whole of those of the Marlborough  and as for their discipline , if they had been drilled every day for a year , they would not have been equal to the troop which I had left .
Lord Bruce , the colonel , was a complete novice , and he suffered himself to be led by the nose by a serjeant of the 15th , of the name of Walker , who knew little more about the matter than himself .
I , however , attended from day to day , without any one attempting to teach me any thing .
There were certain fines levied for particular faults , in all these troops , such as for absence without sufficient cause , talking in the ranks , coming to the field too late , not being dressed in uniform , c. c.  but I was never reprimanded , fined , or sent to drill , while I was in the troop .
We had a dinner at the Castle , at Marlborough , his Lordship in the chair  but as most of the troop were composed of his father 's , Lord Aylesbury 's tenants , and his dependants , and tradesmen , or belonged to the corporation of the rottenest of rotten boroughs , Marlborough and Great Bedwin , there were very few , except myself and my friends , Hancock and Hitchcock , who dared to say their souls were their own .
His lordship was always very polite to me , but he did not appear to relish my delivering my sentiments , which I did with great freedom , upon these occasions .
In the field , in the ranks , I knew how to conduct myself , and never failed to pay implicit attention to my duty , nor ever deviated from the strictest discipline  but , when I was at his lordship 's table  or at a mess with the troop , I knew of no distinction  I never felt any other controul than that which was dictated by politeness and good manners .
Perhaps , young as I was , I might have been thought to have delivered myself upon some occasions , and upon some subjects , with too much freedom  and being always bred up with the idea that nothing was so base and degrading as a slavish disposition , I might , in my endeavour to avoid this , have erred by falling too much into the opposite extreme  but the natural bent of my disposition always led me to avoid giving offence to any one intentionally .
My maxim was , never to offer an insult to any one , and to be particularly careful not to say any thing to hurt the feelings of any person in an inferior station of life to my own  never to take umbrage lightly  but if anyone , be he who he might , gentle or simple , offered me a premeditated insult , always to resent it upon the spot , whatever might be the consequence of my so doing .


I now contracted a very intimate acquaintance with Mr. Thomas Hancock the Banker , and always made his house my home when I went to Marlborough , though my wife 's elder brother kept the Castle Inn , where I was always welcome .
This brother and myself were , however , never particularly intimate , for we were of very different dispositions .
He had been , as I have often heard his father say , and himself acknowledge , a very wild , dissipated youth  but as the `` wildest colts make the tamest horses , '' so had this gentleman put on a very sober sedate demeanour , while he was yet but a young man  and the loss of his wife , who left him with a large young family , increased rather than diminished the grave turn of his mind .
His acquaintance lay mostly among the dependents and tenants of his landlord , Lord Aylesbury , and as his chief pursuit appeared to me to be directed towards amassing a fortune , and as our tastes were cast in a very different mould , our friendship , though we were upon very good terms , was not of the inseparable kind .
He was very much respected among the persons whom I have before described , with whom he associated  and as he knew well on which side his bread was buttered , he took good care to pay particular attention to the steward of Lord Aylesbury .
Nor , as the `` grey mare was always the better horse '' in that family , did he forget to pay due court to the steward 's lady , who , to my taste , was one of the most disgusting of disgusting women , both in person and manners .
When he first lost his wife , who was a pretty , amiable , fascinating woman , he seemed as if he would sink under the loss , and we at one time feared that he would never recover from his dejected state .
We were , however , agreeably disappointed , as we found that `` time wore off the deepest afflictions  '' but I own that I imbibed rather a prejudice against him , when I soon after discovered that he was upon the point of marrying another lady , a buxom widow , the very reverse sort of woman to his deceased wife .
This lady was the widow of a grocer , who had left her some little property , and she was therefore too much of a lady to marry an Innkeeper , and she had sufficient influence over him to make him quit the Inn , and commence gentleman coach master before she gave him her hand .


One day , in the beginning of August in this year , just as I was preparing to commence harvest by wheat reaping , I received a message from my father , to say he wished to see me , as he was not well .
I enquired of the servant whether my father was seriously indisposed , and I received for answer that he had kept his bed all day .
At this season of the year , I had generally a horse standing saddled in the stable , and although my dinner was just going upon the table , I mounted , and having desired my family not to wait for me , I appeared at my father 's bed-side , who lived at a distance of two miles from Widdington , in less time than that in which many persons who were called active would have put on their boots and changed their coat .
I had always been bred up to act with decision , and make all my movements in quick time  and as the servant had also made no delay , my father expressed his surprise and pleasure at the rapidity with which I had attended to his wish .
I found him flushed in the face , and with a strong quick pulse .
He told me that be had had the misfortune to run a thorn in his leg as he was getting through a hedge the day before , that he had endeavoured in vain to extract it , that it had caused him considerable pain , and had brought on so much fever in the night as to produce delirium .
He had had it fomented in the morning , and was in hopes that he was better , but now the inflammation was so much increased that he was fearful of another restless night .
I begged to see his leg , and I found it to be so much inflamed , that I wished him immediately to send for the family surgeon , or some better advice .
He answered that , if he were not better , he would in the morning .
In the mean time , he requested me to look round his farms , and attend to his servants .
I told him that I would most cheerfully do so , but that I must entreat him to let me send for some medical man .
I had no opinion of our family surgeon , yet I thought , as he was a man of very extensive practice , that he would , at any rate , give my father something to abate the irritation and fever , without the possibility of doing harm .
As my father would not consent to have any other person sent for , it was agreed that I should dispatch a messenger to Pewsey , a distance of five miles , while I rode round his farm , to see what the servants were doing .


As soon as I got down stairs I mounted my horse , and , not choosing to trust to the uncertainty of sending a servant , I galloped the five miles in about twenty minutes .
The doctor was from home , but I soon traced him out , and by intreaty I got him to make his old mare put her `` best leg before , '' and he was in a very short time in my father 's bed room .
After having heard his statement , and examined his leg , he recommended bleeding , which was immediately performed .
Young and inexperienced as I was , I suggested the propriety of some cooling cathartick  but our doctor said no  my father required sleep , he must take a little warm gruel , and he would send him some physick in the morning .
As my father felt drowsy , he requested me to go home  and hoping that he should have a better night , he requested that I would look after his business next day , and that I would come and see him in the forenoon .
He had a most excellent nurse in my eldest sister , who was his housekeeper  and I left him I own without any sanguine hopes of finding him much better in the morning , although I did not apprehend that any thing very serious was likely to arise from his accident .


When I got home , I told my wife that I was fearful my father was laid up for the harvest , and I must have her assistance more amongst my servants than I had before required of her , as I was convinced that I should have to attend to the whole of my father 's large and extensive business as well as my own , and I must make my arrangements accordingly .
Instead of waiting for the forenoon , I called upon my father before 4 o'clock the next morning .
When I reached his house my sister was up  she had not been in bed since I saw her  my poor father 's leg had been very painful all night , and his fever had again occasioned delirium .
I found him in a burning fever , and his inflammation alarmingly increased in his leg : since I left him , he had not , he told me , slept a single moment .
I at once proposed to have better advice , and urged the necessity of procuring that advice in time .
But who should we get ?
I recommended my surgeon , Mr. Robert Clare of Devizes .
My father had always professed an objection to him , because he said he was a drinking profligate character , but I pleaded that he was an intelligent surgeon , and I soon got over my father 's scruples , which I had no sooner done than I was for effecting the object .
Devizes was twelve miles distant , but with me the greater the distance the less delay was to be made .
I therefore ordered a trustworthy servant to do his best to manage the business , and I was at Devizes and had called the doctor up and was at breakfast before the clock struck six .
In ten minutes after that time our horses were at the door , and the proper medicines being prepared , I had them in my pocket and was mounted .
Mr. Clare 's foot was also in his stirrup , and , he was giving some directions to his assistant , when a man came galloping up to the door with one of his hands wrapped up in a handkerchief , streaming with blood .
We enquired what was the matter , to which he replied that he was a birdkeeper , and that wishing to draw a charge of shot he had held the gun upside down , with the intent to shake the shot into his hand  but by some accident the gun had gone off , and the charge had passed through the middle of his hand .
At this moment up came another man on horseback , to say that a neighbouring lady was taken in labour , and that the doctor or his assistant must come that moment , as '' 't was missusses vust child , and mayster was vrightened out of his senses . ''
Clare dispatched Duffet his assistant off to the good lady in the straw  and then said , `` Harry , if you will get off your horse and assist me , we will manage matters for this poor fellow . ''
`` Ah , '' said the man , `` cut off my hand as quick as you can , sir , for I have left all the rooks eating my master 's corn , and I long to get back again to send them about their business . ''
The doctor smiled as he unbound his hand , which was in a most shocking mangled state .
Instead of proceeding to amputate the hand , the doctor , after having washed it in warm water , informed him that he would save his thumb and little finger , if he would stand steady while he took off the three middle fingers .
`` Very well , sir , if you please , but be sharp , '' was his reply .
-- I held his arm , and Mr. Clare , who was a skilful surgeon , in a very few minutes took out the three middle fingers nearly up to the wrist , and having bound up the wound and pressed the thumb and little finger nearly together , he desired the man to ride slowly home , and told him that he would see him again on his return from my father .


The doctor always rode excellent horses , and having mounted one of his very best , and the road lying over the Downs , we arrived at my father 's house twenty minutes before eight o'clock .
I had already ridden a distance of twenty-six miles .
Mr. Clare having examined my father 's leg , pronounced the case to be a serious one , and at once recommended that Mr. Grant , an eminent surgeon of Bath , should be called in , as well as Dr. Hill a physician , ( for form 's sake ) from Devizes .
He said to my father , whom he knew to be a man of an uncommonly firm mind , `` I know you will not be alarmed , Sir , but we must have good advice and assistance , or your leg is in such a state that I fear amputation may be necessary .
I have therefore desired your son to send or go for Mr. Grant , of Bath , to assist me , who is one of the most eminent men in the profession . ''
My father firmly replied , `` if you think , Sir , that it is absolutely necessary , never wait for Mr. Grant , but take off my leg at once . ''
-- `` No , Sir , '' replied Clare , `` I shall not advise that at present .
I will do all that is necessary for you now  but let your son depart for Mr. Grant immediately .
I know your son 's expedition , and I know that he will be more likely to prevail upon Mr. Grant to come than any one we can send .
In the mean time I will bring over Dr. Hill from Devizes , and see you in the afternoon . ''


This was so settled , and without delay I had changed my horse and galloped back to Devizes  with Mr. Clare , in my way to Bath .
As we passed along he informed me , seriously , that my father was not merely in a dangerous state , but that he had not even the slightest hopes of his recovery .
I was thunder-struck  I had hardly ever thought of such a thing .
My father , at the age of 63 , was one of the most healthy , vigorous , active men in the kingdom , and had scarcely ever had a day 's serious illness in his life .
To see him walk , ride , mount his horse , or in fact do any thing  he was so active , so alert , that his motions were more like a youth of eighteen or twenty than those of an old man  and to look upon him , no one would guess his age to be much above forty , though his hair lead been as white as the driven snow for years .
The truth was , that he had all his life been an active , temperate , prudent man , and at the age of sixty his constitution had never received a single shock .
I have often heard him say , that he had never been ill since he had the small pox , which he caught in the natural way , when a boy at the age of eight years .
In the drawing-room , he frequently shamed myself , as well as all the young men of the village  for he was the most polite and attentive man I ever saw .
If a lady dropped her fan , her shawl , her handkerchief , nay even a pin , he was the first to spring to her aid and pick it up  and this he would do in less time than one of our modern yawning , lounging , dandies would take to drawl out `` pray Maam shall I have the honour , c. '' He would take a cheerful bottle , and make one of the merriest of the gayest party , but never to excess  for he was arrived at that time of life that he knew how to enjoy every pleasure in moderation .
He had acquired wealth sufficient for all his wants , and enough to assist a friend  and , where he had a confidence , he was unlimited in his generosity .
If he saw a man persecuted unjustly , he was sure to become his friend .
In one respect this had led him into a great error , he having advanced to a brewer of Bath as much as seven thousand pounds , without much better than personal security .
He had the finest farms in that part of the county , and they were cultivated like gardens  no man was surrounded with brighter prospects , or was possessed of greater worldly blessings  and When Mr. Clare seriously told me that he had no hopes of his recovery , I was absolutely overpowered with astonishment and anguish , and was incapable of uttering a single sentence .
`` If , '' said he , `` your father ever recovers it will be a miracle  it is too late to attempt amputation .
If I had seen him yesterday , before he was bled , his life might have been saved  but my opinion is , that if the Pewsey doctor had taken a pistol and shot him through the head , he would not have been more instrumental to his death than he was at the moment when he took a pound of blood from him in the state in which his leg must have been last night .
Between you and I , he is a murdered man , and I do not believe that all the surgeons on earth can save him without a miracle  but we must see what can be done .
I know you will not be long riding the thirty miles , to Bath .
When you return , call at my house , and leave word at what time Mr. Grant will come , and I will accompany him to Littlecot , either to-night or to-morrow morning .
As you go through Devizes call likewise upon old Hill the physician , and make him ride over this afternoon .
We must let him earn a guinea or two , as he wants it badly enough , and there is no chance of his doing any harm , for he will not venture to alter what I have ordered , unless I am present .
As soon as Grant comes we will do our best  though I assure you I can not give you any hopes . ''


As I had to ride a distance of sixty miles , I calculated the time I should be on the road , and as I was to go thither and back on the same horse , and it was very hot weather , I somewhat slackened my pace , that I might not knock up the poor animal .
As I passed through Devizes , I left word for Dr. Hill to repair immediately to my father 's  and without loosing one single moment for my own refreshment , I reached my friend 's , at the brewery in Walcot Street , a few minutes before one o'clock , having come the thirty miles in some thing less than three hours .
Two men were instantly set to clean and refresh my horse , to prepare him for my return , while I hastened to find Mr. Grant .
He was visiting his patients , for he at that time had the best practice in Bath .
Seeing my distress , his servant readily accompanied me to that part of the town where he was most likely to meet with his master  and we soon found the doctor , coming out of a gentleman 's house in Brock Street .
[ 21 ] Upon my accosting him with considerable earnestness and agitation , he invited me to return with him into the house , where I informed him of my earnest desire that he should proceed forthwith , in a chaise and four , to see , and if possible , save my father .
To this pressing application he replied that , sorry as he was to be obliged to refuse , he must nevertheless do so , it being impracticable for him to leave Bath  but he added , that his old friend , Bob Clare , was as able a man , and as good a judge how to proceed in such a case , as himself or any surgeon or physician in England .
I urged that it was Mr. Clare 's most particular wish that he should come  that Mr. Clare had not time to write , or he would have explained that it was a peculiar case .
I then described it , together with the symptoms , as well as I could .
He shook his head , and said at once , `` I fear , if I could go , that I should be too late .
That Pewsey doctor can kill much easier than I can cure .
The taking of blood away at such a moment was most stupid , it was most damnable  he ought to have put blood into him , instead of taking it away .
I fear , after that , there is no hopes .
What says Bob Clare ? ''
`` I am sorry to say , sir , that you are too well agreed in your opinion  but for God 's sake lose no time to fly and do your utmost to save the best of parents . ''
He repeated that it was impossible  for that he had the most important engagements that evening , to break which would never be pardoned , either by his patients , or by the medical men who were coming over , one of them from Clifton , on purpose to meet him .
He said , however , that he would recommend me to a friend , who would , perhaps , be able to attend me  and he assured me that he was a very clever man , quite as capable as himself in such an affair .
No , this would not do for me  Mr. Clare wished the assistance of Mr. Grant , and I would not accept of any one else .
I implored , I wept , and , in agony of supplication , I knelt and seized his knees , declaring that I would not loose my hold till he had promised to go to see my father .
I offered him any sum that he might demand , and assured him that I would engage to procure such post horses , as would take him there and back in six hours .
He gazed upon me with astonishment .
At length be exclaimed , `` your uncommon filial piety has triumphed .
No money should have induced me to leave Bath under my present circumstances  but such devotedness , such unfeigned and unusual affection in a son for a father , I never before witnessed : '' and turning round to the lady of the house , who , with her two daughters , had been drawn to the spot by my raving agony , he said , `` I should be for ever ashamed of myself if I did not yield to the prayers of such unbounded filial affection . ''
-- Then addressing me , `` return , '' said he , `` my young friend , and inform Clare that I will take him up in the morning at six o'clock , and we will be at your father 's before eight .
I see that you think there is great delay in this , but nothing on earth could induce me to leave Bath before I have seen my patients here .
I have an important engagement , a consultation , which will not be concluded before one in the morning .
Instead of going to bed , I will start at two in a chaise with four horses , and will be at Devizes by six  and do you take care that Bob is ready , so as not to keep me waiting , for I shall be there to a minute . ''
I could not help sighing , and looking doubtfully , and as he took my hand , I said , `` are you sure that you will come ?
Are you sure that nothing will prevent you ? ''
`` My good lad , '' he replied , `` in our profession we are so often put in mind of the uncertainty of life , that we are sure of nothing but death .
But this you may rely upon , that if I am alive and able to come , I will be at Devizes at six o'clock , and at your father 's by eight . ''
I thanked him most earnestly , and enquired if I could do any thing to forward his good intention , by hiring or bespeaking the horses for his carriage .
To this enquiry he replied , that his servant would take care of that  but that I might order horses to be ready for him at Devizes .
I consequently assured him that four of the best post horses in the kingdom should be ready and waiting for him at Mr. Clare 's door , by the time he arrived there  and this I could safely promise , as I had the interest to procure such from the Bear Inn .
I now took leave of him , and he gave me the most friendly salutation  and so did the lady and her two daughters , who had looked and listened to my entreaties with a great degree of interest .
Nor had they confined themselves to silent good wishes , for they had most fervently joined in supplicating the doctor to comply with my request  and they now expressed their earnest hopes for the recovery of my father  which was balm to my ears .


I returned to my friend 's , where I had left my horse  and , having taken some slight refreshment , I proceeded without loss of time towards home .
Such a melancholy journey I never took before , nor have ever taken since !
My mind was wholly absorbed in the reflection that it was possible I should so soon lose the best of fathers , of whose real value I seemed never to have had a true estimation till now that I felt the dread of losing him .
A thousand sad forebodings hurried across my brain , and I began already to feel that I had lost the best , the truest and the most sincere friend whom I had in the world .
Thus it is with poor weak mortals  they seldom know how to appreciate the most inestimable blessings , till they are in danger of being deprived of them !
In this sad state I soon reached Devizes , a distance of nineteen miles , on my return , scarcely having noticed any of the objects which I had passed .
I called upon Mr. Clare , and left a note for him , to be ready by six o'clock in the morning , and I ordered four of the best post horses at the Bear to be in waiting at Mr. Clare 's door at that hour .
Then , without making any other delay , I spurred forward , and reached my father 's house within a few minutes of three o'clock .
I found him much in the same state as when I left him at eight in the morning .
My journey to Bath and back , sixty miles , I had completed including my stay there , in seven hours  having now ridden , in the whole , upon two horses , a distance of eighty-six miles .


My poor father , who had been anxiously expecting my return , expressed great satisfaction at my speed  and taking my hand , he said , `` Ah !
you are a generous , kind-hearted soul .
I told your sister that , if you could find Mr. Grant in any reasonable time , you would return by three o'clock .
I knew the horse would carry you the sixty miles in six hours  and I also knew that nothing on earth would delay you when your father 's health , probably his life , was at stake .
Well , '' added he , `` what says Mr. Grant , will he come ? ''
`` Yes , sir , he will be here by eight o'clock in the morning or before  in the mean while , I find that Mr. Clare has ordered you to take some medicine that he has sent . ''
`` And has he not ordered any thing to be done to my leg  no fomentation or any other thing ? ''
`` No , sir . ''
`` Why then , '' said he , `` I fear he gives it up for lost  because , unless something is done to stop the inflammation that is going on there , a mortification must follow '' -- and having said these words he sunk back upon his pillow , resigned and composed .
His leg was not quite so painful as it had been  for the fact was , that mortification had actually taken place , when Mr. Clare first saw it in the morning .


My father now said that , after my very great exertion , in riding such a distance , which he had reckoned up , while I was gone , as being eighty-six miles , rest must be necessary for me  and he therefore did not choose that I should ride any farther , for fear I should make myself ill also  otherwise , he felt a great desire to know how the reaping went on , as neither of us had seen the reapers since they began .
I gaily told him I was not at all exhausted  and that if such a thing could in the least add to his pleasure or his comfort , I knew that I could ride to Bath and back again without any difficulty .
I added , that as to the reapers , I had anticipated what would be his wish , and consequently , before I came in , I had ordered the saddle to be put upon his horse  and , after my sister had given me some tea , I intended to see all the reapers , both upon his farms and my own -- `` Ah , my dear son ! ''
he replied , `` it must be all yours during this harvest at any rate  no cure that can be performed upon me will enable me to get about during this harvest .
I am delighted with your alacrity to please me  and , as I have full confidence in you , and know your capability , I shall not give myself one moment 's uneasiness about the business . ''


Having taken some tea with my father and sister , I mounted the third horse , and rode round the fields , and saw every one of the reapers and other servants .
I recollect that there were seventy-six reapers at work in my father 's fields , and twenty-eight in mine , making in the whole one hundred and four persons , who had that day begun reaping our wheat crop , which was remarkably fine .
I had an opportunity , for the first time since I left home , which was about half-past three in the morning , to call and see my wife  of whom I had not had a sight , though I had passed by the house both in going and returning to Devizes and back , and to Bath and back , four times during the day .
I informed her of the true situation of my father , and told her that I should return and sit up with him all night .


By the time I had performed my task it was between nine and ten o'clock , and I had literally tired the third horse .
My poor father objected so strongly to my sitting up , that about twelve o'clock I retired to an adjoining room to rest myself , but to sleep I found it impossible .
I rose again at four , and after I had enquired how he had passed the night , I rode again round the farms more to pass away the hours previous to the arrival of the surgeons and the physician than for any other purpose .
A little before eight , according to their appointment , they drove into the yard in Mr. Grant 's chariot with four horses .
Oh God !
what a moment for me !
I shall never forget the agitated state of my mind , divided as it was between hope and fear .
At the same instant that I hastened them to the bed-room of my father , I would have given any thing to have delayed the fatal , much-dreaded decision .
But no time was to be lost .
Seeing the agony in which I stood speechless before them , Mr. Grant took me by the hand , and said , `` my good young friend , you must exert all your courage , and be prepared for the worst  my old friend Clare has given me such a description of your father 's leg , that I have no hopes of a favourable result . ''
Old Dr. Hill , the physician , now said , `` come !
come !
Mr. Grant , do you bear up  do not make the young man down-hearted , `` there are a great many slips between the cup and the lip . ''
It is not so bad as you imagine . ''
Good Heaven !
what a strong recollection I at this moment have , of the look of scorn and contempt which Mr. Grant bestowed upon the old Devizes physician !
He did not utter a word , but his look was enough .


Having informed my father of their arrival , they all three proceeded to his bed-room  a most awful anxious moment for me , and I never before prayed so devoutly for any thing in my life , as I now did for a propitious decision from Mr. Grant .
After the first salutation was over , the surgeons began to examine his leg  and Mr. Grant pointed out to Clare a deep red streak , that passed up the inside of his thigh , quite up to the body .
He asked my father whether he had any objection to have his leg opened  to which my father promptly replied `` not in the least .
I beg you will do any thing you think proper . ''
Mr. Grant then said it would be necessary to make a pretty deep incision , to ascertain the state of the inflamed part .
`` Proceed as you please , sir , '' said my father , `` I am quite capable of bearing pain . ''
Mr. Clare then made an incision in the calf of his leg , three inches deep , quite down to the bone , and five or six inches in length .
The flesh appeared as black as mahogany , and very little blood flowed .
This my father bore without the least flinching .
Some cloths were wrapped round it , and they desired him to lie down , and compose himself a little .
`` I will lie down , sir , '' he replied , `` but I hope that I do not appear discomposed . ''
All this while I stood like a statue , as pale as ashes , watching every look of Mr. Grant with intense anxiety .
`` Well , sir , '' said Mr. Grant , `` I will consult with Mr. Clare , who understands these matters quite as well as I do , and , in fact , as well as any surgeon in England , and we will settle the course you shall follow .
Your leg is in a dreadful state , but we will see what can be done for you . ''


Mr. Grant now took my father by the hand , and was wishing him good morning , when my father , holding his hand , firmly raised himself upon his bed , and said , `` I am very much obliged to you , Mr. Grant , for the trouble you have taken to come such a long journey to see me  and my son will most cheerfully remunerate you .
There is , however , one thing more which I shall request you to do before you leave me .
It is that you will give me your candid and honest opinion of my situation .
Have you any well-grounded hopes of my recovery ?
If you have not , you will confer a great obligation upon me by saying so . ''
Doctor Hill , who was standing at the other side of the bed , prevented any answer , by saying , `` Come !
come !
Mr. Hunt , you are low spirited  come !
come !
you must not indulge in any such notions  you will do very well again by and by . ''
Upon which my father , turning indignantly round , replied with a firm and rather strong voice , `` stand back , and keep your peace for once , Dr. Hill , and do not expose yourself -- I am neither low-spirited , nor so weak as to be put off by your common-place cant .
Have the modesty , at any rate , to listen with patience to what I am going to say to Mr. Grant , who appears to be a sensible , honest man , or else be so obliging as to leave the room . ''
Then , turning back to Mr. Grant , he said , `` I have , sir , contrived so to live as not to fear to die .
You are a perfect stranger to me  but you have the character of knowing your profession well , and also of being a humane man  at least my son informs me that you have been induced to take this journey more from humanity than for your fee .
I have therefore , a perfect reliance upon your judgment with respect to my case  you see that I have nerve to hear my fate  and it will be a great relief to my mind , and it will afford me even comparative consolation , to be informed of it from your lips , rather than be left in suspence .
Nay , I appeal to your humanity , to speak the truth boldly at once , to save my poor afflicted son the pain of communicating it . ''


Having said this , my father paused , to receive a reply .
Oh !
what an agonising , heart-rending moment was this for me !
Mr. Grant took my father 's hand , and seriously delivered himself as follows : -- `` After what you have said , sir  after the calm and manly appeal which you have made to me , and with so laudable and rational a desire to spare pain to the feelings of your son , I should be doing an injustice to my own sense of duty , and be imposing upon you , if I were to withhold any longer my honest opinion  which is this , that , as a mortification had taken place , for many hours even before Clare first saw you , and as it has approached your body , I can not , unless some very extraordinary interposition of Providence shall occur , see any hopes of your recovery . ''


My father , who , during this sad speech , had looked him firmly in the face , calmly and rather cheerfully replied , `` I thank you , sir , most sincerely .
I am content !
the Lord 's will be done !
Pray take care of my poor son . ''
The last words of the Doctor had produced such an awful effect upon me , that , unperceived by them , I had sunk senseless into a chair .


As soon as I recovered a little I was led out of the room , more dead than alive  and even at this moment the words of Mr. Grant vibrate afresh upon my ear .
Though I had anticipated such an answer , and had , indeed , no reason to expect any other , yet when the blow came , it was much more stunning , much more overwhelming , than I had any idea of .
I was dumb with sorrow  I now , by cruel experience , understood , what dumb sorrow meant .
I could neither speak nor give vent to my feelings by tears .
The agony of my poor sister , who saw enough to convince her what was the fatal sentence , and who immediately went into violent hysterics , was the first thing that recalled me to myself .
The sight of her distress roused me from my lethargy  yet it was with a sort of stupor that I moved to her assistance , and when she had in some degree recovered , my brain was still whirled round and bewildered .
I had received such a shock that all the world appeared as one vacant blank before my eyes .


Mr. Clare , at length , called my attention to the wish of Mr Grant to return  and the chaise being brought to the door , he reminded me of the doctor 's fee .
I asked Clare what would be proper  to which he replied that twenty guineas would be handsome .
I , however , gave him thirty , with which he expressed himself very well satisfied  and on his departure he politely requested that he might be numbered among my friends .
I made my friend Clare promise to return in the evening  and poor Hill , who had eyed with a mixture of surprise and envy the large sum paid to Mr. Grant , received his two guineas for his two visits , and left the place , cursing , I have no doubt , Mr. Grant in his heart , for having spoken out so plainly as to render his future visits useless , and thereby deprived him of three or four more guineas in fees .


The moment they were gone I returned to my father , endeavouring to suppress my sorrow as much as possible .
Taking me by the hand , he said , most tenderly , `` My dear son , though I do not feel myself weak , yet , as we must part so soon , pass as much of your time with me as you conveniently can  for I feel at present in very sound mind , and I shall be enabled to give you some good advice , which I hope will be of lasting service to you  and , as it will be given at such a time as this , I am sure that it will sink deep into your heart .
In the first place you must not give way to sorrow  for you must be a father to your sister , and to your unfortunate little brothers , who are at school in London .
I shall not for one moment repine upon my own account .
I am not afraid to meet a merciful Creator  he is not the implacable being that some find it their interest to represent him .
I always have had , and shall , to the last , continue to have , full and implicit confidence in his loving kindness and mercy .
Be you , therefore , calm and temperate in your grief , and consider that you have a great duty to perform .
It must be your task to comfort your father in his last moments , when , perhaps , by the exhaustion of his bodily powers , he may become weak in mind .
If this be the Divine will , which , however , may Heaven avert , be it your care to soothe , to comfort , and to cherish  and , if possible , collect and controul my wandering senses .
Promise me that you will not leave me long at a time .
In you I place my trust , and I know you will not deceive me . ''
I solemnly assured him that I would not leave the house .
`` Nay , [ '' ] said he , `` do not say so  all our large farms , with two or three hundred servants , require your attendance , sometimes  but do not leave me long at a time .
I feel no symptoms of my approaching end .
Send for your wife .
She will comfort and be a good companion for your sister , and will assist her to nurse me .
I know that you will all make me as comfortable as you can while I remain here . ''
To which I replied , by entreating him not to doubt my affectionate attention .


Mr. Clare and Mr. Grant had both told me that they thought it impossible that he could live more than three days at the most , as the mortification had approached the vital parts .
-- As he was a very hearty strong man , with a sound constitution , it was possible that he might live full three days  but , nevertheless , as some change might bring on his dissolution much sooner , he ought , they said , to lose no time in settling his affairs .
He , himself , began on this subject , by saying , `` You know that I made my will since your mother 's death , and I see no cause to alter the distribution of my property .
I have dealt fairly by all my children .
You will possess the manor and estate of Glastonbury , by heirship , in addition to what I have given you .
I wish to make a codicil , to appoint you a trustee , in the place of one of those whom I appointed when you were a minor . ''
My uncle Powell , my mother 's brother , who was named as a trustee , and his attorney , were , therefore , sent for , and the necessary alteration was made without delay  and without giving my father any trouble , or uneasiness whatever .


As the mortification encreased , his leg grew less painful , and in the night he had some sweet sleep  but I could not be prevailed upon to leave his bed-side for a moment .
I devoured every syllable that fell from his lips  and I thought I had suffered the greatest loss if he required any thing , and I was not upon the spot to furnish him with it .
My sister was quite knocked up  nature was over-powered  and as I now found the assistance of Mrs. Hunt to be absolutely necessary , she was sent for in the morning .
Without her we should have been greatly at a loss  for my poor sister was now more in need of being nursed herself than able to assist in nursing my father , whom we contrived to keep perfectly easy and free from any serious pain till his death .
His amazing strength of constitution went beyond the calculation of the doctors  for he lived four days and nearly five nights , after the mortification had visibly passed into his body .
During the whole of this time , even to the very last , he was perfectly sensible , and not till he ceased to exist , did he cease to possess all his faculties in the soundest state .


The next morning after Mr. Grant had been , and confirmed his approaching end , he begged to have my sister 's piano forte brought up into his bed room  and when he grew fatigued with giving me his kind admonitions , he was much pleased and refreshed by my sister 's playing and singing .
He was always passionately fond of music , and was a tolerable amateur himself , and it appeared to give him as much pleasure as ever to hear her play and sing `` Angels ever bright and fair , '' c. c. Sacred music was mostly his choice upon this occasion , yet he would sometimes request a lively and cheerful air .
These tunes frequently lulled him into a sweet sleep , which he now and then enjoyed for an hour at a time  during which period I never failed to watch over him with the most pious care , never suffering him to be disturbed upon any occasion .


During the whole of this time he talked of his approaching dissolution with the greatest calmness and composure  and he gave orders how he would be buried , and named those of his servants who should carry him to the church , to lay him by the side of his dear Elizabeth .
He often repeated Pope 's universal prayer , and frequently expressed his gratitude that he did not feel as his beloved wife Elizabeth had done at her decease , the moment of which he greatly lamented was clouded with doubts and fears  a circumstance which he had always attributed to bodily weakness  and he prayed devoutly to the author of his being not to suffer his mind to be impaired while he had life in his body .
He felt that he had lived the life of an honest man , and had never failed in strictly doing his duty towards his neighbours  he declared that he had gone regularly to church , as an example to his servants and his family , but believed that one private act of devotion was more acceptable in the eyes of a benificent and all-wise divinity , than any mere outward form of public worship .
It was , he said , the greatest consolation to him in his last trial , to reflect that he had been honest and upright in all his dealings , and that in his conduct to his fellow creatures , he had uniformly kept in view the sublime precept of `` Do unto others as you would they should do unto you . ''
This , he said , was his chief consolation in the hour of trial  and he most emphatically urged us to follow his example , particularly in that respect , as `` honesty was the best policy . ''
Recalling to his memory and mentioning all the little menial errors that he had committed , he assured us that they gave him not the least uneasiness  that God was too wise , too just , too good , and too forgiving , to record such faults , and to make his creatures suffer for them where they had not been vicious and premeditated .


In this way , for four days , he spent the close of his existence , principally with me  urging and inculcating every good , honest , and noble principle  cautioning me against the effects likely to result from my great enthusiasm , and pointing out to me the path which he thought would lead to happiness , honour , and renown  and he constantly offered up the most pious and devout thanks to Heaven , for having permitted him to remain so long after he had received notice of his approaching dissolution , as to enable him to give me so much good advice .
He anticipated that I should do well and prosper in the world , if my daring independent spirit did not lead me into difficulties  he continued to express great doubts about the prudence of my remaining in the yeomanry cavalry  he said that he had always dreaded some great evil would arise out of it to me  and he submitted whether it would not be much to my advantage to leave it .
His death , would , he said , be a most ample reason for my quitting it , as I should have such a large business upon my hand , that it would require every moment of my time to attend to it .
`` And if you want an excuse , '' added he , `` say it was one of the last wishes of your father that you should do so  but recollect , my dear son , I do not bind you down to any promise of the sort  I only throw out this hint , if you choose to make an excuse .
I must , however say , that an honourable and brave man , should never think it necessary to make any excuse for doing that which be deems right and proper .
You will recollect these observations and feel their justice , after I am dead and gone  when you will have no sincere friend to advise and admonish you .
I own I wish I could have lived another year or two for your sake  as we were now just begun to live as father and son ought to live , upon the most friendly footing .
You would have assisted and protected me in my old age  and I know , and you will so feel , that I should have been of the most important service to you .
You decide too hastily  you are quick and impetuous  your young hot blood leads you on incautiously into unnecessary dangers and difficulties .
The truth is , you are young  and therefore I would not have you otherwise disposed than you are .
I have long discovered a noble generous spirit to be the ruling passion of your soul  and all your faults even result from an amiable and a praiseworthy enthusiastic desire to excell .
You only want prudence and experience to direct you  but that experience which you might have acquired from me you must now purchase .
To have lived to direct , to advise and admonish you , would have been a great happiness to me .
But the Lord 's will be done !
I have given you a good education  I have made you a complete master of your business , as a farmer  God has blessed you with a strong mind , and a sound body  and few young men of your age will begin the world with brighter prospects  you will have a large business upon your hands , that will keep you out of idleness  though , in fact , I do not suspect you of any tendency to idleness  but I hope this fine business will keep you out of mischief .
You must be a father to your poor little brothers , who are so unfortunate as to require double care .
Your uncle Powell has promised that he will take care of your sisters  but be sure and give them repeated advice not to be led away , against their better judgment , to adopt his form of religion , that of a Quaker .
I have not the slightest objection to the Quakers  but I have always found the church of England quite good enough for those who have been bred up in that persuasion .
I do not think any one would be justified in dissenting from the church of England till he has acted up to all the Christian precepts of that church .
But now , that we are on the subject of religion , and the church of England , mark what I say upon my death bed .
It will , I know , sink deeper into your young mind than any thing that I could have said at any other time .
Do not , my dear son , for one moment imagine that I wish to inculcate the idea that , as I approach my Maker , I profess to believe all those mummeries that I have hitherto dared to disbelieve and dispute .
You know that I never joined in Saint Athanasius 's Creed .
All such unchristian denunciations I ever held , and I still hold , to be blasphemous impositions .
Many of the forms of the church also are superstitious and ridiculous  but the moral precepts of the Christian faith are wise and good .
I have never meddled in religious discussions  I have always formed my own opinion to the best of my judgment and belief  and if in any of those opinions I have erred , I have not the least shadow of doubt upon my mind that a wise , just and beneficent Creator and father of all , will pardon my errors .
I do not feel the least disposed now to investigate , or puzzle myself , in my last moments , in a vain endeavour to enquire whether I have been right or wrong  the Lord 's will be done , say I , and may he in his goodness assist you to continue an honest and an upright man amongst your fellow men .
Do your duty by your neighbour , and worship your Maker agreeably to the dictates of your own conscience , and you will live happy  and when the time comes ( for , recollect that it must come with ALL ) and when it comes with you , my dear son , may you be as well prepared as your father is to enter the presence of your Maker . ''


I have , I think , shewn the reader enough to impress him with the idea of the incessant pains , the unwearied exertion , of my excellent parent , to inculcate the true principles of honour , morality , and religion upon the mind of his son .
He well knew that what he said upon these matters , at such an awful period , was sure to make a lasting impression upon the memory of his son : for whose benefit he appeared to live even to the last .
When , at times , he became exhausted with his anxiety to serve me , he would say , `` now , my dear boy , go down stairs and get some refreshment , while I meditate , while I commune with God in private , and silently adore his goodness .
Come again soon  but , in the mean time , do not let any one disturb my meditations . ''
When I crept quietly back again , I sometimes found him with his hands clasped , still in the act of silent prayer .
On seeing me , he would cease , and say , `` it is all well  '' and then he would return to the most interesting discourse with me .
At other times I found him in the most sweet and delightful sleep  his countenance as placid as in the most happy and prosperous moments of his life  as if he were blessed with health and spirits .
He always awoke cheerful , and apparently refreshed , and would relate some delightful dream which he had had , frequently consisting of a happy meeting and heavenly conversation with his dear departed Elizabeth , my mother .
God of heaven !
what did I not feel in those interesting and trying moments !
Any weeping , any gloomy sorrow in his presence , he forbad  for he said we all ought to bless the hour , and to rejoice to see a beloved parent upheld at such a moment by his Creator , so as to be enabled to die with such serenity and firmness , and to set such an example to his children .
In this manner passed away three days and nights after Mr. Grant had pronounced it impossible for my father to recover .
As all the medical men had agreed that it was not probable that he would survive more than two days , I had every now and then a faint hope that the strength of his constitution would overcome the mortification .
Mr. Clare , however , who attended daily , repressed that hope by pronouncing it impossible for my father to live .
His predictions were verified by the event .
On the morning of the fourth day it was evident that my parent grew weak  his voice failed him , he had much greater difficulty in holding any conversation , and his breathing was much less frequent  yet he was calm and cheerful , and felt pleasure in hearing my sister play upon the piano-forté , which caused him a short slumber after each tune .


About the middle of the day , he desired to be alone with me  and taking my hand , with a benignant smile , he said , in a weak but tender tone , `` my dearest son , your father 's time for quitting this mortal life is arrived .
I find that the hand of death is upon me . ''
After a pause of half a minute , to recover from the exertion , he continued , `` you will soon lose your best and truest friend .
I would not wish to make you a misanthropist  I would not , because it is unnatural at your age , have you suspect all mankind  but of this you may rest assured , that there are few , very few in the world , who will not flatter you if they can get any thing by it .
There are none who will tell you of your faults with the candid kindness of a friend  some , indeed , may taunt you with them , in order to irritate and provoke you  but , before another sun rises , you will have lost the only one who must be naturally anxious to advise and admonish you with a pure and disinterested friendship .
Young and sanguine as you are , you will be thrown upon the wide world , to think and act for yourself  but your prospects are bright , your father has done his best for you , and in his last moments he will pray for your success and happiness in life .
My only sorrow is at leaving your little unfortunate brothers .
You must be a father to them , and I have left them an ample fortune , to repay you well for any trouble you may have with them .
I know you will be a kind brother to them , and I hope , in return , that they will be grateful to you .
I have little dread on your account , for though you are young , yet God and your father have done their duty towards you so bountifully , that there is every prospect of your doing well in the world .
I only wish I could have lived to have seen you well out of the yeomanry cavalry !
Recollect my last words -- you will always find ` honesty the best policy  ' therefore always ` do unto others as you would that they should do unto you , ' and take care so to live that , when death calls , you may be prepared to follow him , as I now am , in humble but confiding hope , and without repining . ''


My poor father held me firmly by the hand and looked me steadily in the face , though his eyes grew dim , and his voice was so interrupted by the difficulty of respiration , which now much increased , that he was greatly exhausted .
At length he sunk gently back upon his pillow , ejaculating `` the Lord 's will be done  the Lord be praised . ''
His eyes were fixed and death had overspread his face with a sombre hue  he held my hand about three hours , but never spoke more  lying all the while perfectly still , apparently without the least pain or uneasiness , either in body or mind .
In this state he continued till near eight o'clock in the evening , of the 27th of August , 1797 , when the best of fathers drew his last breath , and gently slid into the arms of death , without a groan , a struggle , or even a sigh , to the inexpressible grief of his affectionate and deeply-afflicted son .
His hand still retained its hold of mine , and I now gave vent to that unbounded sorrow which I had heretofore suppressed and smothered , because I would not make him uneasy .
It is to me in my dungeon a source of never-failing pleasure to reflect that all that it was possible for one man to do to save the life of another I did , to save his life  and at any one moment , after his doom was pronounced by the doctors , I would have sacrificed my life , nay , if I had had a thousand lives I would have died by torture a thousand times , to have saved his life .
But he had taught me not only by precept , but by example , to bow to the will of God .
There never lived a better man , nor a better father  nor did ever a son sustain a greater loss than I did by his death .
It has been said , with great truth , that he was the second founder of his family .


After he drew his last breath , I remained kneeling by his bed-side absorbed in grief and silent prayer for nearly an hour , before any one of the family came to me .
At length my wife came to my aid , and being roused by her I performed the sad sacred office of closing his eyes for ever .


I shall not make any apology to the reader , for having dwelt so long on this melancholy scene .
I trust that it will prove one of the most instructive parts of my history .
In fact , and in truth , I would not write another line , if I did not fondly hope that almost every part of my life may prove instructive , as well as entertaining , to my fellow creatures and the rising generation  particularly to those who may embark upon the wide , rough , boisterous , and dangerous ocean of politics .
When I recite my own errors , and it has already been seen , that I have committed many and great ones , I am rewarded for the pain I feel in the recollection of them , by the hope that they may prove a beacon and a warning to those young persons who may do me the honour to read these pages  and where they find that the impulse of honourable generous feelings , unguided by prudence , has led me into a wrong course , I trust that the young reader will learn , from my mistakes , how to temper his zeal with that discretion which may enable him to steer clear of those perilous quicksands upon which I have so frequently struck .


What a great misfortune for me was the death of my father !
Before I was yet twenty-four years of age , with a mind unformed , and I may say , in the common acceptation of the phrase , very young of my age  here was I left in the uncontrolled possession of one of the largest farming concerns in the kingdom !
I had a young wife , and a family of my own coming on  and had five sisters and brothers , younger than myself , left without father or mother .
I was immediately obliged to attend to the farms , which had had no master to look over them for the last week , that week the most busy one in the year  and I had likewise to give orders for the funeral of my departed father .
Exertion was indispensable .
It was no use for me to lie down and cry God help me !
Necessity , however painful to my feelings , compelled me to see to every thing , because I had no friend either to do it for me , or even to assist me .
The whole lay upon the hands of myself and my wife , who was of the greatest assistance to my poor sister , who almost sunk under her afflicting loss .


It was fortunately fine weather , and the wheat harvest was nearly finished before my father was buried .
When the awful day of his funeral came , I performed the last sad and solemn office for him , as I had faithfully promised to him that I would , and saw him laid by the side of my poor mother in the silent grave , the tomb and vault of his ancestors , in the chancel of the parish church of Enford , in the county of Wilts .


This melancholy scene made the most lasting impression upon my memory , and such was the effect of the kind benevolent and endearing conversations which I had held with my father , during the four last days of his life , after he knew that he could not survive his illness , that for seven years afterwards , I used in my sleep to hold the most delightful converse in my dreams with the spirit of my beloved parent  in all of which he appeared most anxious for my welfare , and advised , admonished , and kindly cautioned me against every impending evil  so that he was not only the best of fathers when living , but he proved my kind and fostering guardian angel after his death .
No young man ever had better advice bestowed upon him than I had  unceasing kind and paternal advice , as well as the best example .
Nor was any one ever more sensible of the great and irreparable loss be had sustained than I was  or ever more sincerely deplored the loss of a beloved parent , than I did the loss of my father .
Mine was not that sort of sorrow which puts on a gloomy outside , the garb of woe , while the heart beats to a merry tune .
But , though I did not assume any hypocritical outward sorrow , yet I was really and truly most sad at heart .
The constant employment of the body and the full occupation of the mind is , however , always the very best antidote to grief , and those my business furnished me with , to the fullest extent .
When my father died , what he rented , and what he left of his own , was nearly all the tything of Littlecot , as well as Chisenbury farm , and I was in possession of Widdington farm , about two miles distant .
All the farms were now in my occupation , and , as I thought it proper to live more centrical , I took Chisenbury House , a large old-fashioned , handsome mansion  and as soon as I could fit it up and furnish it , I went to reside there .
This was considered by some as being rather an imprudent and extravagant step  for it would require a considerable income to keep up an establishment such as a house like that demanded .
The reader will be able to estimate its size , when I inform him that there were not less than fifty two windows in it to be paid for to the assessed taxes  the number of them , however , I had the prudence to reduce considerably .
But , in spite of all my prudence , it could not , considering the scale on which my arrangements were formed , be otherwise than a very expensive residence .
Still it was not more , perhaps , than I was fairly entitled to , as the profits arising from my large well cultivated farms enabled me to vie with men of five or six thousand a year , in my domestic establishment .
My stables were stored with hunters  my kennels with dogs  my cellars were well stocked with wine and the best old October  and my table always amply furnished the best of viands to my friends .
My wife , who was quite as fond of company as I was , made her female guests uniformly welcome .
We kept a hospitable house , and we never wanted for company to fill it , or a parson to say grace to a good dinner .
At this time we had another daughter born , and every thing went most prosperously with me in the world .
My friend , Dr. Clare of Devizes , who was a sporting man , purchased at Lord Audley 's sale a handsome curricle , which he offered me , and we soon struck a bargain .
Curricles were all the vogue at that time  therefore a dashing young man without a curricle was nothing  and as my wife was a great driver , as well as a good horsewoman , a curricle was almost indispensable .


Let no one suppose , from reading this , that I was become a careless squanderer .
The habits of economy which , almost from my infancy , I lead imbibed in consequence of the example that I had always before my eyes , did not desert me even under these circumstances .
By management I lived as well , kept as good a house , and had my whole establishment so arranged , as to make quite as good an appearance for a thousand or fifteen hundred a year as many persons make who spend more than thrice that sum .
I had at all times plenty of money , and I had every comfort and luxury about me  but in the midst of all this apparent extravagance , I never forgot the poor .
All my servants were well paid and well fed , and I scarcely ever failed to attend the parish pay table , to see that those who held the office of overseer turned no one away , who was really in distress , without affording him relief .
Thus early I gained the character of being the friend of the poor .
I always pleaded the cause of the widow , the orphan , the aged , and infirm  and , being the largest paymaster in the parish to the fund of the poor , I never pleaded in vain .
The idle , the indolent , and the dissolute , I left to fight their own battles  but the infirm , the aged , the widow , and the orphan never fruitlessly sued when I was present , and , as I have just said , I seldom failed to attend  if I did I was sure to hear complaints .
My readers will recollect that I am writing these Memoirs during the life-time of hundreds who can speak to this fact  and I speak of it not as boasting , but with the firm conviction that it can be substantiated by hundreds who lived in the parish , and that there is not one who will contradict it .
The friend of the poor is a title which I earned very early in life , and I hope that I shall deserve to carry it to my grave .
Sorry , however , as I should be to lose this honourable title , I would ten thousand times rather lose it than lose the heart-cheering , soul-inspiring reflection that I have always been their friend not for the name , but for the pleasure I felt in protecting and assisting my less fortunate fellow-creatures , when they were in distress .
It may be said , if you are really so , why not rest satisfied with the pleasure of knowing it ?
Why do you sound your own trumpet , and endeavour to blazon it forth to the world ?
My answer is , because my being incarcerated here for two years and six months has induced me to become my own historian , and I will endeavour to be so faithfully  and I feel that I have need to put upon record all my good qualities , as a set-off to balance my bad qualities .
Of the latter I have disclosed a great many already , and as I proceed I shall have to record still more .
Now , as we are told that charity covers a multitude of sins , if I possess this good quality of charity , and if I prove that I always exercised it , I think I should not be doing common justice to myself or to my friends , if out of false modesty I were to keep silence .
Those who have read my work hitherto will not fail to have discovered that , from my early days , I have proved myself to have been animated by an ardent love of country , that I possessed a sort of inherent patriotism , without having at all entered into politics .
A patriot I consider to be a man who is devoted to the laws and constitution of his country in their purity  a defender of the rights and liberties of the people , and one who does his best to promote their happiness and welfare .


Merely possessing the good quality of being charitable , by no means makes a patriot .
Therefore , I am not professing any claim to patriotism , on the ground of my being at that period a friend to the poor .
In the first place , I believe that charity and a sympathy for the sufferings of my fellow-creatures are inherent qualities of my breast  at any rate I know that I felt them in all their purity as long ago as I can remember .
In the next place , I was taught to practice charity by the example of my amiable and excellent mother , who possessed as much christian charity , as well as piety , as any mortal that ever lived  she was , indeed the very milk of human kindness  and although my father taught me to exercise the virtue with more discretion , yet he never checked it .


When my father died he was the Vicar 's churchwarden , as well as the principal overseer of the parish of Enford  and , of course , as I came into possession of his estates and farms in that parish , I continued in the parochial offices , as his substitute , till the next Easter .
During that time it was a severe winter , and I exercised my own discretion , and without any ceremony raised the pay of the poor , particularly of the aged and infirm , those whose labours were done .
I found their pay at two shillings and sixpence per week each  I raised it to three and sixpence each , and in some instances , as in cases of infirmity , still higher  and , when some of the parishioners mentioned their objections , to the measure , I declined to reduce the allowance , but offered to pay out of my own pocket the advance which I had made , in case of my conduct being disapproved of at a meeting or vestry .
No meeting , was , however , called  nor in this large parish , where the population is above six hundred , was there any complaint made to the magistrates by any pauper against me during the whole time I was in office .


When Easter came , I being the largest paymaster in the parish , it was my turn , by rotation , to serve the office two years longer , and my name was placed at the head of the list that was sent in to the magistrates for their approval .
The practice is , for the parishioners , at the annual Easter meeting , to send in a list of three or four names , to give the magistrates a choice in the appointment of two : but as the two names that are placed first and second are those that are considered by the resident proprietors as the proper persons , and whose turn it is to serve the office , the magistrates seldom or ever , without some very substantial reason , pass them over and appoint any of the others , whose names are placed , as a mere form , below them .
In this parish , which was known to be well conducted , the circumstance of passing over the recommendation of the principal inhabitant was never known to have happened .
My name being the first , I had no doubt but that I should be obliged to remain in this disagreeable and troublesome office .
I was , however , deceived .
My disposition to give to the poor more liberal relief than had been heretofore granted to them , had been too evident during the short time that , in the winter season , I had been in office .
The considerable and permanent advance that I had made to all the old people in the parish , who were no longer able to labour , had got wind , and this was canvassed amongst the magistrates , who were all farmers , some of them very large farmers in the neighbourhood  and who should be the magistrates of this district , but the valorous officers of the gallant Everly troop , Messrs. ASTLEY , POORE , and DYKE , the latter being nearly as large a farmer as myself , and employing a great number of labourers !
It never entered into my head for a moment that I should be objected to  on the contrary , I should rather have expected that this worthy bench of JUSTASSES would have been pleased with the opportunity of fixing me in what was generally considered a troublesome and harassing office  one which in such a large parish would require a considerable portion of a man 's time to execute it properly : even when there was least to be done , it occupied three or four hours every other Sunday to attend in the vestry room , at the pay table , to hear the complaints and to relieve the wants of those who were in distress .
This I had never neglected , nor left , as others had frequently done , to the care of servants .


The parish books were returned from the justices , and lo and behold !
my name was passed over , and a little apron farmer was appointed in my stead .
At the first view of the case , I felt a weighty responsibility and trouble taken , as it were , off my shoulders  and I was , as I conceived , released from a great deal of labour which I had anticipated  and I heartily despised the petty malice , the little dirty insult , intended me by the magistrates , who , in their desire to annoy me , had in fact rendered me a great service .
On my speaking of it in this way to my old housekeeper , who first brought me the news , she archly addressed me as follows : -- `` Ah , sir !
I know your heart too well to believe that this will save you any trouble .
Though you are not in office , yet as you pay so much towards the relief of the poor , and feel so much for them , you will not desert them .
You will , I am sure , still attend the pay table and see justice done them at any rate . ''
This was quite enough for me .
While she was speaking , a thousand ideas crowded my imagination , and like lightening , I resolved to put them into execution .
I said nothing , but the next Sunday , after the service of the day was over , I attended the pay table , as I had constantly done while I held the office .
It was so unusual for any one to attend but the two overseers , that it was instantly noticed by the poor who were in waiting .
I sat silent , but that was quite enough  every one was paid the same as they had been the week before , when I was the paymaster  though I knew that it had been agreed upon to dock them .


There was scarcely a single servant of my own whose name was upon the books  for my wish was , that they should always earn sufficient by their labour to support their families , without going to the parish .
While I was in office myself , I acted on this system , without making any remonstrance with those farmers who paid their labourers about half price , and sent them to the parish for the remaining sum which was required for their support .
But I now made up my mind not to bear this grievance any longer , without an effort to remove it .
I , therefore , got the overseers to call a special meeting at the vestry , to take these matters into consideration .
At this meeting I proposed that every farmer in the parish should raise his servants ' wages , to enable them to keep their families  at any rate those who were able bodied men .
There was scarcely any objection made to this , and it was carried unanimously .
But I soon found that this measure was eluded , and of course would not answer .
Several of the farmers turned off half their servants , and others all of them , and hired servants out of the parish , whom they could procure for less wages .
I , however , always persisted in engaging my servants to earn enough to keep themselves and families without going to the parish  which most of them did , till all sorts of provisions were risen to double if not treble their usual price .


One thing I shall here forestall , which is the fact that I continued for nine years afterwards to occupy a very great portion of the parish , and consequently to pay a great portion of the parish rates  but , though my name was placed at the head of the list and sent in to the magistrates , every Easter during that time , yet I was never appointed the overseer of the poor  and this because I had set an example of too great liberality towards them when I was in office .
Notwithstanding this , I never failed to advocate , and with success , the cause of the aged , the infirm , the widow , and the orphan , not only in my own parishes , but also in those surrounding me  and every act of oppression that was practised in the district where I lived was always communicated to me , and as far as I had it in my power I obtained redress for the oppressed .
I very soon , therefore became an object of suspicion and dread amongst the petty tyrants of that district  and by them I was denominated `` a busy meddling fellow  '' but as a set off to this , I received the thanks , the blessings of the poor , and the love of my servants , whom I looked upon as my friends and neighbours .
I had as much work done for my money as any man  I paid my servants well  but I did what was of much more consequence to my interest .
I treated them with kindness , and addressed them as fellow-creatures and fellow-freemen  instead of doing as many did , and which is unhappily much too frequently the practice , to treat labourers and servants as if they were brutes and slaves .
By these means I managed a very large business with the greatest ease imaginable .
My servants looked up to me as a friend and protector  as one who was at all times ready to stand forward to shield them from any oppression  and , on the other hand , I placed the greatest confidence in them to guard my property and my interest : I was seldom deceived  for I not only found them faithful at that time , but they are grateful even to this day .
All this I attribute solely to my always treating them with kindness and justice .
No part of their affection did I ever obtain by any unfair or surreptitious means .
I never encouraged indolence , idleness , or profligacy of any sort , and an habitual drunkard I never kept in my service .


Contrary to my father 's advice , I still continued in the Marlborough Troop of Yeomanry Cavalry .
His last words were , however , quite prophetic as to the danger that I was in , by remaining amongst a set of men whose notions were so very far from being actuated by a pure love of country .
Still , as the threat of invasion continued to be held up to the country as likely to be executed , I could not make up my mind to quit their ranks .
I felt an ardour to be one of the first to meet a foreign foe , if ever they dared to invade us , and I therefore continued to join the troop as often as it was convenient  and as I was perfectly acquainted with my duty , and resolved to perform it , I was never once fined for any breach of the rules or regulations , which were made and agreed to for the guidance of the members of the troop  and I was upon particular good terms with the commander of it , Lord Bruce , the eldest son of the Earl of Aylesbury , who always treated me with polite attention .


The officers of the Everly Troop of Yeomanry had , as they thought , offered me an insult , and one which I had no power to resent  they were his Majesty 's Justices of the Peace , and if they chose to mix up their revenge with their duty of conservators of the peace , I had no power to prevent it , nor , as they kept their own council , could I ever remonstrate .
Aware , as I was , of the insult intended by their passing over my name  yet , as I was glad to be out of the office , and had taken such a course as would enable me to protect the poor from any partial or unjust treatment , and as I still was appointed the Vicar 's Churchwarden , I felt little or no resentment on that account .
I had expected neither candour , liberality nor justice from them , and they had not disappointed me  I was therefore quite indifferent on that score .
But as my father always had a sort of presentiment that something would turn out unpleasant to me before I got quit of the volunteer service , I was exceedingly guarded in all my movements in the Marlborough troop  and was particularly careful never to omit any part of my duty , or to do any thing in violation of the rules or regulations  and I believe that I was almost the only man in the troop that had not been fined over and over again .
In fact , as the fines were very moderate -- for instance , I believe it was only half a crown for being absent from the field days , and not even that if there were a reasonable excuse for non-attendance -- they did not inspire the members with much dread .
This was the only punishment for non-attendance .


In the midst of all my fancied security , a circumstance , however , occurred that proved all my father 's prognostications to be well founded .
The reader will not have forgotten that I was become an expert sportsman  and , agreeable to my usual enthusiasm in all that I undertook , he will not be surprised to hear that I was also become what is called a good shot .
During the month of September I had killed one hundred and twenty brace of partridges , and I was engaged to take the first day 's pheasant shooting , on the first of October , with my friend and comrade , Mr. Thos .
Hancock , the banker , of Marlborough .
Lord Aylesbury , the proprietor of Marlborough Forest , possessed very extensive estates and large manors round this district , almost the whole of which he made one large preserve of game  but , as it was necessary that he should keep his tools , the members of the corporation of his rottenest of rotten close boroughs , Marlborough , in good humour , he allotted one small manor , at a distance of several miles from his principal preserve , where all his tenants and the inhabitants of the town of Marlborough and their friends , were allowed to shoot and sport without interruption , whenever they pleased .
To this place my friend Hancock had promised to take me for a day 's sport  he himself being , as will presently appear , a very poor shot .
I went to Mr. Hancock 's to sleep the night previously , and , like a true and keen sportsman , I was up and dressed , eager for the sport , before it was day-light .
In fact , it was necessary that we should be early , as there was a host of cockney and other sportsmen , who always sallied forth from Marlborough on that day  and as the manor was not large the ground was generally pretty thickly occupied before sun rise on the first of October  for it will be recollected that , on these gala days , `` tag , rag , and bobtail , '' all had leave , whether they were qualified or not , and all who professed to be sportsmen hurried there , whether they had certificates or not .


My friend and myself , attended by our servants , mounted our horses , and as we rode along we passed two or three parties who were on foot , and who had got the start of us  but we soon reached farmer Edward Vezey 's , of Grove , upon whose farm we intended to take our day 's sport .
As we had ridden a distance of four or five miles the sun was now up , and as we heard several shots fired we put up our horses and proceeded immediately to the field  being too eager sportsmen to wait to take the breakfast which Mrs. Vezey had prepared for us .
The farmer informed us that the game was very plentiful  and when we entered the first stubble field , we saw a nide of fourteen pheasants run into the hedge row .
This was a fine earnest of our sport  and as I had never before been a shooting where they were so plenty , I expressed great anxiety to begin the slaughter without delay .
The farmer , however , checked my ardour , and increased my surprise when he told me that he had ten such nides upon his farm .
The sport began  and , having a double barrelled gun , I killed a brace , a cock and a hen  my friend and the farmer both missed .
The latter requested me not to kill hens , as he would procure me plenty of shots at cocks .
We had with us my dogs , which were staunch and steady , and they were now pointing again .
I brought down a brace of cocks with another double shot .
My friends both missed again , and laughed heartily at each other  particularly when they found that I was sure to kill enough for all the party .
As we proceeded I killed a leash more , so that I had three brace and a half out of the first nide of fourteen .
Several of the others had been marked down , and the farmer said we were sure to find them all again  but I proposed to look for fresh birds , instead of following those which had escaped .
This was agreed to  and , at the further end of the very next field which we entered , we discovered another set running into the hedge row .
When ten o'clock arrived I proposed a cessation of hostilities , that we might retire and take some breakfast  for I declared that I was ashamed to kill any more .
I had had twenty shots , and had bagged nine brace and a half of cocks and one hen pheasant  having been lucky enough , as my dogs brought all their game , to save every bird without a feather being scarcely rumpled .
My friends had thirty shots between them , and had killed one bird  in fact , they were altogether as bad shots as I was a good one .
-- Though , during the whole time , we had not been a quarter of a mile from the house , yet , I believe that while I was out , I heard at least a hundred shots fired -- so thickly were we surrounded with the rotten borough sportsmen and their friends .
After this we returned to the farmer 's house , where Mrs. Vezey had provided an excellent breakfast , not only for us but for my dogs , which were caressed as prodigies  and the game , consisting of ten brace of cock pheasants and a hen , was spread in triumph on the floor .


Having enjoyed such a breakfast as keen sportsmen are accustomed to take , in the course of which we talked over the feats of the morning , and bestowed many well earned encomiums upon the staunchness and sagacity of my dogs , my friends proposed to start again for the field , till dinner time .
I , however , positively refused to budge an inch , declaring that I would not fire another shot that day .
I was , I told them , more than content with having killed ten brace of pheasants in one day , and therefore I would remain at home with Mrs. Vezey , till they returned .
They tried hard to prevail upon me to accompany them , but I resisted their entreaties : they then endeavoured to rally me out of my plan , but I had made up my mind not to go out again , and consequently all their bantering was of no avail .
I was not to be moved even by the good humoured jokes of the farmer , about my remaining alone with his wife  and , finding me to be immoveable , they set out by themselves .
At length they returned , bringing with them one solitary pheasant , though they acknowledged that they had had ten shots each  and they were afterwards candid enough to confess that the dogs had actually caught that .
Nothing daunted by their bad shooting , after they had dined and taken a sufficient quantity of good old stingo , and once more tried in vain to persuade me to bear them company , they sallied forth again , for the evening 's sport  the best time of the day for pheasant shooting .
About eight o'clock they came back , but they had only killed another pheasant , notwithstanding they assured me that they had actually seen above one hundred .
Thus had these two sportsmen only killed three pheasants in the whole day , having had between them upwards of fifty shots  while I had killed ten brace at twenty shots , in about three hours .
Of course I laughed at them heartily  in which I was joined most sincerely by Mrs. Vezey .
I am quite certain that if I had continued in the field , and followed up the sport as my friends did , I should have killed fifty pheasants instead of twenty  and that too without having made them appear much thinned , so plentiful was the game in that country .
After spending a very pleasant evening , we returned to Marlborough , where I slept with my friend Hancock , and shot my way home the next day  having , previously to my setting out , equally divided the game between the three , which was always the case in those friendly parties where I made one of the number .


This account has , I dare say , appeared to the reader to be a digression upon a trivial subject , but I shall now show him that the seemingly trifling circumstance which I have been narrating , led to a very important event of my life .
About four or five days after this , I received a letter from Lord BRUCE , merely saying , `` that my services were no longer required in the Marlborough Troop of Yeomanry , and he , therefore , requested that I would return my sword and pistols by the bearer . ''
I wrote a brief answer , to say that I was astonished at his communication , but that I should attend on the next field-day , for an explanation , and that I should not fail to bring my arms with me .
I own that I was at a loss to conjecture the cause of this unceremonious and laconic epistle of his lordship , and I conjured up a hundred imaginary reasons for this abrupt dismissal of me from his Troop of Yeomanry .
I had been in it for many months  I had never been once fined , or received the slightest reprimand from his lordship or either of the other officers  nor could I recollect any one instance in which I had either failed to perform or neglected my duty as a soldier .
But , though I could not recollect this , I now recollected the last sad foreboding words of my dying father -- `` I only wish I could have lived to see you well out of the Yeomanry Cavalry ! ''


On the following day came a letter from my friend , Hancock , the banker , which unriddled the mystery .
He informed me that he also had received a similar communication from our colonel , Lord Bruce  that he knew of the dismissal which had been sent to me , and that it was a current report amongst the tools of Lord Aylesbury , at Marlborough , that we were dismissed from the troop , because we had shot so many pheasants on the first of October , upon one of his lordship 's manors : what I meant to do on the subject , he was , he said , desirous to know , as he should like to go hand in hand with me  at the same time vowing vengeance against our colonel .
I sent him a copy of the answer which I had written to his lordship , and apprised him that I would be at his house early on the morning of the next field-day , in my uniform , as usual , to accompany him to the place of exercise .


The day arrived , and we rode together to the field where we used to perform our evolutions .
It was upon one of the plains in Savernake Forest , about half a mile from his lordship 's house , but within full view of it .
When we reached the ground the troop was assembling , and we fell into the ranks as formerly , to the utter astonishment of his lordship 's vassals , who composed a great portion of the troop , and who had heard of our being discharged or dismissed , or , in plainer terms , turned out of the troop by the colonel .


After we had remained a little time , one of his lordship 's toad-eaters came to reconnoitre  and , as soon as he discovered us in the ranks , he retreated to carry the astounding intelligence to his patron .
Messages now passed backwards and forwards , from the troop to his lordship 's house , for nearly an hour before he made his appearance  a delay which had never before occurred .
The cause was not only anticipated by Hancock and myself , but by all the members of the troop , and just as I was proposing to march to his lordship , since he did not appear disposed to come to us , he at last made his appearance , riding on his charger with slow and solemn pace .


I have since understood that , during this delay , several messages passed between his lordship 's house , Savernake Lodge , and Tottenham Park , the seat of his father , the Earl of Aylesbury .
Before I proceed , it may not , perhaps , be amiss to make the reader acquainted with the origin of this business .
It turned out that Lord Bruce had been induced to write the aforesaid letters to me and Mr. Hancock at the earnest suggestion of his father , Lord Aylesbury , who had prevailed upon him , much against his own inclination and better judgment , to turn us out of the troop  though he had no other complaint to make against me but that I was too good a shot at his father 's pheasants , and consequently a very unfit person to oppose the French in case of an invasion .
His lordship saw and felt the difficulty of his situation , and for a long time he held out against the entreaties of his father  but the old earl was inexorable , and I am told that his mandate was at length delivered in such a tone and such a manner , that his son did not feel it prudent to resist any longer .
The particulars I subsequently learned from one of the keepers , who was present at the interview when the earl came down from London  which I understand he did on purpose .
Some envious and cringing tool of his lordship 's having heard of our successful day 's sport at Grove , on the first of October , wrote up to him an exaggerated account of it , stating that I , in company with Mr. Hancock , had killed an immense number of pheasants upon his lordship 's manors  but at the same time this worthy intelligencer took care not to state where , and upon what manor we had been sporting .
The old earl , who was the most tenacious , perhaps , about his game of any man in England , no sooner got the letter than he came post from town , in a great passion  and when he arrived at Tottenham , he immediately summoned all his keepers , to demand an account of their conduct for suffering his game to be destroyed in such a way .
It was in vain that they all declared that we had not been into or near any of his preserves  that we had only been shooting upon a distant manor , where his lordship did not even appoint a keeper  and which manor he had expressly appropriated for the sport of the people of his Borough of Marlborough , and their friends .
This was all to no purpose  he would hear no excuse  and as soon as he found that we were in his son 's troop of Yeomanry , he dispatched a messenger for him .
In the mean time he threw himself into the most violent fits of passion with the keepers  so much so , that he was frequently obliged to retire and recruit himself , by reclining upon a sofa , and when he had recovered his strength a little , he returned to the charge again with redoubled violence .
The keeper , who was my informant , assured me that several times they were fearful , or , more correctly speaking , expected that he would break a blood vessel , by giving himself up to such unbounded fury .
It seems the family at Tottenham did not know of the precaution that is used upon such occasions , by a testy old baronet of this county , who does not live a hundred miles from Stoneaston , which I am credibly informed is as follows -- whenever the baronet has one of these sudden and violent paroxysms of passion , which is not very unfrequently , her ladyship prevails upon him to sit down while she pours copious libations of cold water over his head , as the only means of cooling his blood , and saving him from the rupture of a blood vessel upon the brain .
At length his lordship 's son , Lord Bruce , arrived , and the same scene was repeated  and it is said , that nothing but a promise from the gallant Colonel of the Wiltshire Regiment of Yeomanry , that he would immediately write to me and Mr. Hancock , and dismiss us from his troop , would pacify the old earl .
This promise was performed in the way which I have described , by his lordship writing to each of us , to say `` that he had no further occasion for our services . ''
But now to return to the troop , which we left drawn up on the field of exercise : our colonel having at length arrived in the front of the ranks , he continued to direct his eyes quite to the opposite flank to that in which I was , and I could never catch his eye directed even askance towards me .
After a considerable delay , the serjeant pulled out the roll-call , with which he proceeded till he came to the number filled by my name  he passed it over , and began to utter the name of the next man  but the name was scarcely half out of his lips , when I put spurs to my charger , and brushed up so furiously to him , that he reined back several paces ere he stopped  which he had scarcely done , with my horse 's head almost in his lap , before I sternly demanded by whose authority he had passed over my name ?
In a tremulous voice he stammered out , that `` it was done by order of Lord Bruce . ''
I wheeled my horse suddenly round , and his head coming across the serjeant 's breast nearly unhorsed him .
I then rode briskly up to Lord Bruce , who reined his charger back also .
I saluted him as my officer , and firmly demanded by what authority , or for what cause , he had given orders to have my name struck out of the muster-roll ?
Conscious of being about to persist in a dishonourable and unworthy act , after hesitating a little , he said , `` Pray , Sir , did you not receive a letter from me ? ''
I hastily answered , `` Yes , and I am here to demand in person an explanation , and to know what charge you have to make against me , either as a soldier or a gentleman . ''
He now seemed still more confused , and he looked everywhere except in my face .
He then cast his eyes towards the troop , as much as to say , will you not protect me ?
will you not assist to get me out of this dilemma ?
but all was as silent as the grave , and every eye was fixed upon him .
At length he mustered courage to say , `` I make no charge against you  neither do I feel myself called upon to give you any reason for my conduct .
I -- I , as commanding officer of this regiment , have a right to receive any man into it , or to dismiss any man from it , without assigning any reason for my so doing . ''


This was a critical moment of my life .
It is in vain now to lament my want of discretion .
I was young -- I was devoted to the service of my country -- I was a soldier -- I was insulted without the shadow of a pretext to justify the insult -- I was wounded in the most tender part -- my patriotic zeal !
At such a moment I could take no counsel of cold , calculating prudence .
I sternly replied , `` then , my lord , you are no longer my officer -- you have offered me a deliberate insult , which it seems you are not prepared to explain or apologise for  I therefore demand that satisfaction which is due from one gentleman to another  and mark me well , unless you give me that satisfaction I will post you as a coward : '' upon which I took my pistols from the holsters , and was taking my sword from the belt , in order to cast them with defiance at his horse 's feet , these arms being the only thing that I possessed belonging to the government .
Expecting , perhaps , that I was going to make use of them in a different way , his lordship wheeled suddenly round , and clapping spurs to his charger , he was , without once looking behind him , soon out of sight  he having wheeled into the gateway of Savernake Lodge , his lordship 's residence .


While this was passing , I had hurled the sword and the brace of pistols upon the ground , and my friend Hancock had moved out of the ranks and come up to me .
As long as our gallant commander was visible I kept my eyes fixed upon him  and when , on his disappearance , I looked round , I found the whole troop staring with astonishment , which , when they had recovered from a little , was followed by a general laugh .
My friend Hancock was talking loud and in rather a coarse way , which I checked  and then riding up to the centre , in the front of the troop , I addressed my comrades , something in the following strain : -- `` Gentlemen , you have lost your commander , You have seen and heard the cause .
As , however , a troop without a commander is like a ship without a sail or a rudder , I , for once , will give the word .
To the right wheel -- dismiss -- every man to his quarters . ''
Upon this , every man made the best of his way home , and I returned to Marlborough to dine and spend the evening with my friend Hancock .


If I had paid more regard to prudence , and not acted with such precipitation , I should have put this lord so much in the wrong , that he would have had no small difficulty in satisfactorily accounting for his unwarrantable conduct  for , without much vanity , I may say , that there was not a better soldier in the regiment , a man more devoted to the service of his country , and very few indeed , if any , who would have so `` greatly dared , '' in opposing its enemies with his fortune and his life .
The affair , as it was quite natural that it should , soon got wind throughout the county , and particularly amongst the members of the various corps , the ten troops of Yeomanry .
His lordship , however , did not choose to meet me , but rather preferred to settle the point in the courts of law .


In the following term a criminal information was filed against me , for challenging the noble lord and gallant colonel to fight a duel .
As I could not deny the fact , I suffered judgment to go by default , rather than try the question in the Court at Salisbury  my counsel , Mr. Garrow and Mr. Burrough ( the present Judges ) , having informed me , that it was useless to defend it , as I could not plead the provocation , however great , with any chance of obtaining a verdict .
But they were of opinion that , when the affidavits on both sides came to be read , the Court would never call me up for judgment .


In this conclusion they were incorrect  but it is not wonderful that such a conclusion should have been drawn by them  for the late Lord Kenyon expressed a very great unwillingness to proceed , and , term after term , he intimated to my counsel that he hoped I had seen my error , and that I would make an apology to his lordship , which would save the Court the trouble of taking any further steps in the affair .
My counsel answered , that they were not instructed to say whether I would do this or not .
His lordship then stated , that in case I did so before the next term , he understood that the other party would not press for judgment  and Mr. Erskine and Mr. Vicary Gibbs , who were employed against me , added , that so far from wishing to degrade me , they did not even wish that I should make any personal apology to his lordship .
If my counsel would say for me , that I admitted the offence against the law , and regretted the uneasiness that I had given to his lordship , there should be an end to the business .


This offer Lord Kenyon strongly urged my counsel to accept .
Mr. Burrough , who was junior counsel , said , that he knew my feelings upon the subject so well , that he would undertake , although in my absence , to say , that I was perfectly sensible that I had been provoked to offend the laws of my country , and that he was ready to make the most ample apology to those offended laws  but that , as I considered Lord Bruce to be the aggressor , he could not , on my part , undertake to make any apology to him , and he was fearful that I should never be persuaded to do it , though he would communicate the wish of his lordship and the court upon the subject .


This affair had now been before the Court four or five terms , and had been as often put off by Lord Kenyon .
In the mean time , the affair created a considerable sensation amongst all the Yeomanry Corps in the kingdom , and in none more than in the different troops of the Wiltshire Yeomanry  and the conduct of their Colonel was canvassed very freely .
Every gentleman in the regiment , and , in fact , every member of the whole of the volunteer force of the country , felt that it was a common cause , as he might be placed in a similar situation , and , consequently , if I were punished , he himself might be liable to arbitrary and unjust dismissal by a superior officer .
The Court felt and knew this .
Many , very many , members of the Wilts regiments , declared that they would immediately resign if I were sentenced to any fine or imprisonment  and several of my particular friends and acquaintances never failed to , what they called , keep up my spirits , by volunteering this declaration as often as I met them .
Mr. Wm. Tinker , of Lavington , with whom I was particularly intimate , and my friend , Mr. Wm. Butcher , of Erchfont , both unequivocally declared that they would not remain in the regiment another moment after I had received any sentence .


The next term came , and when my counsel were again called upon to know whether they were instructed to make the necessary apology , the answer was , that I was sorry for having violated the laws of my country , but that the illegal and unjustifiable provocation given by Lord Bruce was such , that I had declined to make any submission whatever to his lordship .
Lord Kenyon begged Mr. Garrow to do his duty by his client , and make it for me  and Mr. , now Lord , Erskine also begged his friend Garrow to do it , declaring he would accept the slightest acknowledgment made in his , Mr. Garrow 's , own way  that he felt for me , and did by no means wish to degrade me in the slightest degree .


Mr. Garrow rose , and in a spirited manner said , `` that he thought I had offered quite a sufficient apology to the offended laws of my country  and that he , for one , did not feel that , under all the circumstances , Lord Bruce was entitled to any apology whatever .
If Mr. Hunt had felt disposed , of his own accord , to suffer him to say that he was sorry for having challenged his lordship , he would have done it with all his heart , without believing that the slightest stigma would have been fixed upon that gentleman 's character , either as a soldier or a gentleman .
But Mr. Hunt had a right to have his own feelings upon the subject , and he could not blame him  and so far from making any apology for Mr. Hunt , in his absence , without his consent , he , as his counsel , with all the respect which he entertained for the court , yet would not take upon himself to advise him to do it against his inclination . ''


Mr. Erskine appeared to assent to this  but Mr. Vicary Gibbs jumped up , and with great petulance said , `` Well , then , my lord , we demand that he may be brought up .
We pray the judgment of the court . ''
Lord Kenyon said , it must be so , then  and he fixed a day in the following Michaelmas Term , for me to attend to receive judgment .


As this will bring me to a very important epoch in my life , I shall pass over briefly several minor occurrences , that would have been considered as great events in the history of many persons who have written an account of their own lives .
I shall , however , slightly touch upon one or two circumstances which , within the last month , have been brought to my recollection in the following rather extraordinary way .
A lady , travelling from London to Bath , in her road to Ilchester , accompanied by the gaoler of that place , was questioned by a fellow passenger , a gentleman , how far they were travelling westward ?
The gaoler , naturally enough wishing to disguise his name and occupation , answered , `` I am going to Bath , sir  and that lady is going on to Ilchester . ''
The word Ilchester was no sooner pronounced than his hearer turned to the lady , and said , `` Ah !
that is where Mr. Hunt is confined , and treated with so much severity .
Perhaps you will see him , madam ? ''
She replied that it was possible , as she had some slight knowledge of me , and in return she wished to be informed if he knew me .
He replied that he knew me very well , and had known me ever since I was a boy , and that he also knew my father and all my relations , as well as Mrs. Hunt and her relations .
This naturally enough excited the curiosity of the lady , who knew me personally only , and who was sure to see me , as she was coming to visit a gentleman at the gaol  and as for the gaoler , any information that he could get about my private affairs and my family would be a great treat , he having no knowledge of me except as a public character .
His curiosity was , consequently , whetted to a very keen edge  and my readers will not have much difficulty in believing , that , during the remainder of the journey , Mr. Hunt was a subject of conversation  and I have no doubt that all the actions of my life were canvassed with great freedom and some earnestness .


This , to them , unknown gentleman was Charles Gordon Grey , Esq. of Tracey Park , near Bath , who was as communicative as our passengers could wish  and the lady 's , as well as the gaoler 's , curiosity was gratified almost to satiety .
The lady has , however , candidly confessed to me , that , although Mr. Grey was a great political opponent of mine , yet , altogether , his account of me had prejudiced her in my favour  and she has related to me many anecdotes of my life , that had totally escaped my recollection .
One of them was as follows , of which , I believe , Mr. Grey was an eye-witness , and , therefore , could speak to it with perfect accuracy .
I was , as I have already informed my readers , always an enthusiast in any thing I undertook , and in nothing more so than as a hunter .
One day , at the end of a very severe stag-chace , after a run of nearly thirty miles , the hounds pressed the beautiful animal so close , that they caught him as he was swimming over a deep part of the river Avon , between Salisbury and Stratford .
Myself , with the master of the hounds , Michael Hicks Beach , Esq. of Netheravon , and two or three gentlemen , amongst whom was , perhaps , Mr. Gordon Grey , were up with the hounds at the time  and we were all very much distressed to see the noble animal , which was a large red deer , and which had afforded us so much sport , becoming a prey to the hounds , without it being possible for us to save him .
Mr. Beach at first urged the whipper-in to attempt it , but he declined , adding , that as he could not swim well enough to encounter so many difficulties as he should meet with , the hounds would certainly drown him , as well as the stag , if he were once to venture into the deep water .
While every one was lamenting in vain the sad fate of the poor animal , which appeared nearly exhausted , as the hounds had repeatedly pulled him under the water , I had slipped on one side , hitched my horse 's bridle to a stake in the hedge , and stripped in buff , before the rest of the sportsmen had perceived what I was doing .
I sprang to the river 's brink , plunged at once off the high bank into the midst of the foaming stream , and swam to the assistance of the almost expiring stag .
The moment that I dashed head foremost into the stream , the remainder of the pack , which had not before ventured into the watery element , but had kept yelping and baying upon the banks , now to a dog leaped in after me .
None but those who were eye-witnesses of this scene can have any idea of the danger in which I appeared to be placed .
Many of the hounds , that had been worrying the stag , seeing a naked man rise as it were from out of the deep , for I had been obliged to dive several yards to break my fall from off the steep bank , instantly quitted the hold they had on the stag , and swam towards me , as if to seize upon more tempting prey .
My fellow sportsmen , who had scarcely recovered from their astonishment at seeing me unexpectedly plunge into the water , and who now apprehended my inevitable destruction by the hounds seizing upon me , gave all at once an involuntary scream , and implored me to retreat as quickly as possible  but , having once made up my mind to accomplish an object , the word retreat was not in my vocabulary .
Nothing daunted , I swam boldly up , and faced the approaching pack , calling each hound by his name , which I fortunately knew , and , which was still more fortunate , my voice was as well known to them .
I swam and fought my way through them , cheering and hallooing to them , as if in the chace .
They all turned , and continued to swim with me again up to the poor stag , with the exception of one old hound , Old Trojan , who , unperceived , seized fast hold of me by the thumb of the right hand , which at once checked my progress and gave me great pain .
I called him by his name , but it was in vain , for he held fast  upon which , with considerable effort , I dragged him under water , and seizing him by the throat with the other hand , I held him there till he let go his hold .
During this struggle we both disappeared under the water together , to the great consternation of the anxious beholders .
Up we came together again , but I continued to grasp him firmly with my left hand by the throat , and I , for a short time , exhibited the caitiff in this state , with his mouth open and his tongue out  to shew how completely I had subdued him , I gave him one more ducking under water and let him go : I then continued my course without further interruption towards the stag , who had , meanwhile , drifted twenty or thirty yards down with the current , which was very rapid , surrounded by every hound in the pack ( twenty-two couple ) , with the exception of poor Old Trojan , who now kept at a very respectful distance behind us .


We soon came up to the stag  but now the most difficult part of the task commenced  now `` the tug of war '' began , for I had no sooner laid my hand upon the poor animal than the whole pack began their attack upon him with redoubled vigour .
One of the gentlemen threw me his whip , which I applied to the backs of the dogs with one hand , while I held the stag with the other .
This , however , had little or no effect  they were too much accustomed to the lash to be driven from their game in this way .
One of my friends , therefore , called out to me to take the other end , which I did , and laid on about their heads and ears lustily .
Still I found that they would not let go their holds without I almost beat out their brains  and I was consequently obliged to take another course , which was this -- the first hound that I came near to I grasped by the throat till he let go  and in this state , with his mouth still open , I held him a short time under water .
This mode of proceeding had the desired effect , and I continued it with every hound till I set the poor animal perfectly free .
By this time I was almost exhausted myself , for I had been in the water at least twenty minutes  and that too at the end of a very severe chace , in a cold day in February .
My friends on the bank kept giving their advice , and amongst the number was Tom , the whipper-in , who had refused to venture into the water  and , as a punishment for his cowardice , I requested my friends either to make him hold his tongue , or throw him in and give him a ducking .
In the midst of all this I recollect to have hailed the huntsman , and desired him to take my clothes off the wet meadow , and to lead my favourite mare about to keep her from taking cold .
Some of my readers will wonder how I could be so much at my ease under such circumstances , and particularly as I have said I was nearly exhausted .
This I shall easily explain .
The hounds being all checked off , the stag , poor fellow , lay most patiently floating upon the stream  and , as I had now taken him round his velvet-skinned neck , I supported myself with great ease , and gained strength to swim with one hand while I held him with the other , till I arrived at the opposite bank , where my brother sportsmen were waiting , with the greatest anxiety , to assist in taking him out of the water .
But , as the water was nearly ten feet deep , I of course could gain no footing  and as the bank was four feet above the river , those on the outside could not reach him .
I contrived , however , to fasten the thongs of their whips round different parts of his body , so that they were enabled at length , with great difficulty , to drag him safe on shore , without the poor stag having received any material injury .
As soon as this was accomplished , and not before , was I dragged out in the same way , with the thongs of my fellow sportsmen 's whips .
I was certainly so exhausted that I could not stand without holding , while they rubbed me dry with their pocket handkerchiefs  but I soon recovered , and having put on my clothes , I mounted my favourite chesnut mare , Mountebank , and rode with my friends , who all accompanied me to the [ 22 ] Inn , the only house in the borough of Old Sarum , where this story is frequently related to this day .


Such is one of the anecdotes that Mr. Gordon Grey related of me , and which circumstance , with a hundred others of a similar nature , had entirely escaped my memory , and would never have been related here , had it not been for the journey in the Bath stage coach  although the mark , which Old Trojan 's tooth made on the thumb of my right hand , is always present to my view , particularly when I am writing , and which mark , I observed at the time , would always bring the event to my recollection , as I should carry it with me to the grave .
That I shall carry it there is certain , for it is still perfectly visible , though it was inflicted twenty-eight years ago .


Such was the man whom Lord Bruce dismissed from the Marlborough troop of yeomanry , as unworthy to rank amongst those who had volunteered their services to repel the invasion of a powerful , menacing foreign foe !
Such was the man and such was his zeal and enthusiasm -- such his devoted patriotism , that , had it been practicable to lay a mine of gunpowder under the Boulogne flotilla , he would , with the same alacrity as he now rescued the stag , have dashed into the sea with a lighted torch in one hand while he swam with the other !
Such was the man who would have fearlessly applied the torch to the train , and freely have blown them and himself together into the air , to have saved his country !
And this was the sort of man that Lord Bruce knew me to be when , to gratify the rage of his father , he undertook to dismiss me from the Wiltshire Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry , because I had , forsooth , killed ten brace of pheasants at twenty shots !


Well , the day at length arrived for my attending the Court of King 's Bench , to stand , for the first time , upon its floor to receive judgment .
Mr. Justice Garrow and Mr. Justice Burrough were my counsel  and the former made an eloquent appeal to the court , declaring that he would much rather be placed in my situation than that of the noble lord  and winding up his speech with a high eulogium upon my character , he said , that if he lived in my neighbourhood , I should be the first man that he would seek for as a friend , c. c..
The present Lord Erskine and the late Sir Vickery Gibbs were employed to pray for the judgment of the court against me  but his lordship conducted himself with the greatest moderation and even kindness towards me , and never uttered one single offensive or unkind sentence in the whole of his eloquent harangue .
But the little , waspish , black-hearted viper , Gibbs , whose malignant , vicious , and ill-looking countenance was always the index of his little mind , made a most virulent , vindictive , and cowardly attack upon me , which was so morose and unfeeling , and so uncalled for by the circumstances , that , if I had not been held back by any attorney , I should certainly have inflicted a summary and a just chastisement upon him upon the spot , by dashing back his lies , together with his teeth , down his throat .
I was , however , restrained , and sentence was passed by old mumbling Grose , that I should pay ONE HUNDRED POUNDS to the King , and be committed to the custody of the Marshal of the court for SIX WEEKS .
There sat , squatting upon the bench , KENYON , Chief Justice , GROSE , LAWRENCE , and LE BLANC  all four of them gone , long , long ago , to receive their sentence from the Judge of another and a higher court , the JUDGE of JUDGES  and the Lord have mercy on them !
say I. I paid the fine immediately , and two friends , who were in court , entered into recognizances in five hundred pounds each , and myself in one thousand pounds , to keep the peace towards this gallant lord for three years .


I was handed over to a tipstaff , who very civilly conducted me and my friends in a coach to the King 's Bench , which place I had the evening before been to reconnoitre with my friend Mr. Wm. Butcher , who had come to town with me , and had voluntarily become one of my bail .
My friends anticipated that I should be committed to the King 's Bench , as I had made up my mind not to offer any apology to Lord Bruce .


At this time Mr. Waddington was a prisoner in the King 's Bench , for forestalling hops  and as he had conducted his defence before the court with great energy and considerable talent  and , as he was convicted upon an old obsolete statute , he was not esteemed guilty of any moral crime .
I had imbibed a notion that the debtors in the prison were generally a set of swindlers , and I was , therefore , anxious to avoid their society , or having anything to do with them  which feeling , however erroneous , increased my desire to become acquainted with Mr. Waddington .
The chief temptation , however , undoubtedly was his being a man who had become celebrated for the spirit which he had several times evinced before the court , in defending himself against what was generally considered as a mere political prosecution .
I made several inquiries about him , but I only learned that he was not within the walls , and that he had apartments over the lobby , without the gates .
I was , as yet , too great a novice to comprehend what was meant by imprisonment without being in prison .


I arrived at the prison about two o'clock , and was conducted into the coffee room , kept by Mr. Davey , the Marshal 's coachman , where we were soon accommodated with a very good dinner .
In the mean time I had made the necessary inquiry for an apartment , but the prison was represented to be very full  and I was shewn one or two rooms , where the parties occupying them had no objection to turn out , to accommodate me , for a certain stipulated sum .
Amongst the number I was shewn up into a very good room , which was occupied by a lady , who , it was said , would give up her room for ten pounds .
When we entered the room she was singing very divinely , she being no less a personage than Mrs. Wells , the celebrated public singer .
With great freedom she inquired which was the gentleman , me or my attorney , who accompanied me  and upon being informed that I was the prisoner , she eyed me over from head to toe , and then , with that art of which she was so much a mistress , she simpering said , that `` she was loath to part with her room at any price , but that , as I appeared a nice wholesome country gentleman , I should be welcome to half of it without paying any thing . ''
As I was not prepared to enter into a contract of that sort , I hastily retired , and left my attorney to settle the quantum of pecuniary remuneration with her .


We dined very pleasantly , I think six of us  and , before the cloth was removed , I had a visit from my friend , the Rev. John Prince , the chaplain of the Magdalen , and vicar of the parish of Enford , whose churchwarden I was .
I stated to him the difficulty I had in procuring a suitable apartment  which he no sooner heard than he volunteered his services to go immediately to his friend and neighbour , the Marshal , with whom he had no doubt he should readily arrange that matter for me to my satisfaction .
I was much pleased to have such an advocate as Mr. Prince , a man so well known , and so much esteemed for his piety and goodness of heart .
But he soon returned , looking very grave , and said , that he could do nothing with the Marshal , who would not enter into any conversation with him upon the subject  but told him , that if Mr. Hunt wanted any thing , he was ready to do whatever lay in his power to serve him , but that his attorney was the proper person to transact such business , and that it was quite out of the worthy parson 's line .


My attorney , Mr. Bird , immediately waited upon the Marshal  and , while he was gone , Mr. Prince informed me , that his old friend Jones had behaved quite rudely to him , and expressed himself very much surprised that a man of his calling should think of interfering in such matters .
Poor Prince was , therefore , fully impressed with an idea that Mr. Jones would do nothing to accommodate me , as he had quite huffed him .
In ten minutes , however , Mr. Bird returned , with the news that he had settled every thing with the Marshal  that I should have an apartment over the lobby , but that I must go with him to the Marshal , and enter into security not to escape , c. c. I immediately complied  and , as we went along , he informed me , that I was to give a bond for five thousand pounds not to escape  and that it would not be necessary for me to return again within the walls .
This I readily agreed to , and the matter was settled in ten minutes .
I was to have the room over the front lobby , and the run of the key .


I returned to my friends elated with the prospect of my being so comfortable , as I had been very much disgusted with the scenes of profligacy and drunkenness that I had already witnessed within the walls .
Mrs. Filewood , the principal turnkey 's wife , who kept the lobby , was to prepare my bed , and get every thing ready for me in my room by ten o'clock , the time at which my friends were to leave the prison .
When the hour arrived , I was shown into a very spacious room , nicely furnished , with a neat bureau bedstead , standing in one corner .
My hostess , who was a pretty , modest-looking woman , was very communicative , and so attentive that I really felt quite as comfortable as if I had been at an inn .
It was , in fact , much better than the apartments I had been in at the inn , in London , the Black Lion , Water Lane .
There was a good fire in the room , and every thing bore the air of cleanliness and comfort , and I went to bed and slept till day-light , as sound and as well as I ever slept in my life .


As I lay in my bed , thinking of the new situation in which I was placed , I lamented that I had not overnight made some inquiries about Mr. Waddington , as I still felt very anxious to become acquainted with him  and I was devising all sorts of schemes how I could gain an introduction to him , when my hostess knocked at my door , to say that Mr. Waddington , the gentleman who lodged in the room over me , sent his compliments , and wished that I would favour him with my company to breakfast , which he would have ready in half an hour 's time .
This was to me a most gratifying invitation , which I cheerfully accepted with as little ceremony as it was made .


Having dressed myself I was shown into his room , which was immediately over mine  I being on the first and he on the second story .
Having read a great deal about him in the papers , I had formed to myself an idea of Mr. Waddington  but instead of meeting , as I expected , a tall , stout , athletic person , I found him rather a short , thin gentleman , who approached me quite with the air and address of a foreigner .
He , however , received me very politely , and having shaken each other by the hand , we had a hearty laugh at the expense of our prosecutors , and the ridiculous situation in which we were placed .
From that moment all reserve was laid aside between us , and before we had finished our breakfast , we agreed to mess together during the six weeks which I had to remain : he being sentenced for six months .
It was arranged that my room should be the dining and his the drawing-room , and , whoever might visit us , that he should pay the expenses of the first day , and I of the next , and so on alternately .
We had our meals provided by Mr. Davey , at the coffee room , and sent to us , and we settled our bill of the preceding day every morning at breakfast .
Without once having deviated from this plan , we passed our time , for the six weeks , in the most profound harmony and good humour with each other , never having had the slightest disagreement during the whole of the period that we were together .


I soon discovered that my new acquaintance was a great politician , and that he was a decided opposition man , or rather a democrat , a sort of being which I had hitherto been taught to look upon , if not with an evil , at least with a suspicious eye .
I was a professed loyal man  but , before we had been together four and twenty hours , he pronounced me to be a real democrat , without my being aware of it myself .
I found him a cheerful companion , who , whatever I might think of his political feelings and information , was at any rate possessed of a great share of mercantile knowledge .
His opinions upon political matters were many of them new to me  and his arguments , though there was much ingenuity in them , were not altogether calculated to carry conviction to the mind .
His conversation , however , gave me an insight into many matters that I had never before had an opportunity of investigating or of hearing discussed .


On the second day , I was for the first time introduced to Henry Clifford , the barrister , who was one of Mr. Waddington 's counsel , and who came to dine with us .
I was very much pleased with him , and though he advocated the same principles that were professed by his client , yet he did it in such a way , and in such plain intelligible language , that every word , every sentence , carried conviction with it .
He conversed of rational liberty , of freedom as the natural rights of man , and as the law of God and nature .
He put the matter clearly and distinctly , undisguised by sophistry  and , as far as I could discover by his discourse , I had already an inherent love of that liberty of which he spoke : I was naturally an enthusiastic admirer of freedom , and an implacable foe to tyranny and oppression  and this I admitted to him , at the same time that I disclaimed any participation in those principles which were designated as jacobinical , and professed myself a loyal man , and a friend to my king and country .


With the greatest good-nature , Mr. Clifford smiled at my folly  `` but , '' said he , `` my worthy young friend , and I am proud to call you so , I see that you have in reality imbibed the best , the most honourable of principles  the seeds of genuine patriotism are implanted in your heart , it only requires a little time to rear them into maturity , and , I have not the least doubt but they will , ere long , produce good and useful fruit .
I believe you are a really loyal man , a sincere friend to your king and country  and if I thought you were not , our acquaintance , I assure you , should be very short , but , as you are one , I hope our friendship will only cease with our lives . ''
I shall take leave to say that this wish was accomplished to the very letter , as I ever afterwards lived in the most friendly habits of intimacy with him till the time of his decease .


Our discourse now became more general .
Mr. Waddington had listened with great attention to his friend Clifford 's clear and undisguised manner of initiating , as he called it , the young countryman into the science of politics  and he appeared much delighted to find that `` the bait took so well . ''
Clifford reproved his expression , and added , that the young countryman , as he was pleased to term me , required nothing more than a little practical knowledge of corruption , to make him shake off all his natural prejudices , and become as good and sincere a defender of liberty as either of them .


By this time , our friend Clifford , who was then a two-bottle man , had taken his glass too freely to make himself intelligible any longer , and I resisted the proposition of Mr. Waddington to uncork another bottle , as I was very much shocked to see one of the most intelligent and truly able men in the country , reduced to a mere idiot by the effect of wine .
Mr. Waddington , who was naturally an abstemious man , agreed with me , and , as we had previously given a general invitation to Clifford to dine with us twice a week , we now came also to a resolution , that , in future , we would not be deprived in such a way of his instructive and agreeable society .
To accomplish our purpose , we agreed , therefore , that we would limit the quantity of wine to be drank when he was at our table , and that , as soon as the quantity was gone , coffee or tea should invariably be introduced .


Our friend and guest literally reeled down stairs when he took leave of us , and I could not help observing , what a misfortune it was for such a brilliant man to drown his senses and obscure his intellect with wine .
Though I had for some years , at least since I was married , kept that sort of company which led me to take my glass freely , yet I seldom took it to excess , and never to inebriate myself .
This melancholy example of Mr. Clifford had a very great effect upon me .
To see a man of the most brilliant talent , of the most profound erudition , so far forget himself as to become an object of pity and contempt , imbecile , and even beastly , was a sight which made a deep and lasting impression upon my mind , and I began to think that my own partial indulgence in the practice of drinking so freely after dinner was an act of great weakness and folly , which , if not checked , was likely to degenerate into one of the worst of crimes .


In these sentiments my friend Waddington agreed with me , and he readily joined in a determination never to suffer any thing of the sort to take place at our table again while we remained together .
This resolution we managed to keep , though we had a difficult task to perform when Mr. Clifford and the Rev. Dr. Gabriel dined with us , which was regularly twice a week .
The reverend doctor , in particular , we found it incumbent upon us to keep within strict bounds  for , when he had got a little too much wine , though he was an old man , and a dignitary of the church , it was with great difficulty we could restrain him from indulging in obscene conversation , with which my friend and myself were equally disgusted .
The doctor was a wit and a scholar , but , as Mrs. Waddington and her family , as well as other amiable females both of her and my friends , frequently visited us , his language was not to be tolerated , and , consequently , I undertook one morning to remonstrate with the doctor upon the subject .
He freely acknowledged his error , but attributed it to a foolish habit that he had acquired at college , of which he could never afterwards wholly break himself .
At the same time , he pleaded that he never forgot himself so far as to disgrace his profession , unless he had taken too much wine -- which , by the bye , was every day when he could get it .
I made known to the doctor our resolution to limit him to a bottle , and that his visits were to be continued upon that understanding .
To this he readily assented , and thenceforth we found him to be a well-informed and entertaining companion , on the two days in the week that he was invited to dine with us .
The doctor was reduced in circumstances , and was living within the rules .
It was he who built the octagon chapel at Bath , of which he was the proprietor , and where he preached for many years .
He was a man of letters , and , when sober , a perfect gentleman  but , when ever so little elevated , he betrayed , even to us comparative strangers , that he was a complete free thinker .
Many of my readers will recollect the literary controversy which took place between him and , I believe , Doctor Gardiner , of Bath .
I forget what were his politics , but I believe he was a Whig .
One thing I perfectly recollect , which was , that when he was going to relate an obscene story or anecdote , he always gave us a preliminary intimation of it by sneezing .
He was , on the whole , one of the most extraordinary of the numerous extraordinary characters that I became acquainted with while I remained at the King 's Bench , during my first visit there of six weeks , in the years 1800 and 1801 .


This was a very distressing season for the poor  and Mr. Waddington and myself gave a ton of potatoes to the poor prisoners in the King 's Bench every week  nor , during the time that I was there , did we ever fail to relieve not only every applicant , and they were numerous , but also to seek privately for objects of distress within the walls  and wherever we found an unfortunate object , we did our best to alleviate his misery .
Some we found almost naked , without clothes or even bedding  some who were pining , in secret , silent want , who were ashamed to make their wretchedness known .
These we never failed to succour .
The Marshal likewise assisted us in these acts of charity , and did every thing that humanity and kindness could suggest , to ameliorate the condition of the unhappy prisoners in his custody .


It being now the season when those who toil for us naturally expect some proof of our friendship and gratitude , to enable them to enjoy their long anticipated merriment , I sent home directions to Mrs. Hunt to have my usual Christmas present given to each of my servants .
It consisted of a good piece of beef , some potatoes , and faggots to dress it with , the quantity given being in proportion to the size of the family .
This good custom I learned from my father , and I regularly continued it every year  but it was always done , I hope , with a becoming spirit , without any ostentation .
I never , as many did , caused my little charitable acts to be blazoned forth in the public newspapers .
I will venture to say , that , while we were in the King 's Bench , Mr. Waddington and myself gave away , privately , a larger sum , in comparison with our incomes , than , any of the publicly blazoned forth charitable men in the city of London , who were lauded up to the sky for their benevolent disposition .
Every Christmas , each servant , who had worked for me during the year , received a present of beef enough to keep each person a week , which was never noticed in any of the public newspapers , though they constantly teemed with pompous accounts of the generosity , benevolence , and charity of my more opulent neighbours , who never gave half so much  in fact , who never gave a twentieth part so much as myself , in proportion to their means .


A circumstance of this sort , which happened not a hundred miles from this place , and the description of which was given to me by a farmer , has caused me a hearty laugh .
It was lately paragraphed in all the country as well as the London papers , and spread far and near , that a worthy and reverend magistrate , in this neighbourhood , had , with great liberality , given away an ox to his parishioners  some , in their great bounty , added eight or ten sheep to the boon .
I was one day speaking with due praise of this act before a farmer of the neighbourhood , who had called to visit me  upon which he burst into a loud horse laugh , and exclaimed , `` Oh , the old cow ! ''
The fact was , as he informed me , that the worthy magistrate had an old Norman cow , that had done breeding , and consequently gave no more milk  and as every farmer in the country well knows that the Devil himself could not graze an old cow of this sort to make her fit for the butcher , the worthy parson very properly gave her away amongst his parishioners  and the praises of this mighty gift were hawked about in almost every newspaper in the kingdom !


I do not give any name , neither do I , in the remotest degree , bring forward the circumstance by way of taunt or ridicule .
There was nothing improper in it , but the contrary  and , of course , the old cow afforded many a hearty meal , and many a porridge-pot full of good wholesome broth to those amongst whom she was divided , who , no doubt , were very thankful to the worthy justice for the present .
I only mention it to shew that it `` is not all gold that glitters , '' and how such a thing is trumpeted forth when it is once set a going .
I know it is the practice of many persons to give a trifle at this time of the year , and then get one of their dependents to send , and not unfrequently they themselves send , an account of it to the county paper .
Away goes the news , and a person 's name is blazoned forth all over the kingdom , as a most charitable man or woman , when it often happens that a great deal of misery , poverty , wretchedness and want presents itself to their view all the year round , without their ever once extending that aid which , to bestow in private , would afford them ten times as much heart-felt pleasure , and real satisfaction , as they can gain from their ostentatious annual newspaper fraud .
I have given away four times the value of this said cow , every Christmas , for ten or fifteen years together , without having ever once had , or wishing to have , my name held up in a public newspaper , as an example of charity and liberality to the poor .
Yet , twenty years ago , before I was known as a reformer , when , for instance , I was in the King 's Bench , a pound note , a fifth part of what Mr. Waddington and I gave away privately , besides the ton of potatoes , would have caused my name to cut a pompous figure in all the vehicles of news , both in town and country .
I may , without boasting , declare , that scarcely a month in my life ever passed without my having given away more than the value of the said old cow , to relieve and assist my fellow creatures in distress  and yet the public well know how my name has been bandied about in every newspaper in England , Ireland , and Scotland , and , of late years , in almost every paper in Europe , as the greatest enemy of the poor , as their deceiver , their deluder , their plunderer !
I have been held up , for political purposes , by the venal press , as a sort of ferocious monster , who longed to gorge upon the life-blood of my fellow countrymen !
It will be asked by some , how comes it that all the public press has been induced to represent you as a monster of this description ?
The answer is easy .
For this plain reason : because all those who belong to the public press , the liberal press , have been the agents or the , tools of one or the other of the two great political factions , nick-named Whigs and Tories  because throughout the whole of my political life , I have honestly opposed the peculations , the plunderings , and frauds of the borough-mongers of both those two factions upon the people , upon the earnings of the poor  because I have never in any way been , nor ever would be , linked on to either of those factions  because I have fairly , manfully , and openly stood up for the political rights of my poorer fellow countrymen , and never for one moment of my life have compromised those rights , in order to secure or promote my own interest .


I repeat again , that I have not introduced the subject of the old cow with any invidious motive .
As far as the thing went it was a praiseworthy and charitable act .
I have myself many times done the same thing  have fatted an old cow , and given the beef away to the poor , which has been worth , to them , from ten to fifteen pounds  very excellent meat to eat , and I have partaken of some of it in my own family  though it would have scarcely fetched any thing to have been sold to a butcher .
And if this should meet the eye of the worthy justice , he will take it as it is meant , and not as any sarcasm at him , though the said justice is one of the number who was induced to sign the infamous order to exclude my female friends from visiting me  which I would fain hope he did against his own judgment , and I am sure , from the personal kindness I before received of him here , he did it much against his inclination .
Some may say that my statement , of what I have done , is an egotistical digression  that I am sounding my own trumpet  and that to do so is no proof of a truly charitable disposition  but let them recollect that I am compelled to this digression , in order to do justice to my own calumniated character  let them recollect that I am writing my own history , and that , as all the press of Europe has been sedulously and malignantly employed to prejudice the public against me , I owe it to myself , to my children and family , to the myriads of my fellow countrymen who have honoured me with their confidence  I owe it to them , to show , past all contradiction , that my accusers are slanderers  that my conduct deserves to be otherwise spoken of than it has been  and this duty I can perform only by speaking candidly and boldly of such facts as may tell in my favour  facts , be it remembered , which admit of being proved or disproved by thousands of living witnesses .
I make no assertions which are morally or physically incapable of being refuted  I appeal to evidence , which is still in existence  and if my enemies can convict one of having , in my defence , gone beyond the limits of truth , I will be content , ever after , to listen in silence to their calumnies .


But it is now time to change the scene again to the King 's Bench .
I was there every day in the society of men who had not merely mixed in the busy scenes of the metropolis , but of whom I found that many had been connected with the government  many had borne a part in all the dirty tricks , frauds , perjuries , and bribery practised at elections .
Of such abominations as I did not think it possible ever to have occurred , the reality was clearly proved to me , by those who had been eye witnesses of them , and who had participated in the plunder .
Circumstances brought me into strange company , and here I saw men of all persuasions in religion , and of all parties in politics .


The year 1800 was a very busy year , and the price of provisions was at its height , in consequence of which , there were many riots both in London and the country .
The parliamentary remedy for this evil was , an act , passed on the 12th of February , forbidding the sale of bread till four and twenty hours after it had been baked .


Towards the close of 1799 , Buonaparte became the first consul of France , and he immediately wrote a letter himself to the King of England , offering to treat for peace .
The British ministers , however , treated the offer with contempt , and they were sanctioned in their conduct by the legislative bodies .
Oh , fatal policy !
if this offer had been accepted , millions of lives might have been spared -- oceans of blood and hundreds of millions of money might have been saved to the nation .
Mr. Fox and Mr. Whitbread opposed the address in the House of Commons , but it was carried by 265 against 64 .
High debates and strong divisions took place in the Irish House of Commons , upon the Union , when Lord Castlereagh began to make a figure by his intrigues  British gold prevailed over Irish patriotism , and the majorities were in favour of the Union .
Mr. Waithman now first began to figure upon the stage of politics in London , and a motion which he made , in favour of peace , was carried unanimously at a Common Hall .
The House of Commons , on the motion of Mr. Tierney , divided 44 for peace and 143 for war  this was on the twenty-sixth of February , and on the eleventh of May , at a field-day in Hyde Park , a shot wounded a young gentleman , who stood near the King , for whom no doubt it was intended .
The same evening his Majesty was at Drury Lane theatre , when a man in the pit , whose name was Hatfield , standing up on one of the benches , fired a pistol at him  but he was pronounced to be deranged in his intellects , and he was confined accordingly .


All our magnanimous allies had by this time deserted us , with the exception of the Emperor of Germany , whose friendship was purchased by another loan of two millions of money , to be raised in taxes upon John Bull  or , to apply a more appropriate name , John Gull -- for , so zealous were his faithful representatives in the Commons , that they voted away forty-eight millions for the service of the year  and to prevent , or rather silence any grumbling , the Habeas Corpus suspension act was passed .


On the fourteenth of June , the great battle of Marengo was fought , between the French , who were commanded by Buonaparte , and the Austrians under Melas , whose army he completely defeated , killing six thousand of them , and taking twelve thousand prisoners , and forty-five pieces of cannon .
In this battle Napoleon proved himself not only the bravest , but the best general of the age .
Immediately after this battle an armistice followed , and peace was ultimately concluded between France and Austria .


On the eighteenth of this month , July 1800 , the atrocities of Governor Aris , and his abettors , in Cold Bath Field 's prison , were exposed in the House of Commons , by Sir Francis Burdett  and on the fourteenth of August following , the indignant populace assembled to pull down this prison , which they very properly called the English Bastile .
The conduct of Aris was such that he was driven in disgrace from his situation , and another more humane governor was appointed in his place , in order to tranquillize the people , who were justly enraged almost to desperation against this monster .
What a disgrace , not only to the administration of the country , but to the character of the age to suffer a malignant fiend to have the control over the liberties of persons sentenced to be confined in a prison !
How much have those magistrates and sheriffs to answer for who suffer these devils in human shape to tyrannize over and torture the victims consigned to their custody !
How necessary is it for sheriffs ( high sheriffs I mean ) , to visit their prisons in person , and see in what manner their prisoners are treated !
I do not mean a formal visit , when the gaoler has notice of his coming , that he may be prepared to deceive him .
But I say it is the duty of a sheriff to go unawares , at times when he is not expected , and then to visit the prisoners by himself , taking care that those jacks in office , the turnkeys , do not go before him , to prepare the prisoners , and to caution them not to make any complaints .
What a farce is kept up by the parade of visiting magistrates , who pass through a gaol , for instance , once a month , `` like a cat over a harpsichord  '' inquiring , most likely , in the presence of the gaoler or turnkey , if any of the prisoners have any complaint to make to the magistrates !
Oh what a horrible farce is this .
A planter in the West Indies may just as well expect to hear the truth if he were to enquire of the negroes , in the presence of their drivers , whether any of them have a complaint to make against any of the said negro-drivers !


When I first came to this gaol , one of the poor prisoners , who was assisting to repair my dungeon , was telling me of an act of cruel injustice and torture that had been inflicted upon him by one of the turnkeys .
Upon which I said to the man , `` Did you not make a complaint to the magistrates ?
I am sure they would not suffer a prisoner to be treated in such a way with impunity . ''
The poor fellow looked at me very steadfastly , for some time , to see if I were in earnest  at length he replied , `` Lord , Sir !
you will know better after you have been here a little while .
I have been here nearly two years , and I never knew any prisoner make a complaint even to the gaoler , and much less to the magistrate , without being punished for it .
I never knew a man make a complaint who was not locked up , in solitary confinement , within a week afterwards , for something or other .
A prisoner is sure never to get any redress , for the turnkeys will say any thing , and what one says another will swear  and the gaoler always believes them , or pretends to believe them , in preference to the prisoners  so do what they will with us we never complain . ''


I am sorry to say that I have found that there was too much truth in this assertion .
I know it is the practice of some lords of manors , never to hire a gamekeeper unless he will engage always to swear that which , right or wrong , will convict a poacher : and I now believe that it is also a requisite qualification for a turnkey to swear that which will please the gaoler .
I am quite sure it is the case in some gaols , in which , unless a turnkey will do this , he will never get promotion , or a rise in his salary , nor have his rent paid , c. c..
The principal object of these fraternities appears to be deception  and particularly if a magistrate or a sheriff should be a conscientious , humane man , their study , their occupation is to deceive him , in which they are very likely to succeed  for a clever gaoler , surrounded by such pliant helpmates , will deceive the very devil , if he be not aware of their tricks  and how easily then may they cheat an honest , unsuspecting country justice !
I have been led into this excusable digression from the recollection of Aris 's exposure in the House of Commons  and what a tale shall I have by and by to unfold , of the scenes that are perpetrated with impunity in this gaol .
Some of the most atrocious acts are here made a merit of , and the gaoler even boasts of them in the public-houses , amongst his pot-companions .


To return to my narrative .
On the 3d of October , the Common Hall , on the motion of Mr. Waithman , resolved to present an address to the King upon the throne , for peace  but , for the first time , the King refused to receive it , except at the levee .
Thus were the livery of London deprived of their right , their ancient right , of approaching their sovereign to present their petitions to the throne .
Thus were all future Common Halls reduced to the level of any common assembly by George the Third .
Thus did those who took the lead in city politics concede the rights of their fellow-citizens , and surrender their proudest privileges , without a struggle .
From that day to this , the Livery of London have never exercised their constitutional privilege of addressing or petitioning the throne .
Mr. Waithman and Mr. Favel have persuaded the livery not to petition the throne , because they were not permitted to present it to the throne : unlike Beckford , they had neither the courage to demand the right , nor the sincerity to give it up .
By such temporising means they have altogether compromised the rights of their fellow citizens .
I made one effort to rouse the livery into a sense of their duty , and moved for the appointment of a committee to search for precedents  but the Whig cabal frustrated my intentions , though I was supported by Mr. White , of the Independent Whig , and many other patriotic members of that body .
By and by , I shall lay open to public view the despicable intrigues of this faction in the city of London .
The mass of the livery are honest , honourable and patriotic , and real lovers of fair play  but the tricks and intrigues of the factions , who have strutted upon the boards of the Common Hall for the last twenty years , are without parallel  and , when I come to that epoch of my history at which I became a liveryman , it shall be my business to unmask many a hypocrite , and to exhibit these mock reformers in their true colours .
In performing this duty I shall divest myself of every personal consideration  and in drawing the true characters of the great rivals , Wood and Waithman , I will , if possible , divest myself of prejudice , and do them both justice .
The result of the last general election for the city not only speaks the sense of the livery , but it is a pretty fair criterion by which the public may estimate the value of each of these characters .
The inestimable conduct of Mr. Alderman Wood , with regard to the affairs of the Queen , has placed him upon that eminence to which his honesty and public spirit so eminently entitle him .


On the third of November , the Emperor Paul of Russia laid an embargo on three hundred British ships , and sequestered all British property in the ports of Russia .
Thus he who , at the commencement of the year , was our most vigorous and magnanimous ally , became , at the latter end of it , one of our most powerful and inveterate foes .
British gold and British influence could , however , now command the use of the bow-string in Russia , as it had heretofore directed the use of the guillotine in France  for , on the 23d of March , he was found murdered in his chamber , and his amiable and ingenuous son , Alexander , the present tyrant , succeeded him , he being understood to be better disposed to listen to the proposals of the Cabinet of St. James 's .


On the last day of this year , the Union was completed between England and Ireland , and the degradation of that brave and high spirited people was celebrated in London , on the first day of the nineteenth century , by hoisting a standard upon the Tower , and an imperial ensign was displayed by the foot guards .
A new great seal was also used on account of the Union .
The Imperial Parliament also met on the first day of the year , and commenced its first session .


The commencement of the new century had been celebrated the year before , on the first day of the year 1800  but it was now discovered , by the wisdom of John Gull , that the new century did not commence till the old one was finished , and therefore millions , who had before celebrated it , now performed the ceremony over again .
I was then , as I now am , in a gaol , but I was in a very different gaol from this .
When St. Paul 's clock struck twelve , all the bells in the metropolis struck up a merry peal .
I had sat up later than it was my custom , on purpose to welcome in the new year  and as Mr. Waddington was retired to rest , I had called up Filewood , the turnkey of the lobby of the King 's Bench , and had treated him with a glass of grog and a pipe .
Twenty years ago , at this very hour of twelve , I was smoking my pipe in a gaol .
Gracious God !
the scenes that I have since witnessed , how they crowd upon my memory !
The recollection of that night is as familiar to my imagination as if it were yesterday .
I was in a prison to be sure , but I had every accommodation that was necessary  all my friends had free access to me , from daylight till ten o'clock at night  and my family might have remained with me the whole time , day and night , if I had chosen that they should do so .
I was never locked into my room , and I could at all times pass into the yard , and was within call of the turnkey and his family  and the communication to my friend Mr. Waddington 's apartments was always open .
In fact , it would have been truly ridiculous had it been otherwise .
The same apartments which I inhabited had been previously occupied by Mr. Horne Tooke , Lord Thanet , and many other eminent political men who had fallen into the clutches of the harpies of the bar and the bench  and never did the slightest inconvenience arise to the marshal , or any of his officers , in consequence of treating such prisoners committed to his custody with that sort of consideration which made them easy and contented under unpleasant circumstances .
Such liberal treatment always produced a corresponding feeling and action in the prisoners , and I never heard of any instance of disagreement between them .
I know that , in our case , so far from any complaint being made on either side , Mr. Waddington , myself , and the marshal always continued , and we parted , upon the best terms , mutually satisfied with each other .
But what a contrast was that to my present situation in this gaol , one of the most confined , unhealthy , and inconvenient gaols in the kingdom !
Since the high sheriff came to my relief , my confinement is considerably softened , particularly by the admission of the female branches of my family : but the contrast is yet such as to beggar description .
In the first place , I am shut up in a complete dungeon  it is true , I have a window , but that is rendered almost useless by its opening into a small yard , of about ten yards square , surrounded entirely by a dark wall , nearly twenty feet high .
This being situated on the north side of a very high building , both light and air are excluded .
I have not caught a glimpse of the sun from this yard or room , since October .
In the next place , no friend or any other person is admitted till nine in the morning , and not after four in the afternoon  so that my family , who , in consequence of Sir Charles Bampfylde 's interference , are now permitted to see me , are yet compelled to submit to the inconvenience and expense of passing seventeen hours out of the four and twenty at the inn , to be enabled to see me for the remaining seven .
At six o'clock in the afternoon I am locked up in solitary confinement , in my room , ( some time back it was at five )  all the outward doors surrounding my burying vault of a yard are also closed for the night  and , as my dungeon is situated in a remote part of the gaol , I never hear the sound of a human voice till the door of my cage is opened , at seven o'clock in the morning  so that , for thirteen hours , I have no possibility of making any one hear , let what might happen , either from illness or accident  a month back it was fifteen hours , from five till eight .
To remove this unpleasant and brutal inconvenience , a worthy and considerate visiting magistrate , Aaron Moody , Esq. of Kingston , very properly ordered , amongst many other necessary improvements of my den , that a bell should be hung , to enable me to call one of the officers of the gaol , when I might want any thing  but I am now deprived of this common and necessary accommodation by the order of Mr. Gaoler , who forsooth has caused the bell to be muffled , and the wire pegged , so as to render it totally useless .
The reader must find it difficult to discover the motives for this and a hundred other daily acts of petty tyranny that are practised upon me here  and , to render this conduct the more pointed , unjust , and odious , the bell which was hung at the same time , and for the same purpose , in the room of my fellow-prisoner , Mr. Kinnear , remains untouched , for his constant use and convenience .
And yet I understand my gentleman gaoler complains of what he calls my attacks upon him , although he can not deny the truth of one of my statements .


From the comparison which I have drawn , the reader will perceive , that one month 's imprisonment in this bastile , is worse than a year 's imprisonment in the King 's Bench .
In the King 's Bench I enjoyed the rational society of all my friends , and I was particularly pleased with the society of Mr. Clifford .
I have since suffered many great inconveniences and disappointments , which I might have avoided , if I had given credit to some of his statements , which , at the time , I thought totally impossible to be correct , but which I have since , by experience , and to my cost and sorrow , found to be true to the very letter .
I was induced by him to believe many of the infamous acts attributed to the ministers and their agents , and the cruelties practised by their tools and myrmidons  but it was not possible for me to give full credence to many of the stories and anecdotes which he recounted of the Judges upon the bench , in connivance with the gentlemen at the bar .
It was difficult to make me comprehend and credit , the infamous and disgraceful practice of the masters of the crown office , in procuring and packing a special jury , which he assured me was constantly and invariably done in every political cause , where the crown was the prosecutor  but he brought me so many proofs , that , at length , it was worse than self-deception to doubt it .
But that the Judges upon the Bench , in violation of their solemn oaths , would lend themselves to delay , to deny , or sell justice , was a crime which I could not be persuaded to imagine was within the verge of possibility , though he solemnly assured me that all this was not only done , but that it was the every day practice , particularly in political matters .
To think that , upon the ex-parte statement of one of the counsel , a Judge would submit to make himself acquainted with the case before he came into court  to think that a Judge could be spoken with privately , upon a cause that he was going to try openly in public court , that he would be influenced by unworthy motives , or take a bribe , was so abhorrent to every notion of justice that I had imbibed , it was to me so horrible , that I could scarcely listen with any degree of temper to his recital of numerous instances of the kind , which , he assured us , had come within his own knowledge .


If I could have had the wisdom to have listened and have improved from the excellent information that I gained from Mr. Clifford , how many painful and useless exertions I might have saved myself , how many difficulties might I have avoided !
But it was not in my nature to believe such things , or to think mankind , and particularly the Judges of the land , such hypocrites , or such base tools as he represented them to be .
And such is the natural feeling and habits of an Englishman , that he imbibes the notion of reverence for the Judges of the land at a very early period .
We are taught this almost as early as we are taught the Lord 's prayer , and it is nearly as easy to eradicate the one , as the other , such is the effect of early impressions .
Poor Clifford !
how often have I heard him exclaim , `` of all tyrannies , that which is carried on under the forms of law and justice is the worst . ''
How well he understood the practice of the courts , and the trickery of the Judges  every word he ever communicated to me upon this subject I now believe to be true , my own experience has since confirmed it .
He gave us the history , a full account , of the treatment of those persons who were confined in dungeons for political purposes under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act  and amongst others he described the cruel and unnatural treatment of poor Colonel Despard , who was then confined in the Tower , and who had been imprisoned at that time for five or six years .
Mr. Clifford was employed by Colonel Despard , and offered to convince me that his description of his treatment was correct , by introducing me to him any morning that I would accompany him to the Tower  which I promised to do the first opportunity , and a day was fixed accordingly for the interview .


I received frequent communications from home to say that all my large farming concerns were going on well , in fact those were glorious times for farmers  the price of corn and all sorts of agricultural produce was enormous , and as I had grown most excellent crops that season , my profits were very ample .
My bailiff wrote me word , that he continued to obtain the highest price in Devizes market for my corn , both for wheat and barley , and one week he sold wheat for five guineas a sack , and barley for five pounds a quarter .
This was once thrown in my face by an upstart of the name of Captain Gee , when I was standing a contested election at Bristol .
The gentleman put the question to me upon the hustings , whether I had not , or whether my father had not , sold his wheat for fifty pounds a load in Marlborough market ?
I was saved the trouble of an answer by the observation of a sensible , shrewd mechanic , a freeman of that city  who said , `` Well , and suppose he did , what has that to do with the merit or demerit of a representative who is contending for our rights and liberties ?
Was Mr. Hunt not justified in selling his corn for the best price that he could obtain for it ?
It is only a proof that he had a good article to get a good price for it .
Suppose that he had sold his wheat for five pounds a load , while other people were selling it at fifty pounds a load , do you mean to tell us , that we here in Bristol , should have got our flour or our bread any the cheaper for it ? ''
The captain was silent , and my apologist continued , `` Do you believe , sir , if Mr. Hunt had given away his corn , that the millers or the bakers would have sold it to us any the cheaper ?
then let us have no more of your nonsense  what would you have said if your old uncle , the tobacconist , had sold his tobacco for one shilling a pound while other people were selling it at three shillings a pound ? ''
As his scheme did not answer , the captain slunk away and asked no more questions .
I always felt great pride in obtaining the highest price for my corn  because it was a sure proof , that I carried the best corn to the market , and the farmer who grows the greatest quantity of , and the finest , corn , not only benefits himself , but , instead of being an enemy to the poor , he is their best friend , as he contributes the largest share to the common stock of provisions for their support .


My family meanwhile remained at home , it not being deemed advisable , under such circumstances , to remove them to London , for so short a time as six weeks .
Mrs. Hunt had to take care of an infant son , now about four months old , and , besides , I had no one but her to depend upon , to manage the domestic concerns of so large an establishment as I then kept up , and which was absolutely necessary for so large a farming business as I carried on .
Every thing , however , went on smoothly and prosperously  and I had no lack of visitors , who were very numerous , both from London and the country , and perhaps no nobleman in London was better supplied with game than I was .
I received daily presents from all quarters , particularly from the members of the yeomanry cavalry , not only of the county of Wilts , but from various other counties .


Though the whole body of the yeomanry considered themselves insulted in my person , yet the boasted resolution of those members of the Wiltshire yeomanry , who had declared that they would resign if I had any punishment inflicted upon me , was never carried into effect , with one solitary exception , which was that of my friend Mr. Wm. Butcher , who wrote from London , the day after my sentence , and sent in his resignation , assigning openly as the cause , that he would not continue in a service in which he was liable to be insulted with impunity , by the caprice of a superior officer , or liable to be prosecuted , if he resented a wanton insult with the spirit of a man of honour and a gentleman .
But Wm. Tinker of Lavington , who had so often volunteered to resent what he called an insult offered to every man in the regiment , never resigned , or mentioned the subject afterward  and he , amongst all my numerous friends , was the only one who failed to send me some game , though he was a great sportsman , and did me the favour to hunt and shoot over my farms in my absence .


Unlike some other gaolers , the marshal of the King 's Bench was not above his business  he never for a moment neglected his duty to the prisoners .
He did not act , as if he felt it to be his only business to tyrannize over , to harrass , to oppress , to punish , and to torture those unfortunate persons who were committed to his custody .
On the contrary , he took especial care to protect his prisoners from insult , imposition , or cruelty .
Instead of employing his time to devise means of annoyance against those who were placed in his custody , he occupied it in a very different manner .
He knew that it was his duty ( and he acted up to the letter and spirit of it ) to take every means in his power to make each prisoner as comfortable as his situation would admit , and , above all , to shield him from any insult or ill treatment from the officers of the prison  and to take care that the prisoners were not imposed upon by those who served them with provisions and necessaries .
He made a point of going frequently into the prison during market time , and if he found any bad meat , butter , or other provisions , brought into the prison , he would , for example sake , have it seized and destroyed  and he frequently , without previous notice , went round with his officers to examine the weights and measures , so that his prisoners were completely guarded from imposition and extortion  and a man in the King 's Bench prison could lay out the little money he had to spend , to as much advantage as he could in any market in the kingdom .
In fact , Mr. Jones , the marshal , was a humane as well as a charitable man , and he encouraged the prisoners to make excellent and just regulations for their own government  but the refractory , those who would not be governed by the rules of well regulated society , and who violated all moral obligations , were made to feel the weight of his power .
He was a magistrate of the county of Surrey , it , therefore , was not necessary for him to perform the farce of sending for a visiting magistrate .
Any ungovernable delinquent was brought before him , and after a fair hearing , if it appeared upon oath that he merited it , he was committed for a month to Horsemonger Lane prison , or sentenced to be confined in the refractory room .
I do not remember a single instance of any one being punished by him unjustly .
When it was necessary for the marshal to use severity against any man , it generally had the sanction of an immense majority of that man 's fellow-prisoners .
The only one that was punished , during the six weeks that I was there , was a drunken captain , who , in one of his paroxysms , had smashed all the chapel windows , and committed several other depredations upon the property of his fellow prisoners .
He was put into the strong room till the next day , when he was brought up , and after an open and patient hearing , it being found that he had nothing to urge in his defence except drunkenness , he was sent to Horsemonger Lane for a month .
No secret inflictions , no acts of torture were permitted in this gaol .
Punishment , when requisite , was given openly , and fairly , and consistently with the true principles of justice , and every one knew what measure of it was meted out to the offender .
As there are frequently a great number of profligate characters within the walls , it was highly necessary to have some good rules and regulations , some local laws , to protect the well-disposed , the innocent , and the unfortunate , ( of whom there was always a great number ) from the insults and depredations of such abandoned persons .
These local laws , though they were administered with strict justice by Mr. Jones , yet , as far as my own observation enabled me to judge , they were invariably tempered with mercy .
There were frequently six or seven , and sometimes eight hundred prisoners within the walls , and the marshal had a great responsibility upon his hands , yet every thing was conducted with liberality .
He had extensive power , yet I never saw any man exercise power with more discretion and moderation than he did .


The reader will recollect that this is my opinion now , my confirmed opinion at this period , after having been three times committed to his custody by the Honourable Court of King 's Bench .
A second time , for having given a good thrashing to a ruffian who was hired to assault me as I was riding along the high road , and who was proved to have actually assaulted me first .
The Judge , Baron Graham , upon the trial at Salisbury , instructed the jury to find me guilty of an assault , though he admitted it to be clearly proved that the fellow had committed the first assault .
His argument , if so it may be called , was , that I had given him more than an equivalent beating in return : had I , he said , only struck him once , I should have been justified  but , as I had struck him three times with my fist , it was an assault  and for this I was sentenced to three months to the custody of the marshal .
But it will be recollected that I was then become a political character , and had been the means of calling two meetings for the county of Wilts .
The third time was preparatory to my visit here -- but more of these things at the proper period .


While I was in the King 's Bench , many anecdotes came to my knowledge , relating to certain political characters , which it would be neither just nor prudent to mention here , and indeed it might justly be considered a breach of confidence .
I must , therefore , withhold the publication of them till I have the permission of those who communicated them to me .
There were also numerous most important matters , communicated to me by Mr. Henry Clifford , with whom , as the reader has already been told , I soon became closely intimate , which I do not feel justified in promulgating , as they are of an extraordinary character , and would be scarcely credited , the parties not being alive either to contradict or to confirm them .


Henry Clifford was a most intelligent man , and Doctor Gabriel was likewise an intelligent man  and these two individuals gave me a clear insight into the practice of the persons who were concerned in the courts of law , and the church .
I was not more astonished at the trickery , deception , and complete delusion of the former profession , than I was at the cant and hypocrisy of the latter .
I soon became a disciple of Clifford 's , yet so astonished was I with his account of the mummery of the courts , and the farcical deception of what was called the administration of justice , particularly in all political matters , that I really looked with such astonishment , and sometimes with such a suspicious and unbelieving eye , that he frequently thought it necessary to bring me living proof , and incontrovertible demonstration , of the truth of his assertions  nor was it till he had done so , that he could bring me to acknowledge that I was convinced of their correctness .
To the doctrine so unequivocally maintained by the worthy dignitary of the church , Dr. Gabriel , I became a convert with even still more tardiness .


Mr. Waddington was an intelligent man , and he had seen a great deal of the world .
As a citizen of London , he had called a public meeting , at the Paul 's Head Tavern , to petition for peace  and this public-spirited and truly constitutional act was at that period quite sufficient to draw down the vengeance of Pitt and his myrmidons .
His ruin was decided upon by them , and he was handed over to the care of the minister 's pliant , powerful and dangerous tools , the Judges of the then Court of King 's Bench , the chief performer being Lloyd Lord Kenyon .
Mr. Clifford assured me , that which was afterwards proved in the same court , that there was neither law nor justice in Mr. Waddington 's persecution  but that the minister had determined to destroy him for his decisive opposition to his measures in the city  and he had not the least doubt but they would accomplish the ruin of his fortune , though he was then worth one hundred and twenty thousand pounds .
It will be shewn hereafter how completely this prediction was verified .


One morning , while we were at breakfast , Mr. Filewood came in , and told us that two very elegant ladies were brought into the prison for debt , and that they were in the greatest distress , as they appeared to be deserted by all their friends , and had scarcely money sufficient to procure the common necessaries of life .
This was quite sufficient to induce Mr. Waddington and myself to interest ourselves in their behalf , and we made the necessary inquiries , in which we were assisted with great alacrity by the officers of the gaol , and we learned that the parties were , a gentlewoman and her daughter  the mother being arrested for a considerable sum , and being sent into the gaol , the daughter had accompanied her .
A polite letter , tendering our humble aid , was sent to the ladies , accompanied with an invitation to dinner .
This invitation was accepted , but a difficulty arose , as we were without the walls , and the ladies were within , which appeared at first view to be an insurmountable obstacle to their visiting us  for , although we could pass into the prison , yet no prisoner within the walls could pass out , unless by a day-rule in term time , or the special permission of the marshal , which no one expected to obtain without giving sufficient security .
I , nevertheless , determined to apply to the marshal , as we were not to be driven , without an effort , from the pleasure of doing a kind action after we had once made up our minds to it .
We knew the character of the marshal to be that of a gentleman , and as I felt no dread at the idea of placing myself under an obligation to such a man , I , without further ceremony , waited upon him , and communicated the circumstances and our wishes upon the subject .
Without the slightest hesitation he granted my request , and having called his deputy , he demanded the reason why he had not been made acquainted with the situation of the ladies who had been brought in the night before , and he called for the books to know who the lady was , and what sum she was in for .
It was found that her name was M -- e , and that she was detained for three hundred pounds .
I immediately offered to the marshal to become security for the sum , if he had any difficulty about it .
His only answer was , `` Your word , Mr. Hunt , is quite sufficient  '' and turning to the officer , he said , `` Recollect , sir , that Mrs. M -- e and her daughter have free access to Mr. Hunt 's and Mr. Waddington 's apartments , to dine , drink tea , and spend the evening whenever they please to invite them  and take care also that they have a good room provided for them , if they have not already got such within the walls . ''
Thus it was at all times with this worthy man .
I never knew him interpose to prevent an act of kindness or of charity to a prisoner  but , on the contrary , he was always ready to promote their comfort , and willing to assist in relieving the distresses of those who were in affliction .


Mrs. M -- and her daughter arrived at the hour appointed .
She was a tall , elegant figure , apparently upwards of fifty , and her face , though clouded by misfortune , bore evident traces of no common beauty .
Her manners and address were at once graceful , dignified , and unembarrassed .
Her daughter was a pretty little interesting girl of eighteen , and , though she was very accomplished , yet it was easy to discover that she had not received that highly refined education , nor enjoyed those advantages which can only be acquired by associating with persons who have moved in the first circles of fashionable society  all which advantages her mother evidently possessed in a very eminent degree .
Mrs. M -- appeared to be well acquainted with Mr. Pitt , Mr. Dundas , and some of the royal family  but as the conversation turned upon general subjects , we did not enter into any further particulars on the first visit .
We confined ourselves to making arrangements for the future comfort of the ladies , while they remained within the walls , and this object , Mr. Waddington and myself , with the cheerful cooperation of the marshal , easily contrived to promote .


After a visit or two I became enthusiastically interested in the fate of Mrs. M -- .
I discovered that she had moved a great deal in the higher circles , and was particularly well acquainted with the ministers of the crown , and a certain great personage .
As she saw that she had excited , if not an interest , at least a great curiosity in my breast , she told me that she was the natural daughter of the late , the great , Marquis of G -- , and that , as her 's had been a most eventful life , she would relate to me some very extraordinary incidents in it , if I would favour her with an interview some morning .
This was readily assented to , and our meeting was fixed for the following day .
Her history was briefly as follows : -- she had been brought up by the Marquis of G -- , and educated by him , with great care and tenderness .
She married young , and was an early widow .
After the death of her husband , she fell a victim to the seductive powers of old Harry D -- s , and became his mistress , which she continued to be for many years .
During that time she had an opportunity of seeing a great deal of Mr. Pitt , of whom and his associates she told me a vast number of anecdotes , which will not do to mention here .
Her old paramour at length became tired of her , and a very extraordinary event led to an opportunity of shifting her off his hands , without the inconvenience of making her a settlement .
A certain great personage was at that time labouring under a distressing malady .
The physicians in attendance came to the conclusion , that it was necessary that their patient should have a female attendant during the night  and the finding of a proper person for the occasion was the only obstacle which interposed to prevent their carrying their wish into effect .
Old Harry D -- s proposed to obviate this difficulty , by making a sacrifice , as he pretended , of his favourite mistress , upon condition that an annuity of four hundred pounds should be settled upon her .
This proposal was immediately accepted , and the terms were acceded to by the family of the afflicted personage .
Though the wary old Scotchman was delighted to get rid of his mistress upon such advantageous terms for himself , or rather to drive such an excellent bargain , yet he all the time professed that he was making the greatest sacrifice in the world , and doing the greatest violence to his feelings , by parting with a beloved object  a sacrifice which he was induced to make solely from the love and veneration which he bore to his afflicted master .
She assured us of her belief that , by these means , he obtained the greatest favours and the most splendid reward , while she , for the sum of four hundred a year , consented to submit to the embraces of a madman .


The patient recovered , and she was turned adrift , without her salary being regularly paid .
She had contracted a debt of three hundred pounds , for which she was sent to the King 's Bench prison , though she convinced me , by documents that she produced , that she had at the time seven quarters of her salary , seven hundred pounds , due to her from the said great personage  less than half of which would have saved her from a gaol .


This circumstance , however extraordinary it may appear , was not only confirmed by very credible witnesses , but also by most indisputable documentary proof  and , as a confirmation of its correctness , Mr. Dundas , who was subsequently Lord Melville , a few days afterwards came in person to bail her into the rules , which I sincerely believe that he never would have done , if he had not heard of the company that she had fallen into .
Mrs. M -- and her daughter were at dinner with Mr. Waddington and myself , when Mr. Dundas sent for her out  but we made him wait till she had finished her dinner , declaring that we would be her bail , rather than she should submit to receive a favour from such an unnatural being .
This lady gave me a history of the then court , and she was familiar with extraordinary anecdotes relating to most of the persons connected with the ministers as well as the royal family .
The recital of so much infamy and intrigue , when coupled with what I had heard from Mr. Clifford , of the practices of the law and the courts of justice , and from Dr. Gabriel , with respect to the debaucheries of the most dignified members of the church , and the hypocrisy of many of its puritanical preachers , really made me almost believe that I was got into a new world , and that the men and women of which it was composed were a different species from those with whom I had been in the habit of associating  in fact it opened to my view such scenes of villainy , fraud , hypocrisy , and injustice , practised upon mankind by those who contrived to govern them by what is called religion and law , that I involuntarily re-echoed , with an exclamation , the sentiments of Mr. Clifford , and pronounced aloud , `` That there is no tyranny so infamous as that which is carried on under the forms of law and justice . ''


I had here an opportunity of meeting men of talent and men of experience , and particularly some eminent men of the law , who , although they were not public characters , like Mr. Clifford , and therefore did not promulgate their sentiments so publicly as he did , yet all admitted the truth of his description of the state of the courts of law  and my Lord Kenyon was spoken of with great freedom , and his decisions were canvassed with very little ceremony .


I have already mentioned , that Colonel Despard was confined in the Tower , by the Secretary of State , Lord Hobart , in virtue of the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act , and that Mr. Clifford had promised that he would take me to the Tower , and introduce me to the colonel .
The day having at length arrived for the performance of his promise , Clifford called on me , and we walked together to London Bridge , where we took a boat to Tower stairs .


After entering our names in the book , which has been invariably the practice at the Tower , we were admitted to the apartment of Colonel Despard .
He was a mild gentleman-like man .


Mr. Clifford introduced me by name , as a country friend of his , and the colonel received me with great courtesy and politeness .
During our stay he inveighed with some warmth against the injustice of his treatment , and the protracted length of his imprisonment , which he said , I think , was then nearly six years .
Two beef-eaters were always in the room with him , when any person was admitted , and they never left the room , even when his wife came to see him  but , as far as was in their power , consistent with the orders which they had received , and were obliged to obey , they conducted themselves with great propriety and civility toward the colonel and his friends .
He laughed heartily at the idea of a visit from me , who was at the time a prisoner in the King 's Bench , and Clifford surprised him when he said , that I had entered my name `` Mr. Henry Hunt , King 's Bench , '' which I had done .


To shew me the stile in which the procession accompanied the prisoner , Mr. Clifford proposed a walk upon the terrace .
He had described this ceremony to me , and it appeared so preposterous , that he saw I looked doubtful as to whether I should believe him to be serious .
When he observed that I looked suspicious , he always took uncommon pains to convince me by some unequivocal proof , and this was his motive for proposing a walk .
A guard of soldiers was called , and the procession was as follows : -- One of the beef-eaters walked first , with his sword drawn  then followed two soldiers , carrying arms , with their bayonets fixed  then came Colonel Despard , with Mr. Clifford and myself , one on each side of him  immediately behind us marched two more soldiers , carrying arms , with fixed bayonets  and another beef-eater , with a drawn sword , brought up the rear .
In this manner we walked the parade or terrace for about half an hour , taking care to speak loud , so that the whole of our conversation was heard by the beef-eaters .
After our walk we sat with him a short time , and then took our leave .


Anxious to hear something more of the particulars relating to the confinement of the colonel , I called a coach , and ordered the coachman to put us down at the King 's Bench , where Mr. Clifford had engaged to dine with us .
As we rode along , I began to ply my companion , to inform me what desperate offence Colonel Despard had committed , which called for such rigorous treatment .
His answer was this -- `` He served the government faithfully and zealously , as a soldier  he advanced money for them upon some foreign station  but the government was ungrateful and ungenerous to him , and in consequence of some quibble , they have refused to repay him what he advanced on their account .
He complained and remonstrated , he became importunate for justice , he was considered troublesome , and for complaining they have sent him to prison , under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act , as the only effectual means of answering his just complaints . ''
`` And can it be possible , '' I asked , `` that justice will not in the end be done to this unfortunate gentleman ? ''
`` Depend upon it , '' replied Clifford , `` he is too honest ever to gain redress .
If he would crouch and truckle to his persecutors , he might not only be set at liberty , but all that they have robbed him of would be returned .
This , however , he never will do .
He , poor fellow !
expects that when the operation of the Habeas Corpus act is restored , he will be able to bring his cruel persecutors to justice  but he will be deceived !
He is marked out for one of that monster , Pitt 's , victims .
When he comes out , which will be when the suspension act expires , and not before , I know that he will demand to be put upon his trial .
But the ministers , who have always a corrupt majority at their beck , will easily procure an act of indemnity  and as they have nothing to charge him with , they will refuse to give him a trial , and they will laugh at him .
And this is the boasted freedom of the people of England !
This is the way in which the ministers serve those who oppose them !
These are the methods they take , first to punish , and then to drive their opponents into violence and into acts of desperation !!!
I know that he will complain , and that he has just cause of complaint , and I dread the consequence , because I know full well their arts , and the power which they have to carry their diabolical plans into execution .
If he be troublesome , they will stick at nothing , and I should not be the least surprised if they were ultimately to have some of their spies to swear away his life ! ''


Gracious God !
I little thought how prophetic these words were .
Was this really the case , Mr. Justice Best ?
you were his counsel upon his trial  you must know if this were really the case !!!
But more of this hereafter .
After the death of poor Despard , Clifford and myself never met that I did not recall to his recollection , the prophetic conversation that took place in the coach , as we passed over London Bridge , and up the Borough , on our return from the Tower .


All the particulars of the trial and the execution of Colonel Despard are fresh in my memory  but I shall be much obliged to some friend , who may chance to read this , to send me the Trial itself , through my publisher , Mr. Dolby .
I shall also be much pleased , if some one will furnish me with the names of those persons who were waiting in readiness to come forward and prove that the witnesses , who swore to the facts against the colonel , were persons of the most infamous character , and not worthy to believed upon their oaths  which persons were neglected to be called by Mr. Sergeant Best .
Clifford told me their names often , but they do not occur to me now  therefore I shall be obliged to some one to furnish me with the particulars .


When we got back to the King 's Bench , we were informed , by Mr. Waddington , that there had been a great inquiry for me in my absence , as some friends out of the country had been to visit me , and had , foolishly enough , made much stir in the King 's Bench in their endeavour to find me .
Mr. Waddington , however , having learned what was going on , satisfied their inquiries so far as to induce them to be quiet , and promise to call the next day .
Some of my readers will be surprised that a prisoner should have been from home !
But the fact was , that I was committed to the custody of the Marshal of the Court for six weeks , and I had given him ample security for being at all times ready to appear , in case he should be called upon to produce his prisoner .
They were not then so particular as they now are .


The visit to the Tower made a lasting impression upon my mind , and , after what I had witnessed , I was easily persuaded by Mr. Clifford that the account which he gave me of the treatment of other prisoners confined under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus act , was perfectly true .
These horrible facts created in my breast a deep-rooted never-ceasing antipathy to that tyranny which is perpetrated under the disguise , under the false colour , the mere forms of law and justice , and sanctioned by the hypocritical mummeries of superstition , instead of real religion .
After dinner , Clifford described to us a scene of which he had been a spectator in the Tower , the week before , when he went there with Mrs. Despard to consult with the colonel , and to make his will  the colonel being then , and having long been labouring under a serious complaint , which had been brought on by the length of his confinement , and which was considered as dangerous by his physician .
During the whole of that time the beef-eaters remained in the room so that even the sacred obligation of making his last will could not be performed , unless it was done in the presence and in the hearing of the officers of the Tower  and they actually became the subscribing witnesses to his will .


I had now become acquainted with many political characters , and I was frequently invited by Mr. Clifford to go down to Wimbledon with him , on a Sunday , to join the public parties of Mr. Horne Tooke , from whom he promised to insure me a hearty welcome .
Deep-rooted vulgar prejudice against this extraordinary and highly gifted man had , however , got such possession of my feelings , that I continually made some excuse  for I had imbibed a notion that he was an artful intriguing person , of an insinuating address , who frequently led young politicians into scrapes and difficulties .
My idea of him in politics was , that he was a violent Jacobin , and an enemy to his King and country  and this was quite enough to make me avoid his company .
The real fact was , that I was afraid to trust myself in his society .
I had no wish to become a politician , and as I found that the principles of liberty , which Mr. Clifford inculcated , had made a considerable impression upon my mind , I was afraid to encourage too far my natural propensity to resist injustice , oppression , and tyranny .
I did not wish to fan the flame which Mr. Clifford 's eloquence and convincing arguments had lighted in my breast .
Another reason for my refusing to make one of the Wimbledon parties was , the probability that I should there meet with Sir Francis Burdett , whom I was induced to look upon almost as a political madman , a dangerous firebrand in the hands of Mr. Tooke , who appeared to me to be nothing less than a designing incendiary .
Mr. Clifford took some pains to persuade me out of my ridiculous notions  yet , in the account which he gave me of Mr. Tooke 's character , he in some measure confirmed me in the opinion that I had previously formed , as Mr. Tooke certainly made Sir F. Burdett a puppet to carry on his hostility against those ministers who had persecuted him , and aimed a deadly blow at his life .


Mr. Tooke was a man of profound talent , a persevering friend of liberty , and an implacable foe to the measures of Mr. Pitt .
But he only supported partial , not general liberty : he was no friend of universal suffrage  he supported the householder , or rather the direct tax paying suffrage .
To those who contended for universal suffrage , namely , the Duke of Richmond , Major Cartwright , and others , he made this comprehensive , intelligible reply , `` You may go all the way to Windsor , if you please , but I shall stop short at Hounslow  '' thus implying , that he was not prepared to give political freedom to more than one half of the people , that he would not go farther than Hounslow , which is not half way to Windsor .
Sir Francis Burdett gloried in being thought a disciple of Mr. Tooke .


The Sunday parties at Wimbledon were composed of the disaffected persons in London and Westminster .
Amongst the number stood pre-eminent the noted Charing-Cross tailor , Frank Place , who was always an avowed republican by profession  poor Samuel Miller , the shoemaker , in Skinner-street , Snow-hill  poor old Thomas Hardy , and many others , with whom I did not become acquainted till some time after this period , though I collected their characters from my friend Clifford .
Mr. Thelwall had cut the concern , and set up in another line , that of a fashionable teacher of elocution .


At this period my taste leaned more to the sports of the field , to hunting , shooting , and fishing , than to any thing else  and as these amusements were more congenial to my habits and my large farming concerns in the country , I never , while I was the first time in prison , sought much for political information , though I necessarily heard a great deal of politics from my friends Waddington and Clifford , as well as from numerous political characters with whom I became acquainted , in consequence of their coming to visit the former gentleman .
Indeed , seldom a day passed without seeing some half dozen or half score of them .
Mr. Waddington 's friends were almost all opposition men in politics  but his relations were one and all backbone loyalists , or rather royalists .


My young friend , William Butcher , was delighted with the society of Mr. Clifford .
Butcher was a disciple of Thomas Paine  he had been bred up in a country village , where the clergyman , Mr. Evans , of Little Bedwin , who was his associate , had instilled into his mind all the principles of Paine , both political and theological , and consequently Butcher was delighted with the society that he had met with at our table .
Butcher was a famous great arm-chair politician  over the bottle he would be as valiant as any man , yet he would never act .
The reason he used to assign for never meddling in active politics was , that , except in a republic , no private citizen could ever attain the eminence of being the first man in the country  and no man , he thought , could have a proper stimulus , unless he could hope to be placed at the head of the government .
Washington was his idol , and the American constitution was his creed in politics .
He was enraptured to hear me listen with so much earnestness and attention to the political dogmas of Clifford , as he was pleased to call them  for Mr. Clifford never professed to wish for a republican government  he always contended that the English constitution , if it were administered in its purity , was quite good enough for Englishmen .
In this opinion I then concurred with him , and from this opinion I have never once in my life swerved , up to this hour .
A government of King , Lords , and Commons , so that the latter are fairly chosen by all the commons , would secure to us the full enjoyment of rational liberty .
I am for that liberty which is secured and protected by the government of the laws , and not by the government of the sword .
But those laws must be such as are made by the whole commons , the whole people of England , and not the arbitrary laws that are made by the few for the government of the whole  not the laws that are made by the few , for the partial and unjust benefit of the few , at the expence and cost of the whole .


Mr. Clifford was the brother-in-law of Sir Charles Wolseley , the worthy Baronet 's first lady being Mr. Clifford 's sister .
My good and excellent friend , and true radical , Sir Charles Wolseley , baronet , is , as well as myself , the political disciple of the honest Counsellor Clifford .
If Clifford , poor fellow !
were now alive , how he would laugh to see two of his staunchest and most disinterested political disciples caught in the toils of the boroughmongers !
But he would also laugh to see the melancholy state to which the said boroughmongers are reduced !
Now they have caught us they do not know what to do with us .


Through Mr. Clifford I learned how they managed matters in the courts , and Mr. Waddington , who by this time had had considerable experience , was most violent against the injustice of the persecution which he had experienced .
At this period he possessed a large quantity of hops , perhaps half the hops in the kingdom , which he had purchased upon a speculation , that there would be a very bad crop .
His calculations turned out to be correct , and the hops that he had purchased at ten pounds a hundred were now worth twenty-two and twenty-three pounds .
They were all in the Borough , and he was selling them off , at this advance in price , when the conspiracy was formed against him , at the head of which was Mr. Timothy Brown , of the firm of Whitbread and Brown .
Mr. Pitt , in order to punish Mr. Waddington , for calling the meeting at the Paul 's Head Tavern , in the City , to petition the King for peace , and the removal of ministers , lent himself and his agents to further the objects of this conspiracy of brewers against Mr. Waddington  and as Kenyon , the chief justice , was a devoted instrument of the minister 's , Mr. Waddington was not only fined and sentenced to six months imprisonment , for forestalling hops , but acts of parliament were passed to permit the brewers to use foreign hops , quassia , or any other drug , or ingredient , as a substitute .
By these unjustifiable and partial proceedings , the very same hops that were worth , and had been selling at , twenty-three pounds a hundred , were reduced down to five pounds , and even to three pounds a hundred .


Mr. Timothy Brown was at the head of those brewers who acted as the tools of the minister , to persecute Mr. Waddington , not for forestalling hops , but actually for standing up to do his duty in the city of London , as a liveryman , to oppose the ruinous system of ministers  and it is the best proof that can be given of his earnestness and sincerity , that they never relaxed in their persecutions against him till they had ruined him .
He was a merchant , a banker at Maidstone , and a trader , and , of course , he was largely concerned in money transactions .
Now the government can always silence any man in this situation , or ruin him and his credit , if he becomes really sincere in his opposition to them  and this is one good reason why we radicals have nothing to expect from merchants , bankers , and traders .
The ministers have no objection to those persons who carry on a regular whig opposition , because that is all in the way of business .
They are all in the regiment , and although they are upon what is called half-pay , yet they belong to the regiment , and are always in the expectancy of being called into active service again .
The ministers generally employ some of these expectants to do their dirty work for them  and any measure that is prosecuted by the Whigs is , at least was , at the time of which I am speaking , thought by a great number of well-meaning but ignorant people , to be perfectly justifiable .
As I pass along I shall be able to prove to the reader , how well the factions manage these matters , how skilfully they always play into each other 's hands , against the rights , the property , and the liberties of the people .
For instance , if the ministers want any obnoxious measure brought into parliament , such an one as , if it were to be suggested by themselves , would create a great public feeling , alarm , and hostility to it , throughout the country -- to wit , if they want to carry a corn bill , to raise or keep up the price of corn three or four shillings a bushel , the effect of which is , to lay a tax of twenty or thirty millions a year upon the people who consume it , they are cunning enough to put forward one of those shoy-hoy Whigs .
Sir Henry Parnell , an Irish Whig baronet , must , forsooth , be the ostensible parent of the measure , while the ministers are professing openly to be doubtful of its expediency and policy .
When all this has been done to sound the people , they , at length , with a seeming reluctance , yield to the suggestions of the landed interest , and the urgency of the state  and should the people begin to be importunate , and remonstrate against the measure , why then it is only necessary to bring upon the scene their principal shoy-hoy , Westminster 's pride , to wit  and if he will but just say at a Westminster meeting , `` that the measure is of little consequence either to him or his constituents  '' and if , when he is called upon in the House , by my Lord Castlereagh , to speak honestly his sentiments respecting the measure , he will get up and merely tell the Noble Lord `` that he deserves to be impeached  but that as to the corn bill it will be all the same to him whether it is passed or not , that he is as much for it as against it , but that he does not care which way it goes  '' why then the juggle is rendered complete .
Oh , what a farce !
What a delusion !
but the ministers having got this hero on their side , the measure passes , and the people are duped and deceived .
As I proceed in my history , I shall be able to shew to the public how necessary these shoy-hoys are to the ministers , and how often they have successfully played them off against the people .
So it was in this case .
The Judges knew that there was no law against Mr. Waddington .
It was , therefore , necessary to make a shew of great feeling and interest for the welfare of the people  and this Mr. Timothy Brown , who was a Whig , and a partner of Whitbread , was selected as the instrument upon this occasion .
He was so selected because he bore Mr. Waddington a personal hatred , and was glad to pursue him with vindictive hostility , for a harmless joke which Mr. Waddington had played upon him .
Nor did he cease his attacks upon him till he actually ruined him .


I will now explain the cause of his hatred and hostility .
Mr. Waddington , who was an active , intelligent , persevering man of business , and who , besides being a banker at Maidstone , in the heart of East Kent [ 23 ] , was also engaged in the hop trade , as a hop merchant in the Borough  was a great speculator in this speculating business , which always was considered as a business of chance rather than of judgment .
As , however , games of chance are greatly governed by the penetration of those who play them , Mr. Waddington payed that attention to the growth of hops , that he made it rather a game of certainty than of hazard .
In the spring and summer of 1800 , this gentleman thought that he discovered a considerable stagnation in the growth of the vine , as well as such a degree of disease generally , in the crop of hops near Maidstone , that he was determined to make a peregrination on foot through the gardens in all the hop districts in Kent and Sussex .
He carried his determination into effect  and having made such observations as led to the conclusion , that it would be a very short crop , he made large purchases of the growers , to be delivered at a certain price when picked : this was called fore-hand bargains , and was the invariable custom of transacting business between the farmers and the factors .
Mr. Waddington then started into Worcestershire , and having made a similar survey of the growing crops in that county , and having come to a similar conclusion , he made large purchases also upon the same terms as he had done in Kent .
As he returned through London he called upon his friend , Tim Brown , and , in the true spirit of friendship , he communicated to him the result of his travels , and his inspection of the hop gardens , both in Kent and Worcestershire  and , as a proof of his conviction that there would be a short crop , he informed him of the large purchases which he had made  and added , that he should still increase his stock as the season approached  advising , at the same time , his friend Brown , by all means , to lay in a good stock of old hops , and purchase early and largely of new ones .
-- Mr. Brown affected to hold Mr. Waddington 's information very cheap , and in fact treated his advice rather with ridicule than attention .


At length picking time came , and Mr. Waddington 's predictions were realised to the very letter  there being not more than a quarter of a crop grown that year .
Mr. Brown had not only failed to follow his friend 's advice , but , relying upon some other information , had actually neglected to lay in the usual stock for the house of Whitbread c.. .
Mr. Waddington , rather piqued at the slight put upon his judgment by his friend Brown , and elated with his own success , sent Mr. Timothy Brown a GOOSE , as a quiz upon him for his want of discernment , and lack of faith in his representations .
This innocent joke , which , I understand , was at that time frequently practised by speculating men in the city , so enraged Mr. Brown , that he vowed revenge  and smarting under the loss of not having had the foresight to purchase his hops earlier , before they had risen a hundred per cent .
which they had now done , he became one of the remorseless persecutors of , one of the conspirators to prosecute , Mr. Waddington upon an obsolete law , for forestalling .


A verdict having been obtained against Mr. Waddington , for forestalling in Herefordshire , and being about to be tried in Kent , [ 24 ] the prosecutors moved , the Court of King 's Bench to remove the venue out of Kent , upon the ground , that the farmers were prejudiced so much in favour of Mr. Waddington , that they could not obtain a fair jury .
Mr. Law , who was afterwards Lord Ellenborough , was his leading counsel  and upon his argument , and the authorities which he cited , although they were strongly opposed by the counsel on the other side , yet , as the prejudice was proved , Lord Kenyon , upon the principle that the administration ought `` not only to be pure , but that it should be above suspicion , '' made the rule absolute , and the cause was tried in Westminster Hall , by a Middlesex jury .
It was mainly upon this case that I rested my application , for the court to remove the cause of the King against Hunt and nine others , for a conspiracy , out of Lancashire into Yorkshire .
The Middlesex jury was , however as tractable as that in the country , and he had a second verdict against him , for which he was sentenced to the custody of the Marshal of the King 's Bench .


It was while he was undergoing his sentence , that , as I have already mentioned , I became acquainted with him , and I passed my six weeks as pleasantly as I ever passed any six weeks of my life .
To be sure it put me to a great expense , and a considerable loss , in taking me from my family , home , and business  but I gained more real information , more knowledge of the world , and of men and manners  more insight into mercantile , political , and theological affairs than I should have gained in so many years , if I had continued in the country , employing my time in farming , shooting , fox hunting , and attending to the exercise of the yeomanry cavalry .
It is more than probable that I should never have taken the lead , ( such a lead ! )
in the political affairs of my country , if I had not thus early been placed in such a situation , and in such company , by the sentence of the Court of King 's Bench .
Before that period I had , it is true , a natural and an inherent abhorrence of tyranny and oppression , and my excellent parent had instilled into my breast a pure love of justice , and an invincible attachment for fair play  and , therefore , it is not likely that I should ever have been a tool of arbitrary power .
Yet , if it had not been for this circumstance , I should never have been such an enthusiast for equal rights , and such a determined enemy to a corrupt , a sham representation .


Mr. Clifford found in me a willing , a zealous proselyte to the cause of rational liberty , and a warm admirer of the principles of universal political freedom .
He recommended to my notice the political works of Paine , particularly his Rights of Man , and applauded my determination never to mingle religious with political discussions , and never to risk the cause of liberty by doing any thing which could excite religious prejudices .
Mr. Clifford was a Catholic , a rigid Catholic , notwithstanding which , there never lived a more sincere friend of religious as well as of civil toleration .
Some of our party were frequently introducing theological discussions  and some , who ought from their profession to have known better , denounced all religion as relics of superstition .
Mr. Clifford , as well as myself and Mr. Waddington , discountenanced , and ultimately prohibited , those subjects .
We each professed our faith , and we did not choose to be dictated to , any more than we wished to dictate to others , in matters of conscience .


On my return into the country , I was met at Marlborough by my friend Hancock , who accompanied me to Devizes , where we were joined by a large party of friends , at a dinner , which was provided for the occasion , at the Bear Inn .
Some of my more rustic neighbours expressed great surprise to see me look so well , after coming out of a prison  their idea of which had led them to expect to see me look thin , pale , and emaciated .
On the contrary , they found that I had lost none of my usual ruddy and florid appearance , and , instead of looking as if I had been fed upon bread and water , I had grown stout and fleshy , although I had taken regular exercise , and , compared with my usual habits in the country , had lived moderately , and in fact abstemiously .
Yet , with all my precaution , I had so much increased in bulk , that it was very visible to all my friends who had not called on me in London .


I found my wife and children in perfect health , and they warmly greeted my return .
In fact , my absence was nothing more than passing six or seven weeks in London .
I found all my business going on with great regularity , my stock in good order , and my hunters in excellent condition  and as I longed to taste again the sports of the field , and to mingle in the pleasures of the chase , my favourite mare was ordered to be ready on the following morning , at the usual hour , that I might ride to join the hounds , which threw off for the occasion within three miles of my house , as the sportsmen were to meet upon the down of my farm at Widdington .


Here I met my old brother sportsmen , who appeared rejoiced to see me once more amongst them  but they one and all declared , that my scarlet coat was grown too small for me .
Some said , that I was grown a stone heavier  others , that I was increased two stone  and some bets were made , corresponding with these contending opinions  all , however , agreed , that I was increased very considerably in weight .
Like a true sportsman , I knew my weight to an ounce before I went to London .
It was twelve stone five pounds .
In the midst of this conversation , as we were riding along I espied a hare sitting at a considerable distance  she was started , and off we went , to the music of the many pack of harriers , supported by subscription , but kept by Mr. Tinker , of Lavington .


I was more than commonly elated , and enjoyed the sport with great pleasure  in fact , I entered into the spirit of the chace with the greatest enthusiasm .
My beautiful high bred hunter was in admirable condition and spirits , and appeared to participate with the rider in the full zest of the sport  she almost fled with me across the downs , keeping pace with the fleetest of the pack .
The hills and vallies upon that part of Salisbury Plain very much resemble those of Sussex , in the neighbourhood of Brighton race-course .
Persons unused to such countries would consider them as almost precipices .
Our horses , however , as well as their riders , being accustomed to them , mounted them with apparent ease , and generally descended them at full speed .
I had been spanking across the downs for nearly an hour , with the highest glee , and was going with great speed down the well known steep hill which leads into Waterdean Bottom , pressing on my mare , so that she might be enabled to ascend half way up the opposite hill by the force of the increased velocity that she had acquired in descending the other , which is the common practice of all good sportsmen and bold riders in such a country .
In passing with great speed over some rather uneven rutty ground , at the bottom of the hill , I received a violent and sudden shock , by my poor beast coming all at once to a stand still .
I jumped off without her falling , though she was nearly down .
She stood trembling , and I was shocked to find that she had broken both of her fore legs : the right short off above the knee , and the other below the fetlock joint .
This was a most distressing accident , and the miracle was , that she had not fallen , and I , her rider , been smashed in the fall .
But her wonderful courage saved me from almost inevitable destruction , for we were going at the time with the velocity of an arrow shot out of a bow .


The other horsemen had gone on , and were soon out of sight , and I was left in this situation upon the open down , a distance of two miles from my home .
Seeing the deplorable state of my poor horse , and knowing , from the nature of the injury she had sustained , that it would be impossible to recover her , I determined to proceed on foot to my home , that I might send some proper person to release her from her misery  and I had gone some little distance on my road , when , on looking round , I found the poor creature hobbling after me , indicating , that it was her wish not to be left alone and abandoned in such a pitiable state .
My heart bled for my faithful and noble beast , and I instantly attended to her apparent call upon my humanity .
I took the rein , and she followed me home , nearly as fast as I could walk .
When we [ 25 ] reached there , she was instantly relieved from her pain by the last sad resource , the fatal unerring ball , which , when directed by a skilful hand , produces instantaneous death , without a groan , or scarcely a convulsive struggle .
I dropped a tear when she had breathed her last  consoled only by the reflection , that my life had been spared by a merciful and beneficent Creator  for had the poor animal fallen , at the swift pace she was going , my destruction must have been inevitable .
What is very remarkable , I never before or since ever knew a horse break its legs , when going at full speed , without falling .
But this noble animal , in the struggle , in the amazing effort to save herself from falling , when the bone of her right leg snapped , actually fractured the other .
I had the fractured bones of both legs preserved , for the inspection of the curious , for many years afterwards .


This sad accident was a great drawback to the pleasure that I had promised myself in the chase during the spring of the year , subsequent to my return from the King 's Bench  and to add to my mortification and disappointment , the first time I mounted my next greatest favourite hunter , I found that it was brokenwinded .
I had lent her , during my residence in town , ( for it is a farce to call it imprisonment ) to a gentleman of the name of Tompkins , who lived at Oakley House , near Abingdon  and he had returned it in the state which I have described , so that my hunting was spoiled for that season .


Upon my being weighed it was not difficult to account for the lamentable fate of my lost favourite .
I found that I had increased two stone two pounds during my six weeks comparative inactivity in the King 's Bench  for , although I had taken much more exercise than my fellow prisoner , Mr. Waddington , yet it was so very different from , and so much less than , that which I had been in the habit of taking when I was in the country , that I had increased in size and weight in the rapid manner which I have described  and to this increase must be attributed the melancholy accident which occurred to my unfortunate hunter .


My friend Tompkins , who had returned my other hunter broken-winded , in consequence of his servant 's mismanagement in feeding , or his own indiscreet riding , upon being informed of the circumstance , very coolly answered , that he was sorry for it  and , in the true stile of a knowing sportsman , he proposed to accommodate me in return -- not by lending me one of his hunters for the remainder of the season , but by selling me one , a young horse , as he said , of great power and promise , which would just suit me  and as a great favour he wrote me word , that he would part with it to me , as a friend , at the same price which he had given for it .
He invited me to his house to see it , and I accepted his invitation , notwithstanding his sister-in-law , not knowing of his intention to oblige me with it , had previously informed me that he was very much dissatisfied with his purchase  that he had a most unfavourable opinion of the grey horse , and that he would be happy to part with him at a loss , rather than not get rid of what he considered as a very bad bargain .
From the lady 's description of the horse and of the bad qualities for which Mr. Tompkins wished to dispose of him , I had , however , formed a more favourable opinion of him , and I was therefore determined to trust to my own judgment , and go and see him , particularly as he was well bred .
I accordingly visited Oakley for the purpose , and without one word of higgling I gave him his price , which was forty guineas , my friend assuring me that he did it to oblige me , and that he considered himself as doing me no small favour .
Thus had this sporting friend , to make amends for the loss he had occasioned me , by breaking the wind of a favourite and valuable hunter , worth little less than a hundred guineas , palmed upon me , for forty guineas , as a pretended boon , a young three years old horse , which he did not think would ever be worth sixpence !
So much for sporting , horse-dealing friendships !
However , I had no reason to repent of my bargain .
I got my horse into condition before I tried him , and he turned out one of the best and most valuable hunters in the kingdom , to the great mortification of my envious and obliging friend  for , early in the next season , when he was only four years old , the Honourable George Bowes , the brother of Lord Strathmore , offered me three hundred guineas for him .
I , however , never parted with him , which I had reason to repent , for , a few days after I had refused five hundred guineas for him , my friend Wm. Butcher 's horse got loose in my stable , and by a kick broke his fore leg , when I was obliged to have him killed , and so ended poor OAKLEY !


I was rather unlucky in my sporting acquaintance , as will be seen by the following circumstance .
Soon after my return from my imprisonment , my friend Wm. Tinker , of Lavington , and his family came to visit me  after dinner , amongst other things that I was relating , relative to what had occurred during my stay at the King 's Bench , I mentioned the toast that was usually drank first by the prisoners every day , which was , `` Plaintiffs in prison , and defendants at liberty . ''
Mrs. Tinker asked whether I and Mr. Waddington had joined in this toast ?
I answered , yes  and added , that I believed it was the first toast drank every day after dinner .
This she set down at once for a very disloyal sentiment , because my nominal plaintiff or prosecutor was the King against Hunt , and she consequently pronounced me , as I thought in a mere joke , to be a disloyal man , a jacobin .
In this opinion of hers she was confirmed , by learning that I had called upon Colonel Despard in the Tower , and hearing me inveigh , in rather warm language , against packed juries , treacherous lawyers , and corrupt judges , and also venturing to call in question , `` a la Clifford , '' some of the measures of the heaven-born minister , she therefore set me down at once in her mind as a rank jacobin  and , as the sequel will prove , she did not fail to act upon this impression -- for , about a month afterwards , I received a letter from my only paternal aunt , to say that Mrs. Tinker had informed her , that , since I had been in London , I became a disloyal man , and that I had actually drank at my own table the most disloyal toast , wishing the King to be imprisoned .
All my forefathers , said my aunt , had been loyal men , and one of them , Colonel Thomas Hunt , had been by nothing short of a miracle saved from losing his head for his loyalty to King Charles the Second  as therefore I had chosen to take a different course , by professing different principles , she should alter her will , and leave that fortune which she had intended for me to some other persons .
She most religiously kept her word  though in my reply I unequivocally disclaimed any intention of offering the slightest insult to the King , or saying any thing that could , without the most wanton misconstruction , be deemed disloyal .
Yet I claimed the right to think for myself , and did not admit that , because I professed the most unbounded loyalty to the King , I ought to pledge myself to a blind subserviance and attachment to all the measures of his ministers .
All that I could urge against this breach of confidence , in betraying , nay , in misrepresenting a conversation at my own table , and the malignity of Mrs. Tinker 's motives , were of no avail .
Although this aunt died without any children , and I was her nearest of kin , yet she made my quondam friend , Tinker , her executor , and never left me a shilling .
The reader will easily conceive that this neither changed my politics nor increased my confidence in sporting friends .
The fact was , that this old lady was an illegitimate daughter of my grandfather , by a relation of this Mrs. Tinker , whom he afterwards married .
My grandfather had been induced to leave this daughter a very considerable patrimony , at the suggestion of my father  and , as she died without issue , it would have been only an act of justice to have restored the money to its lawful source .
But the kind interference of Mrs. Tinker has sent it in another direction , and I sincerely wish it may prosper with those who have obtained it .
I envy them not  I have retained my opinions , and they have got the cash -- much good may it do them , I say .


Had not this Mrs. Tinker been a great croney of Mrs. Hunt 's , the connexion would have ceased from this time .
I was , however , always very cautious what I said afterwards , when Mrs. Tinker was of the party .
By her perversion of a conversation which occurred at my own table , by her officious misrepresentation of me , she had been the cause of my losing some thousand pounds .
This was the first instance in which I experienced the serious consequences of sporting liberal opinions .
But it was not the only instance in which this good lady ( who was always called mother by her family and friends , from her very motherly habits ) had an opportunity of doing me a good turn in the same way .
Another elderly lady , Mrs. Watts , of Lavington , who had voluntarily made her will , and left me property and estates , as being her nearest and only relation , upon being taken ill desired that I should be sent for  but my evil spirit , Mrs. Tinker , who was a neighbour , sent for another lady , and they contrived , as they said , to get the old lady to alter her will in her last moments , and leave her property away from me to other persons .
This was effected in such a manner , and at such a time , and under such circumstances , that I should have disputed the will had I not been afraid of exposing a relation of my own , who was privy and instrumental to this mysterious transaction .
It is sufficient to say , that the old lady never signed her name , although she wrote a most excellent and legible hand , this precious instrument bearing only her mark  and the maid servant , who attended her , would have proved quite sufficient to have set aside the will , and exposed the parties concerned  but , as one of them was a very near relation of mine , and one whose faults I have always been anxious to conceal and palliate , rather than expose and condemn , I put up with the loss without opposing the proof of the will .
There is one fact more connected with this case , which I will state , to show to what extent the cruelty of some persons will lead them , when they wish to accomplish a bad action .
The maid informed me , and offered to swear it , that her mistress had constantly , during several days illness , expressed the most urgent desire to see me , and was anxious not to sign or to do any thing about her will , till I arrived .
She was , however , as repeatedly put off , by the assurance that I had been sent for , and did not choose to come , though I was the whole time at home , at a distance of a few miles , and never received the slightest intimation of her illness till after her death .


By this circumstance I may with great fairness reckon myself minus about five thousand pounds  so that the politics which I had learned in the King 's Bench were not to me a source of profit  but , on the contrary , had proved hitherto most detrimental to my pecuniary interests .
But , thank God !
I was never a trading politician  for if I had been such , my losses would have very soon made me a bankrupt in the cause .


At this time , however , though the sentiments which I entertained upon public matters were never concealed , but were , when occasion required , expressed openly , and without reservation , I attended much more to my business , to the sports of the field , and to my own pleasures , than I did to politics .
My farming concerns were well regulated and attended to , though I spent a great portion of my time in fox-hunting and shooting , and likewise kept a great deal of company  scarcely a day in the week passed that I was not out at a party , or had one at my own house , but much more frequently at home .
This period I consider as far the least interesting portion of my life .
I kept an excellent table , had a good cellar of wine , and there was never any lack of visitors to partake of it .
The old adage , `` that fools make feasts and wise men partake of them , '' I can not refrain from acknowledging to have been pretty much realized at Chisenbury House .
When I look back , and recollect the train of hangers-on that constantly surrounded my table , amongst the number of whom was always a parson or two , I am induced to exclaim , in the language of Solomon , `` it was all vanity and vexation of spirit ! ''
My life was a scene of uninterrupted gaiety and dissipation -- one continued round of pleasure .
I had barely time to attend to my own personal concerns  for no sooner was one party of pleasure ended than another was made .
The hounds met at this cover to-day , at that to-morrow , and so on through the week .
Dinners , balls , plays , hunting , shooting , fishing , and driving , in addition to my large farming concerns , which required my attendance at markets and fairs , and which business I never neglected , even in this heyday of levity and vanity  all these things combined , left me no leisure to think or reflect , and scarcely time to sleep -- for no sooner was one pleasure or amusement ended than I found that I had engaged to participate in another  and I joined in them all with my usual enthusiasm .
In the midst of all this giddy round of mirth and folly , I enjoyed less real pleasure and satisfaction , than I had done at any former period of my life .
I saw and felt that there was little sincerity in the attachment of my companions  for there was no real friendship in their hearts , though they would praise my wine , admire my viands , and bestow the most unqualified compliments upon the liberality with which they were dispensed .
Their praise on this score was certainly merited  for whether it was a dinner party or a ball , at Chisenbury House , no expense or trouble was spared to make the guests happy , and to send them away delighted with the entertainment .


What a scene is this for me to look back upon .
I might be said to have got into the whirlpool , into the very vortex of endless dissipation and folly !
I saw and felt my error , but I knew not how to retreat .
My wife , too , entered into the very marrow of this round of pleasure and gay society .
The means to support all this were never wanting  for I found myself in possession of landed property in Wilts and Somerset , at Littlecot and Glastonbury , of the value of upwards of six hundred pounds a year , besides all the large farming business which my father had left me .
There was , therefore , no deficiency of money  and I owe it to myself to say , that large as was my expenditure , I took care never to live fully up to my income  but had every year something considerable to lay by or to assist a friend with .


Fond as I then was of pleasure , no man attended more strictly to his farming business than I did  and the farms of no man in the kingdom were managed better , or were in higher condition .
My farms at that time were like gardens , and much cleaner and freer from weeds than most gardens  and I had the best flock of Southdown sheep in the country , bearing the very finest fleeces , the wool of which I sold for the very highest price in the kingdom .
I one year sold my wool , consisting of four thousand fleeces , for a penny a pound more than was given for the boasted wool shorn from the flock of the famous Mr. Elman , of Glind , in Sussex .
When , at an agricultural meeting , he was told of this fact , he very coolly answered , that his wool was most decidedly the best , and that the superiority of price which Mr. Hunt had obtained arose merely from the want of judgment in the purchaser .
This question was , however , set at rest the very next year -- for the wool dealer who had purchased Mr. Elman 's wool , having heard of my flock , came all the way out of Sussex , from the neighbourhood of Chichester , and purchased my fleeces at three half-pence a pound more than he had given for the crack Sussex wool , and he paid for the carriage , a distance of fifty miles , into the bargain .
After this , Mr. Elman never disputed the point as to the superior quality of my wool .
I mention this circumstance merely to show how determined I was to excel in every thing which I undertook -- at least , that I did every thing with enthusiasm .
I afterwards sold eight thousand fleeces at once , to some manufacturers , Dean , Forsey , and Co. of Chard , in this county , at the highest price that any wool sold for that season .
Mr. Dean subsequently purchased twenty lambs at my sale , that he might have some of the stock  which he sold to me again , when I called upon him some time afterwards .
Out of this circumstance , an infamous and scurrilous falsehood was propagated in the columns of the Taunton Courier , representing me as having swindled my friend Mr. Dean out of a flock of sheep .
When I come to that period of my history , I shall fully explain the affair to the satisfaction of every candid person , and I shall convince every honest man , that the columns of the Taunton Courier have been made the vehicle to promulgate the most barfaced and wanton falsehood against me , to serve a political purpose  and that , in this instance , the Taunton Courier has never been exceeded in infamy , even by the falsehoods of its brother Courier in London .


In the year 1801 , I grew twelve quarters of best oats per acre , upon eight acres of poor down land , at Widdington , the rent of which was not more than ten shillings an acre .
They were sown after an uncommonly fine crop of turnips , that averaged fifty tons to an acre .
The land had been very highly manured , both from the farm-yard and the fold , for the turnips , which had been hoed three times .
It was the heaviest and finest crop of oats that I ever saw , and they stood full six feet high in the straw .
I was sitting on horseback , looking on while they were mowing them , and I recollect that when Thomas Airs , one of the mowers , who was full six feet high , swept his scythe into the standing corn , the ears of the oats frequently struck his hat as he walked along .
It was very fine weather , and they were carried in and made into a rick by themselves , without taking any rain .
In the spring they were thrashed out , and all sold for seed , at three pounds a quarter .
Now , as they averaged twelve quarters an acre , the sale amounted to thirty-six pounds an acre  nearly three times the value of the fee-simple of the land .
There was also more than three tons of straw upon each acre , and as , during that season , straw sold at six pounds per ton , the actual value of the produce ( taking off one pound a ton for the carriage of the straw ) was 50l .
per acre , while the fee-simple of the land would not have sold for 20l .
per acre .


I have related this to shew what enormous profits were gained by good farmers at those times .
About this period it was , that the late Lord Warwick , speaking in the House of Lords , of the state of insolence to which the farmers had arrived , and alluding to their extravagant course of living , assured his right honourable hearers , that some of them had reached such a pitch of luxury , that they actually drank brandy with their wine .
This caused a laugh , but their lordships little knew how literally true the assertion was .
His lordship alluded to a gentleman farmer , of the name of Jackson , who lived at -- farm , in the county of Warwick , and who then always took brandy with his wine .
I , too , remember a humorous farmer , and a very worthy fellow , of the name of Mackerell , of Collingbourn , who frequently afterwards did the same thing , at the principal market room at the Bear , at Devizes  at the head of which table I at that time presided every week .
Mackerell used to call this liquor ( brandy and wine ) Lord Warwick  and another farmer used always to drink a nob of white sugar in each glass of claret  for , be it known to the reader , that I have repeatedly seen drank at that table , on a market day , by twelve or fourteen farmers , two dozen of old port , and , as a finish , two dozen of claret .
Then they would mount their chargers , and off they would go in a body , each of them with two or three hundred pounds in his pocket  and the Lord have mercy upon the poor fellow who interrupted them , or failed to get out of their way upon their road home !
No set of men ever carried their heads higher than they did  no set of men were ever more inflated or more purse proud , than were the great body of the farmers during these times of their boundless prosperity .
For many years , the average price of wheat was fifteen shillings a Winchester bushel  and as I recollect , and shall never forget , the way in which they carried themselves during these halcyon days of their happy fortune , I should like much to have a peep into Devizes market now , of a Thursday , or into Warminster market of a Saturday , just to see the contrast , just to observe how they look , and how they conduct themselves , now they are selling their best wheat for seven shillings a bushel , which is less than half the former price , while the rent is the same , the taxes the same , and the poor rates are higher , instead of lower !
At that period , it only took me a hundred sacks of wheat to pay my rent of Widdington farm .
How many sacks must farmer Maslen sell now to pay his rent of the same farm !
I should not wonder if three hundred sacks would fall short of paying it this year .
At that epoch Mr. Pocock , who rented Enford farm of Mr. Benett , could pay his rent , taxes , and poor rates , for the sum at which he could sell three hundred sacks of wheat .
The present tenant , Mr. Fay [ 26 ] , must , in this present year , 1821 , sell one thousand sacks of wheat , to raise the money to pay his rent , taxes , and poor rates .
What a falling off for the farmers !
Let us hope that they will display somewhat more fortitude and patience , in the days of their adversity , than they did moderation , Christian forbearance , and temper , in their days of prosperity .


On the ninth of February , in this year , peace was signed , at Luneville , between our beloved ally , Austria , and France .
On the second of March , the state prisoners were liberated , some of whom had been cruelly confined for many years under the suspension bill  and , on the seventeenth of March , 1801 , there was a complete change in the British ministry , by a deep juggle of Mr. Pitt , who resigned .
He and his colleagues were succeeded by Mr. Addington , the Speaker of the House of Commons , and his family and friends .
On the twenty-first , Sir Ralph Abercromby was killed at the bloody battle of Alexandria , in Egypt  and , on the same day , negociations for peace were entered into , between England and France , by Lord Hawkesbury and M. Otto .
On the second of April , the Danish fleet of twenty-eight sail , anchored off Copenhagen , was all taken or destroyed by Lord Nelson .
Such was the fury of the battle , and such was the bravery with which the Danes defended themselves , that , after great carnage on both sides , some of the English ships employed on the occasion were nearly silenced by the batteries .
Nelson , perceiving this , sent in a flag of truce and offered terms , which the Danish governor accepted .
On the nineteenth , the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act , and the Seditious Act , passed by a large majority , in both Houses of Parliament  and immediately afterwards , the ministerial indemnity bill also passed .
On the sixth of May , the famous motion was made by Lord Temple , the present Marquis of Buckingham , for a new writ for Old Sarum , to exclude Mr. Horne Tooke from the House of Commons  he having been elected for that rotten borough by Lord Camelford , who was then the proprietor of it .
The ground of his being ineligible to sit in the Honourable House was , that he had formerly taken priest 's orders .
This fact being proved , a law was passed , by which Mr. Horne Tooke was excluded from sitting in future .
Lord Camelford was so enraged at this measure , that he threatened to return his black servant as the member  and it is thought he would have actually done so , if it had not been for the earnest entreaties of Lord Grenville , who was a relation of Lord Camelford .
On the twenty-second of July , there was a grand review of the volunteer corps in Hyde Park .
The number assembled was four thousand eight hundred .


On the first of October , preliminary articles of peace , fifteen in number , were signed , between England and France , by Lord Hawkesbury and M. Otto .
On the 10th of October , Old Michaelmas-day , Gen. Lauriston arrived in London , with the ratifications of the Treaty of Peace between Great Britain and France  and the General was drawn through the streets by the populace .
There were very violent debates in both Houses of Parliament , against the Preliminaries of Peace .
The opposition dissented from calling it a Glorious Peace  but the ministers carried it by very large majorities .
During this year , the price of bread and all sorts of provisions had been remarkably high  at one period the quartern loaf sold for one shilling and tenpence halfpenny , and the poor suffered very much throughout the country .
The great mass of the people , therefore , hailed the approach of peace with France , in hopes of better times  and every one appeared rejoiced at the cessation of the horrible carnage of war , which had been raging with so much violence .
The French ministers were very well satisfied with the Court of St. James 's , who had at last formally acknowledged Napoleon as the head of the French Government .
Although there were many , amongst the opposition , who denounced the preliminaries as a hollow truce , declaring that if peace was concluded upon so unsatisfactory a basis , and so disadvantageous for Great Britain , the English Government would soon be obliged to violate the treaty , which must lead to fresh hostilities  I , for one , sincerely rejoiced at the return of peace  for I had long been convinced that the war was carried on , not to preserve this country from the horrors of the French revolution  that it had never been waged for any of its avowed purposes  that it had from the beginning been a war against the principles of liberty , established by the revolution in France , which had been attacked by every despotic power in Europe  every one of which powers the French troops had , under the banners of liberty , defeated over and over again .
I now looked upon the object of the war with a very different eye from what I had formerly done , and I took a more correct and dispassionate view of its cause , and the intentions of those who first declared hostilities , than what I did when I first enrolled my name amongst the members of the yeomanry cavalry .
I had now had time to reflect , the six weeks which I had passed in the neighbourhood of the King 's Bench , where I had access to some of the most experienced and intelligent men in the kingdom , had not been spent in vain .
The time that a man spends in a prison is not always thrown away , as I have found by experience  and I shall , I trust , be able to prove by and by , to the satisfaction of my numerous readers , that the time I have spent in this Bastile has been the most valuable part of my life .
I never before knew what real leisure was .
I have enjoyed retirement as much as any man in England  but then I have been always surrounded with my family and friends  I have never , before now , known what it was to have seven or eight hours of a day exclusively to myself .
I am locked up in solitary confinement in my dungeon every night , at six o'clock , without my having the power to go to any one , and without any one having the power to come to me , excepting the turnkey , which , thank God !
never happens now after locking-up time , though it used to be the case very frequently when I first came here .
It is considered a violation of the rules to go near a prisoner , unless upon a great emergency , after he is locked up  but it was not deemed any violation of rules for the turnkey to be constantly coming to my dungeon , and , with an authoritative rattling of the lock of the door , marching in to say that Mr. Bridle , the gaoler , wanted a newspaper , c. c. However , that is all at an end , and I am never interrupted .
I can sit down with a book or a pen at six o'clock , almost with a certainty of not being interrupted by any living creature , for six , seven , or eight hours at a time .
My keepers think this the greatest punishment that can be inflicted upon me  but , on the contrary , I contrive to turn their malice to advantage , and make this the most valuable time of my life .
Few men can boast such a luxury .
I really enjoy it beyond description .
No thanks to my persecutors  and I should not be surprised if , when they read this , which I know they all will , if they were to devise some means to deprive me of this comfort of retirement .
I have made them feel , and I will continue to make them feel , that though I expose their petty tyranny , and their little acts of meanness towards me , yet , that my mind is above the reach of their vindictive malice .
I understand that some of them are praying for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act , that they may have me delivered over to their power  that I may be left to their unrestrained will , to inflict torture upon me in secret -- well !
and what then ?
I will laugh at their torture , and make them painfully conscious of their own insignificance , even while they stand over me and inflict it .


When I was in the King 's Bench , I had none of those trials .
My time passed very pleasantly , and as a great portion of it passed in the best of society , amongst some of the most intelligent men of the age , my time was not thrown away .
I was induced to think for myself , and to form my own opinion of public men and public measures , without placing , as I had hitherto done , an implicit reliance upon the opinions of others whom I supposed to have had more experience , and better means of judging of such matters , than I had .
I began not only to think but to act , for myself .
Among the many facts that I ascertained , not the least important was , `` that common fame was a common liar . ''
Mr. Clifford had brought me acquainted with all the tricks , frauds , and deceptions of the public press  and , to convince me that almost the whole of the public press of that day was venal and corrupt , he proved to a demonstration , by some practical experiments , that for a few pounds , any thing , however absurd , might be universally promulgated  particularly if the absurdity was in favour of the ruling powers .
For instance , he wrote a paragraph , the greatest hoax that ever was , in praise of the mild and amiable manners , the courtesy , and the humanity of Harry Dundas .
Now , said he , to show you how this will be promulgated by the venal press , and how it will be swallowed by John Bull , give me five shillings , and I will put it into the hands of one of the runners for collecting information for the papers , and you shall see it in all the newspapers , both in London and the country .
I produced the crown-piece immediately , and out it came , in one of the morning papers , the next day  and as he had predicted , it was copied into all the London and country papers .
Thus the humanity and suavity of one of the most unfeeling and impudent Scotchmen that ever crossed the Tweed , was cried up to the skies , and he was eulogised by some of them as the very cream of the milk of human kindness !
Then as to public opinion , and the popularity of the leading characters of the day , Mr. Fox , to wit , -- Mr. Clifford has a hundred times declared to me , that this great Westminster patriot was never drawn home in his carriage from the hustings in his life , by the populace , without the persons who drew him being regularly hired and paid for it .
The price was always thirty shillings , to be divided amongst twenty persons , a shilling dry , and six-pence wet , each person .
Clifford assured me this office , of hiring the men to draw their candidates home , was frequently allotted to him , and that it was invariably the same with Mr. Horne Tooke , and Mr. Chamberlain , alias John Wilkes  and that he would undertake to have me or Mr. Waddington drawn through the streets of London , from Whitechapel to Piccadilly , for the same sum .
At this time there was in fact very little disinterested patriotism amongst the working classes of the community .
They had , for so many years , been made the regular dupes of those who were called the Opposition Members of Parliament , without that faction , denominated the Whigs , having ever done any essential service for the people at large , that public feeling , amongst the labouring classes of mechanics and manufacturers , was at a very low ebb .
Nor is this to be at all wondered at , because none , not one , of these great leading public characters ever professed to accomplish any thing that would openly , tangibly , and immediately give any political rights to the people at large .
-- Whenever the Opposition or Whigs wished to oust their opponents , or harrass them in their places , they used to call public meetings in London , Westminster , and other places  and they never failed to get the multitude to pass any Whig resolutions which they might choose to submit to them  there never being , at that time , any body to oppose or expose their factious and party measures .
The people , in London and Westminster , always supported the Opposition against the Ministers  but they had nevertheless , sense enough to discover that there was no direct intention in the Opposition to render any immediate or effectual benefit to the people .
Whatever the Whigs promised , it was all remote and in perspective .
It can not , therefore , excite surprise that there should have been none of that enthusiasm which has been so evidently manifested by the people within the last seven years .
How many score times have I been drawn by the populace ?
-- and yet it never , in the whole course of my life , cost me or any of my friends , the value of a pot of porter for any thing of the sort .
It is easy to account for this alteration in the popular feeling .
The change has been brought about in consequence of myself , and those who have acted with me , having openly avowed our determination to endeavour to obtain for the people equal political rights , which will lead to equal justice  to procure for every sane adult a vote , an equal share in the representative branch of the government , in the Commons ' House of Parliament  to procure for every man that which the constitution says he is entitled to , and that which the law presumes he has , namely , a share in choosing those Members of the People 's , or Commons ' House of Parliament  who have a third share in making those laws , by which the lives , the liberties , and the property of the people are regulated and disposed of .


But to return to my narrative -- I was now living in the zenith of thoughtlessness , if I may be permitted to call it by so mild an appellation .
I had a large income , and I contrived to live nearly , though not quite , up to it , by keeping a great deal of expensive company , and an expensive establishment , both within and without doors .
In all this my wife fully participated  but I attribute no blame to her for this .
It was my business and my duty to know better , and to act otherwise .
There is no excuse for me , as I did know that I was leading what might be fairly and justly called a dissolute life : I do not mean to admit that there was any thing which is generally termed criminal in my conduct , but I must say , if I tell the truth , which I am determined to do at all hazards , that I led a very dissipated existence .


When I look back soberly , and divest myself of fashionable prejudices , I can not conscientiously call it by any milder name .
In fact , though my habits at that period were similar to those of thousands and thousands of fashionable families in the country , who are looked upon as most respectable and correct people , I can not look back but with regret upon the manner in which I spent this most valuable portion of my time .
Hunting , shooting , coursing , or fishing all day , and every day  and then at night , instead of passing it with my family and children in the calm , serene , delightful joys of a domestic and rational fireside , I had always a large party at home , or made one amongst the number at a friend 's house .
Seldom were we in bed till two or three o'clock in the morning .
The next day brought sporting , and the next night a ball , or a card party , or a drinking party  and thus I was hurried from one scene of dissipation to another , without ever allowing myself time scarcely to look round , seldom to look back , and never seriously to reflect .
It was with me even in dissipation , as it was in every thing else that I engaged in , that I was enthusiastic .
In this record of my errors and failings , the reader must therefore prepare himself to hear , at any rate , of some thumping faults  and although I do not deserve , and do not expect , to escape the deep censure of some , yet I rely upon the liberal indulgence of the more virtuous portion of the community , who know that it is the lot of man to err , but that it is godlike to make allowances for human infirmities , and to forgive them .
And , after relating all my errors , I shall boldly say , in the language of our Saviour , `` Let him that is without fault cast the first stone . ''


In the midst of this life of thoughtless gaiety and pleasure , I was always greatly attached to female society , and I gave the preference to those amusements where females were of the party , such as dancing , music , and those card parties where they could join .
In consequence of this , I frequently escaped those Bacchanalian carousals to which many of my intimate friends and companions were strongly addicted .
Not that I mean to pretend , that , when I made one of those parties , I ever flinched .
No  I took my bottle as freely as any of them  but , thanks to a good constitution , never to excess , or rather never so as to become inebriated .
Dancing I enjoyed , and participated in to excess .
My partiality to female society led me into many extravagancies , and into some difficulties  for I could not pay moderate attention to a lady .
My partner , if I admired her , received my enthusiastic attention  for , though I was a married man , yet I suffered no single man to outdo me in polite assiduities to my partner .
This sometimes drew down upon me the anger , and upon one occasion the unjust suspicion , of Mrs. Hunt .
A young lady , who was upon a visit in our family , had attracted my particular notice .
She was handsome , elegant , lively , and fascinating , and I was at first led to pay her more marked respect , because I discovered that it excited the envy of a widow lady of Andover , who came with her on a visit to our house .
She , like many of her fellows , because she never possessed any of those personal charms , or acquired accomplishments , that please all who come within the reach of their influence , was uncommonly envious of those who did  and , setting herself up as a sort of duenna to this young lady , undertook to take her to task , for receiving with so much ease and unconcern , my extremely marked attention , which she declared made my wife very unhappy .
-- This was , at that moment , a barefaced falsehood of the old hag , though she contrived afterwards by her arts , insinuations , and fabrications , to produce that effect in the breast of Mrs. Hunt .
The old widow , whom I shall for convenience sake call Mrs. Butler , at first was successful in thwarting , as she said , her young friend 's amusement , and in rendering miserable the person whom she affected to pity  but at last , by carrying her calumnies too far , she failed altogether in her diabolical schemes  for , having represented to Mrs. Hunt that she had seen me take a gross and indecent liberty with the young lady , the falsehood struck my wife so forcibly , that the object of it was very visible even to her jaundiced eye , and without ceremony she ordered her carriage , and packed the slanderer off to her own home , very properly forbidding her ever entering her door again .


Though my wife behaved with becoming spirit upon this occasion , by banishing such a fiend in human form from her house , yet the latent sparks of jealousy which had been lodged in her breast were still too visible to be concealed .
I was stung by being subject to such unjust suspicions , and , instead of taking the prudent and proper course , conscious of the purity and innocence of my feelings with respect to our young visitor , I continued , nay , redoubled , my zealous devotion .
Instead of healing the breach that this fracas had made , I braved it out  and what before was only the polite attention , which I was always in the habit of paying to an interesting female , became now , to all outward appearance , an enthusiastic attachment .
Unfortunately , too , the young lady , feeling indignant at the groundless and unjust ideas of Mrs. Hunt , too readily fell into my views , and appeared to be very much pleased with my open and increased assiduities .
This added fuel to the fire  it led to the most unpleasant consequences , and laid the foundation for those little bickerings which are too apt to create , at length , a mutual indifference .
However , after having braved the affair out for a few days , the young lady returned amongst her friends , who had the sincerity and candour to represent to her the imprudence of her conduct  and this flirtation , which was so innocent in fact , but so injurious in its result , was at once put an end to .
I have related this seemingly uninteresting affair , first to shew and admit the folly of which I was guilty , for folly it was , to say the least of it  and next , as a warning to my young readers , to avoid the rock of tampering with and irritating the feelings of those whom they ought to love and cherish .
I sincerely believe if a man once excites jealousy in the breast of his wife , whether well founded or not , the virus that it engenders is of such a corroding nature that it is seldom , if ever , totally eradicated .
Married persons , therefore , can never be too circumspect in their conduct .
Though I never offered the most distant insult , or ever took even the most innocent liberty , with this young lady , yet I admit that I was guilty of an act of gross and wanton imprudence .
I was guilty of great injustice to the young lady , and of greater injustice to Mrs. Hunt  and I feel at this moment , that , to induce the reader to forgive this faulty part of my conduct , will require a considerable portion of liberality and good nature , and of that amiable Christian virtue which teaches a person conscious of his own innocence , to look with charity upon the failings of others .


END OF VOL .
I


Volume 2


`` Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see , Thinks what ne'er was , nor is , nor e'er shall be .
In every work regard the Writer 's end , Since none can compass more than they intend  And if the means be just , the conduct true , Applause , in spite of trivial faults , is due . ''
POPE .


MEMOIRS OF HENRY HUNT .


Hunting , shooting , and fishing by day , and mixing in the thoughtless , gay , and giddy throng by night , soon , however , dispelled any unpleasant impression which this circumstance had made upon my mind .
I every day became acquainted with new and more fashionable society than I had before associated with , and as my son was about to be christened , we were determined to give a sumptuous feast and a ball , at which upwards of forty friends sat down to dinner .
When I recal to mind all those expensive and thoughtless proceedings , I can reflect with great satisfaction upon one circumstance  which is , that I never forgot the poor .
I always attended to their complaints , and ministered to their wants , when I could scarcely find time for any thing else .
I never gave a feast that the poor did not partake of .
Whether it were the celebration of a birth-day , or at a christening , they always came in for a share .
I forgot to mention , that , when my son was born , I kept up the good ancient custom , which had been exercised with so much old English hospitality at my birth , by my father .
Not only were toast and ale given to all my friends and neighbours , but my servants also had such a junketing as they will never forget .
My birth-day , the 6th of November , I continued to celebrate as my father had done before his death  and I will here take leave to relate in what way I celebrated that event .
I always had a party of private friends  but , while we were enjoying ourselves with every delicacy which the season afforded , the dinner generally consisting of different sorts of game of my own killing , dressed in various shapes -- whilst me and my neighbouring friends and visitors were regaling ourselves , I was never unmindful of my poorer neighbours .
Enford was a very extensive parish , containing a population of nearly seven hundred inhabitants .
Amongst them there were a considerable number of old persons , for whom , after my father 's death , I had successfully exerted myself , to procure them an increase of their miserable pittance of parish pay  which pay I had , as the reader will remember , raised from half-a-crown to three shillings and sixpence each per week .
All these old people of the parish , of the age of sixty-three and upwards , I invited annually , without any distinction , to come and partake of the feast on the sixth of November .
The servants ' hall was appropriated to their use on that day  and as there were seldom less than twenty above this age , we always had as large a party as the house would well contain .
There were about equal numbers of men and women , but several of the latter were the oldest , some of them being nearly ninety years of age , and many of them above eighty .
As this parish consisted of eight hamlets , some parts of it , where the old persons resided , were at a distance of nearly two miles  and as , from their extreme old age , some of the poor creatures were unable to walk so far and back again , I always sent a cart and horse round to bring them .
They had an excellent dinner of substantial meat and pudding , besides the dainties that went from my table , after which they regaled themselves with good old October or cyder .
The day and night were always passed with the greatest hilarity , and I was never completely satisfied , unless I was an eye-witness that there was as much mirth and jollity amongst my old friends in the hall , as there was amongst my other friends in the dining and drawing rooms .
To bring these poor old creatures together , and to make them once a year happy in each other 's company , was to me a source of inexpressible delight .
The very first year I assembled them after my father 's death , several of them had never seen each other for eight or ten years , in consequence of their inability to leave their homes .
They were overjoyed at meeting each other again , as it was a pleasure which they had long since banished from their hopes .
One or two of them , who had never been a hundred yards from their own humble sheds for years before , and who had resigned all thoughts of ever going so far from their homes again , till they were carried to their last long home in the church-yard , were now inspired with new hopes , and appeared to enjoy new life  and they actually met their old workfellows and acquaintances , and spent a pleasant day with them on the 6th of November , in the hall at Chisenbury House , for eight or ten years afterwards , where they never failed to recount all the events of their youthful days .
They were all full of the tales of former times , and of the anecdotes of my forefathers , of which they had been eye-witnesses .
One gave a narrative of a feast of which he had partaken , another had danced at my grandfather 's wedding , a third had nursed my father , and all of them were past their prime when I was born .
To listen to their garrulity , and to witness the pleasure they felt in describing and recalling to each other 's recollection , the scenes of years long gone by , and their opinion respecting the alteration in the times , was to me a source of indescribable delight .
An old man and woman , who were each of them above eighty years of age , always sung with great glee a particular duet , which they had sung together , at my grandfather 's home-harvest , upwards of sixty years before .
Two women and a man , all above eighty , regularly danced a reel .
Each individual sung a song , or told a story , and , to finish the evening , a tremendous milk-pail , full of humming toast and ale , wound up the annual feast , which set the old boys ' and girls ' heads singing again .
Then , each heart being made full glad , care was taken that no accident or inconvenience should happen to such old and infirm people , by their being obliged to hobble home in the dark .
A steady carter , Thomas Cannings , and an able assistant , loaded them all up in a waggon , in which they were drawn to their respective homes , and deposited there in perfect safety , where they enjoyed a second pleasure in recounting to their neighbours the merry scenes that passed on the squire 's birthday .
It will easily be believed by the reader , that they looked forward to the Christmas treat , of the same sort , and from thence to the next birth-day , with as much anxiety as the country lads and lasses look forward to the annual wake or fair .


The oldest woman in the parish had , all the year round , an invitation to a Sunday 's dinner  and , what is very remarkable , Hannah Rumbold , who was the first Sunday 's pensioner of mine , commenced it at the age of seventy-four , and regularly continued it till she was eighty-three  scarcely ever missing a dinner , from accident or illness , the whole time , and never from illness , without the dinner being sent to her own home .
This , by some , may be called ostentation -- be it so  it was the way in which I discovered my pride  and I trust , at all events , that it was equally laudable with the generous boon of our reverend doctor and justice , of the `` Old Alderney Cow . ''
What a history have I heard of this beneficent , generous , humane , chaste , and pious parson , in consequence of the story of the Old Cow  but , as some of the anecdotes require confirmation , without which they are almost incredible , I must pause till the next Number , before I hand them down , together with the doctor and the old cow , to posterity .
I had now made an engagement to go with some brother sportsmen to Wales , on a grouse shooting party .
Our dogs and guns having been sent on before with our servants , we started , two of us , in my curricle , and the third person met us at the New Passage , near Bristol .
Unfortunately , we arrived there too late for the tide  there was only one more boat could pass over the Severn that night , and that boat was already hired , and waiting to take over the old Marquis of Lansdown .
This was a heavy disappointment to us , as our dogs were on this side of the water , and would , the next day , have between twenty and thirty miles to travel , to Pontypool , where we were going to shoot .
The twelfth of August , which was the first day for grouse-shooting , was on the following day , and therefore our dogs ought to have gone on some part of the way that very evening , that they might be fit for the field , or rather the hills , as soon as the shooting commenced .
What was to be done ?
There was no contending against the tide .
At last I made up my mind to ask the old Marquis to allow the dogs and a servant to pass over with him .
My companions declined joining in the application , as they were fearful that he would take it as an insult  and , at all events , there was little chance of his compliance , as the boat was but a small one , and he had his servants and a considerable portion of luggage to carry , the whole being nearly enough to fill the boat .
I , however , wrote a note and requested an audience , which was instantly granted : the noble Marquis , on my entering the room , politely asking me whether there was any thing he could do to oblige me ?
I related to him our unfortunate case , which I represented as most forlorn  and which , by the bye , none but sportsmen can comprehend .
On his perceiving my anxiety , he laughed heartily , and said , `` Make yourself easy , Mr. Hunt  I will with great pleasure take you and your dogs over with me in my boat , and I shall be most happy to have your company . ''
I thanked him warmly , but hinted that I had two companions , which would be too many for the boat .
`` Come , come , '' said he , `` we will talk to the boatman .
It certainly will not do to overload  but if he should think there will be too many , I will , nevertheless , so manage as to set you at ease upon the subject  for I shall feel great pleasure in having it in my power to facilitate your sport .
As my immediately crossing the river is of little consequence to me , I will remain on this side till the morning , and you shall go in the boat , upon condition that , you and your friends will occupy the beds and eat the supper that I have bespoken at the Black Rock , on the other side .
I expressed my grateful sense of his polite attention  but , as the boatman had now arrived , and assured him that he could take us all in his boat with great safety , it was arranged that we should go together .


The Marquis having finished his tea , we all embarked .
He had his housekeeper and his valet , and we had myself and two friends , with our servant , and two brace of pointers .
The old Marquis of Lansdown , the father of the present Marquis , was not only one of the most accomplished gentlemen and profound statesmen of the age , but his liberality and hospitality were truly characteristic of the old English nobility .
He knew who and what I was , perfectly well , although we were never before personally acquainted  and he remarked , that my situation in life rendered me one of the most independent men in the kingdom .
He dwelt upon the talents of Lord Henry Petty , who was his second and favourite son  and he prognosticated , that he would be an eminent politician , and that some day he would shine at the head of the English Government .
He , however , emphatically said , that , after all , his son 's situation would never be so independent as mine was , because he would always be bound in the trammels of party .
He invited me to Bow-wood , upon his return , for which I politely thanked him , informing him , at the same time , that as I had some friends out of Berkshire staying at my house , I meant , with his permission , to take them some day to see the house , gardens , and park , at Bow-wood .
To this he replied , that he hoped he should be at home when we came  that he should feel the greatest pleasure in shewing it to us himself  but that , go whenever we would , he should be very happy for his people to shew it me and my friends , although they did not in general make a practice of doing it .
`` You will find it , '' said he , `` Mr. Hunt , a comfortable residence for a country gentleman .
It is small , but comfortable . ''


I had two or three days good sport , in grouse shooting , though my friends , who were too delicate sportsmen to encounter , with success , the difficulties and dangers of the Welsh mountains , returned , without having killed a single bird .
It was , however , altogether , a pleasant excursion , and as we returned we spent a day or two at the Fish-ponds , near Bristol , with Dr. Fox , who had recently paid me a visit at Chisenbury , as a friend of one of the shooting party .
As we were on our way home , the Marquis of Lansdown 's polite and gentlemanly conduct became the subject of conversation  and as one of my friends , who came out of Berkshire , expressed a wish , as we passed by Bow-wood , the seat of the Marquis , to see the place , before he went home , we fixed a day , and made a party , determined to accept the offer of the Noble Marquis , to visit his seat , and see the beautiful pleasure-grounds , park , and cascade , which surround the mansion , and likewise view the fine paintings which it contained .
I fell in with this plan the more readily , because my Berkshire friend rather hoaxed me , for professing to believe that the Marquis was sincere .
He said he was a fine old courtier , and it cost him nothing to be polite  but , with regard to what he said about the pleasure he would feel at skewing us Bow-wood , they were mere words of course , and he would think no more of them afterwards  and if we went to see it , we should be treated the same as we were when we went to see Blenheim , the seat of the Duke of Marlborough , which was , we had to pay about thirty shillings to the different servants that showed us over the house , gardens , and grounds , at which , considering it was built for the great Duke of Marlborough , at the public expense , I had expressed my disapprobation .
I contended , that we should be treated in a different manner , and that the old Marquis would not allow his servants to behave so shabbily .
I was , however , laughed at , for expecting that a Nobleman would take the pains to write home from Wales , to his servants , to give them any directions about the matter .
The day was , nevertheless , fixed for the 24th of August , 1801 .


I shall relate the circumstances of our visit , to shew what sort of a character the first Marquis of Lansdown was .
We appointed to meet at Devizes , and the party proceeded together to Bow-wood , which is about six miles from that town .
We were six in number , three ladies and three gentlemen  myself and Mrs. Hunt in our curricle , and our friends two in a chariot , and two in a gig  each of us attended by a servant .
It was a lovely day , and when we entered the lodge , as we drove down the park , a distance of about a mile before we came to the house , we drew up and looked around us .
The picturesque views were enchanting , and the sublime grandeur of the beautiful oaks was most striking .
We had been travelling in Wales , where we had been delighted with the most romantic scenery  but this park at Bow-wood possessed a richness and a luxuriance such as we all declared we had never seen before  and the gravel road , the whole of the mile through the park , was more like the neatest gravel walk in a garden than a public carriage road .
There was not a pebble the size of a marble , not a leaf , a straw , or a blade of grass , the whole way  every thing was kept up in the neatest and most perfect style that I ever saw .
We remarked to each other , as we passed along , that the Marquis must have returned , as no servants would take such pains with a place in a master 's absence .


At length we drove up to the door , and upon inquiring of the porter whether the Marquis was at home , he answered , `` No  '' that he was gone into Wales , and not expected back for a month .
We asked if we could see the house ?
The answer was , that it was never shown to any one but the Marquis 's friends .
My Berkshire friend smiled , and looking very significantly said , `` Well , Hunt , we have had a very pleasant drive , but I told you how it would be  we may , therefore , as well turn round and drive back again . ''
I was about to put some other question to the porter , when the housekeeper approached  an elegant , handsomely dressed matron , who inquired , `` Pray , Sir , is your name Hunt ? ''
I , of course , answered her in the affirmative  upon which she begged we would alight .
She then rang a bell , and desired the porter and another servant to take the carriages round the yard , and put the horses in the stable , and take care of them .
She then informed us , that the Marquis had written home , to desire that , if I came with my friends , we should be shewn the house , gardens , grounds , cascade , and every thing at Bow-wood .


Having led us into a large room , the walls of which were hung with paintings , the good lady politely requested that we would amuse ourselves for a few minutes , while she made some preparations , and she would return and shew us the whole of the house .
As soon as she had retired , my friend admitted that he had done the Noble Marquis great injustice , and he was now full of praises for his true nobility of character .
The housekeeper now returned , and , after pointing out some beauties in the paintings , and the particular views from the windows , she led us into an adjoining room , in the centre of which stood a table , covered with wines of various sorts , and the most superb desert of fruit I ever beheld , consisting of pines , hot-house grapes , and various other fruits , in the greatest perfection , as well as profusion .
We looked at each other with some surprise , when she invited the ladies to be seated , and the gentlemen to assist them to refreshments , before we proceeded any further  and , addressing herself to me , she said , this is a letter I received on the fourteenth of August .
It was written by the Marquis , on the twelfth , from the Black Rock Inn , on the other side of the New Passage .
It commences as follows : -- `` I expect Mr. Hunt , of Chisenbury House , to visit Bow-wood , to see the house and gardens , with his friends .
If they should arrive before my return , you will take care that they receive that attention which I always wish to be shewn to my friends , when they do me the honour to visit Bow-wood . ''
`` Now , '' continued the housekeeper , `` I understand the wish of the Marquis well .
I know nothing will afford him greater pleasure than to hear that you , Sir , and your friends , make yourselves as welcome as he would have made you , had he been at home . ''
She had , she said , orders to dress us a dinner , which she should do , while we were walking round the gardens and pleasure grounds , and viewing the cascade .
She had sent a servant , she told us , to get some fish out of the store , and there was a haunch of venison just fit to dress  and she would have dinner ready for us at any hour we would fix .
As we had a previous engagement , we declined the invitation to dinner , but we did ample justice to the pines and grapes .
We were then shewn over the house , and afterwards we went round the gardens , consisting of five acres of the highest cultivated soil , and the walls clothed with the choicest fruit trees in full bearing .
One fact worth recording the gardener told me , which was , that the Marquis , being particularly fond of pears , they were cultivated in this garden to the highest perfection , and he had a different plate of pears to be put upon the table for every day in the year .
The pleasure grounds and every thing at Bow-wood bespoke the residence of one who was a nobleman by nature as well as by title .


After having spent a most agreeable morning , and had a second edition of the desert and wine , we prepared to depart , all much delighted with what we had seen , and more gratified with the polite and handsome conduct of the noble owner .
Just as I was about to offer a present , the housekeeper called me aside .
She took the liberty , she said , to request that I would not offer any of the servants any money .
As the servants of the Marquis had all of them most liberal wages , he never suffered them to take any vails of his friends who visited him .


In addition to the attention which had been shewn to us , our servants had also been handsomely regaled , and the horses well taken care of in the stables  and , as we contemplated the munificent treatment we experienced at Bow-wood , we could not refrain from drawing a most unfavourable contrast of the treatment we had experienced about a month before , when we had made a party to visit Blenheim , the seat of the Duke of Marlborough , at Woodstock , near Oxford .
There we were turned over from one servant to another , each having his department , and demanding a certain sum before we were handed into the custody of his companion .
Thus is this splendid testimony of national gratitude to the Great Duke of Marlborough made a show of for the emolument of the servants of the establishment  each of them demanding his fee as regularly as a showman of wild beasts at a fair demands a shilling at the entrance .
This is considered by foreigners as a disgrace to the British character , and it is justly considered so .


We must now return to politics .
-- Lord Nelson bombarded the French flotilla at Boulogne , disabled ten vessels , and sunk five  but upon his making another attempt on it , he was repulsed with great loss .
I can not describe this eventful period better than it is described in the `` Chronology of Public Events , within the last fifty years  '' a most useful and entertaining work published by Sir Richard Phillips , Bride Court , Bridge Street .
The passage is as follows , under the head of `` Great Britain . ''
`` This year , 1801 , commenced by exhibiting the effects of eight years war  the national debt had been doubled , and internal distress had become general  the poor were in a state bordering on starvation , and commerce had the prospect of having every foreign port shut against it .
The people busied themselves to meet the threatened French invasion  and after a long watch for encroachment , the English themselves became assailants , by an attack upon Boulogne , which did little injury , and a second attack took place , under Lord Nelson , which failed with loss . ''
This certainly is a correct description of the state of the country , in the ninth year of the war against French liberty , waged to prevent a Reform of the Parliament at home .


I shall now state how I was employed upon this occasion .
Pitt 's alarmists still disseminated throughout the country , a general terror of invasion .
The various Lords Lieutenants of counties were kept actively at work , to support the delusion  for nothing but the immediate dread of invasion could have induced the people to pay the immense drains that were made upon their pockets by taxation  nothing less than the dread of having their property annihilated , their wives and daughters violated , and their children bayoneted before their faces , could have made them submit to the burthens which they bore .


Our Lord Lieutenant of Wiltshire , Lord Pembroke , had caused circular letters to be written to the clergymen , churchwardens and overseers of every parish , to return an account of all the moveable property , live and dead stock , that there was in their several parishes  and also to require every farmer to give in a list of his stock of grain , horses , waggons and cattle  and at the end of it to state what he would voluntarily place at the disposal of the government , in case of an actual invasion  he was also to declare whether he was employed in any volunteer corps , and if not , whether he would place himself under the Lord Lieutenant and act as pioneer , driver , c..
In the parish of Enford , a public meeting was called , which was held at the Inn .
Being much the largest farmer in the parish , I was called to the chair .
Having opened the business of the day by reading the circular of the Lord Lieutenant , and explained as well as I could the object of the meeting , I urged those who were present , which was every farmer of the parish , by all the power of eloquence that I possessed , to come forward manfully and devotedly , to resist the common enemy with their property and their lives , in case they should dare to set a foot upon English ground .
As it was then my practice , and which it has ever continued to be to this day , I told them that I should feel myself a disgrace to human nature , if I could be capable of urging or exciting my fellow countrymen to any act , in the danger of which I would not stand forward personally to participate .
I would , therefore , in the first instance , write down fairly and honestly a true account of all the stock , live and dead , that I possessed , and conceal nothing whatever .
It was as follows : Wheat , sixteen hundred sacks -- barley , fifteen hundred quarters -- oats , four hundred quarters -- hay , two hundred and fifty ton -- cart horses , thirty , value from thirty to seventy guineas each -- draught oxen , ten -- cows , twenty -- sheep , four thousand two hundred -- pigs , fifty -- two broad-wheel and eight narrow-wheel waggons , eight carts , c. c. c. all in excellent condition , and fit for active service .
Each farmer in succession followed my example , in giving a full and faithful account of the whole of his stock  I having urged the necessity , nay , the policy , of this  because , in case the enemy were to land , and the cattle and stock were to be driven off , no one could afterwards claim compensation for more than he had actually entered .
This being done , the next thing required was , for each person to enter in a column set apart for that purpose , how many quarters of grain , how many waggons and horses , how many oxen , sheep , c. he would furnish gratuitously to the government in the event of an actual invasion  and , if he were not serving in any volunteer corps , whether he would become a pioneer or driver , or place himself at the disposal of the Lord Lieutenant .
I took the pen and wrote as follows : -- `` I , Henry Hunt , of Chisenbury House , in the county of Wilts , have given a true and faithful account of all the live and dead stock , cattle and grain , that I possessed  and I do hereby voluntarily tender the whole of it , without any reserve , to the government , to be at their disposal in case of an actual invasion and landing by the enemy .
I also engage to find , at my own expence , able , careful , active and willing drivers for the teams , and shepherds to attend the cattle and flocks , to conduct them wherever they may be required .
As for my own personal services , I having lately been dismissed from the Wiltshire yeomanry by Lord Bruce , the colonel , and having no confidence either in the courage or skill of the colonel or any of the officers belonging to that regiment , but having , by considerable pains and perseverance , obtained a pretty correct knowledge of military tactics , I hereby engage to enter myself and three servants , completely equipped , and mounted upon valuable hunters , as volunteers into the regiment of horse that shall make the first charge upon the enemy  unless the Lord Lieutenant should think that an active and zealous friend to his country , well mounted , and ready to perform any service , however desperate , accompanied by three servants , also well mounted , can serve the cause of his country better by placing himself at the disposal of the Lord Lieutenant of the county . ''


My neighbours stared , and I believe some of them thought me mad with enthusiasm .
And as well as I can recollect , so far were they from following my example , that they all contented themselves with offering some a waggon and four horses , some a cart and two horses , some a few quarters of corn  but no one went further than offering a waggon and four horses and a few quarters of oats .
In fact , when the returns came to be examined , the offer that I had made exceeded that of all the farmers of the whole district , for many miles round .
As soon as the meeting was concluded , not satisfied with writing my name down in the circular , and leaving it to find its way amongst others to head quarters , I sat down and wrote a letter , which I sent by my servant , to Lord Pembroke , explicitly stating the extent of the offer , and my readiness to carry it into execution .
I received the following answer , which I have now before me .


`` WILTON HOUSE , August 20th , 1801 .


`` SIR ,


`` I have been so overwhelmed for some days with business , resulting from the necessity of calling upon a part of this county to put itself in a state of military preparation , that it has not been in my power to send a more immediate answer to your letter of the sixteenth .
As the part above alluded to does not extend to your residence , I conceive you will not be called upon to make any movement , except in the event of actual invasion , or of immediate threatening upon the coast  in which case the offers you make would be of infinite service  in which case also , as you ask my opinion , I think various lines of service might be pointed out , in which your personal services , attended by your servants , would be of much greater avail , and far more beneficial to the country , than as a volunteer in any regular regiment of cavalry , should those corps be permitted to receive volunteers .


`` I am , Sir , `` Your very obedient servant , `` PEMBROKE .
`` To Henry Hunt , Esq. `` Chisenbury House , Wilts . ''


Now let the thinking reader look at this circumstance attentively , and having done so , and marked down the dates , what a field for reflection does this fact , this letter disclose !
-- It appears , by the date of this letter and its contents , that , on the SIXTEENTH OF AUGUST , in the year 1801 , I was acting as CHAIRMAN of a public parish meeting , held at the Swan Inn , in the parish of Enford , in the county of Wilts , assembled in consequence of a circular letter , written by Earl Pembroke , the Lord Lieutenant of the county , in order to take into consideration and to adopt the most effectual means of affording assistance to the government , to resist and repel the invasion of a foreign foe .
The very FIRST time in my life that I was ever called upon by my fellow-countrymen to preside at a public meeting , was on the SIXTEENTH OF AUGUST , 1801  and , for my zeal and devotion for the welfare and safety of my country on that day , I received the approbation of Lord Pembroke , the Lord Lieutenant of the county of Wilts .
On the SIXTEENTH OF AUGUST , 1819 , that day eighteen years afterwards , my readers all well know , and they will never forget it , that I was presiding at as peaceable , as laudable , and as constitutional a public meeting , held at Manchester , for the purpose of taking into consideration the best and most legal means of obtaining `` a reform in the peoples ' or Com - mons ' House of Parliament . ''
But , instead of then receiving the thanks of the Lord Lieutenant of the county , I was assaulted by a military force , imprisoned , sentenced to be incarcerated in the worst , the most unwholesome , and the most infamous county gaol in the kingdom , for TWO YEARS and SIX MONTHS  while the butchers who murdered fifteen or sixteen , and maimed upwards of six hundred of their peaceable and unresisting fellow creatures , received the thanks of the King for their services .


This is a very extraordinary coincidence of circumstances , that the first and the last public meeting at which I ever presided , should have been on the SIXTEENTH OF AUGUST  and that they should have been attended by such different results is equally worthy of notice .
I am quite sure , that I was actuated by the very same feeling , the same love of country , the same anxiety for the well being of my fellow countrymen , and the same self-devotion , at both these meetings  my great leading object being to promote , as far as my humble means would permit , the welfare , the freedom and the happiness of my fellow countrymen .


It will not , I think , be uninteresting to my friends , who honour me by reading these memoirs , to state how I came by this letter of Lord Pembroke 's , written nearly twenty years ago .
It would seem as if I had been a very wary person to preserve my papers so carefully .
But this is not the fact  I have been quite the reverse  thousands of papers , letters from public men , which would have been most valuable to me now , and documents , have I incautiously and thoughtlessly burnt .
I will , however , state how I came by this letter , which I have now here in this gaol .
Soon after I came to Ilchester , I wrote home to my family , to collect from amongst my papers , all letters and papers containing votes of thanks that had been passed at public meetings all over the country , and sent to me from various places , from almost every part of the kingdom  particularly in the years 1816 , 1817 , 1818 , 1819 and 1820 .
When these papers came to me here , in looking them over I discovered three from Lord Pembroke  and I was rather surprised at their being amongst the number sent , as I had quite forgotten what subjects they were upon .
But , on opening them , I found that they all contained expressions of approbation and thanks , for various offers that I had made during the first French war , while an invasion was threatened .
As soon as I had examined them , I put them by , and never thought of them again , till I came to write the account of my first offer .
I was then going to state the substance of the Lord Lieutenant 's answer , as far as my memory would serve me , but at that moment recollecting that I had some letters from Lord Pembroke , I looked for them , and the very first upon which I laid my hand was that which I have inserted above .
Now , let the life and fortune men produce , if they can , one such instance amongst them , of patriotic and disinterested self-devotion as that which I evinced at that time .
It will be seen that I was just the same sort of man on the 16th of August , 1801 , as I was on the 16th of August , 1819  just the same sort of man that I am at this moment .
In the first instance my country was in danger  she was threatened by the invasion of a foreign foe -- that was enough  what was my conduct ?
I hurried to her assistance , and I made a voluntary tender of all I possessed -- corn , hay , horses , cows , oxen , sheep , pigs , waggons , carts , c. to the value of at least twenty thousand pounds , together with my own personal services , to perform any duty , however hazardous .
I had suffered once for my zeal .
I had been insulted by the colonel of the Wilts yeomanry , and for resisting it , I had been fined and imprisoned  but this did not extinguish , nor did it even slacken my zeal for what I conceived to be the safety and the liberty of any country .
The liberal and patriotic offer which I had made was talked of all over the county by the rich and by the poor .


At this period I was living in what was called great style  my mansion being generally full of company .
But in the midst of this profligate course of life , for so it might , with great truth , be called , I was not unmindful of the wants and the privations of the poor , and I never failed to do every thing in my power to relieve their distresses , and at the same time protect them from oppression .
Hunting and shooting were my great delight  but , fond as I was of these sports , I never neglected the call of a poor man or a poor woman , to attend on his or her behalf , at a justice meeting , to advocate their cause , and defend them against the arbitrary and cruel attacks of any little dirty tyrant , who might have premeditated to oppress them .
For this conduct I was branded , behind my back , by the quorum , and all the jacks in office under them , as a busy , meddling , officious fellow  but this never deterred me from doing that which I believe to be , and which I had been taught to be , the duty of a good Christian , namely , my duty towards my neighbour .
If the petty despots of the neighbourhood levelled their sneers at me behind my back , I was more than repaid , I was most amply rewarded , for this indignity , by a self-approving conscience , and by the grateful thanks and blessings of the poor , whenever I came in contact with them .
They were not only civil and respectful towards me and my family , but they were always ready to fly to do me any act of kindness within their power .
Whenever any particular exertion was required in my farming business , it was only for me to hint my wish , and it was not only set about without expostulation or grumbling , but it was sure to be executed and accomplished with alacrity and cheerfulness  for they never had any doubt of my punctuality in repaying them with an equitable and a liberal hand .
This was a delightful state of society  each we would act otherwise than we did , is the weakness of folly  for if we were placed in the very same situation , at the same age , with the same inexperience , and impelled by the same impetuous youthful passions  under similar circumstances , depend upon it we should commit the self-same errors that we have now to regret .
As for myself , instead of indulging in this sort of weakness , I look back upon my past errors with a sort of awful reverence for the benignity of the divine will of my Maker  and , when I prostrate myself before God , and offer up a silent , although an ardent thanksgiving for all his goodness to me , an insignificant human being , I never forget to pour out my most grateful and unbounded acknowledgments to him for his having permitted me to pass through life hitherto so well as I have done , without having committed any premeditated or deadly sin , such as would bear down and oppress my soul with conscious guilt , and place me in that deplorable situation which is so beautifully expressed by a sublime author : `` of all mortals , those are the most exquisitely miserable , who groan beneath the pressure of a melancholy mind , or labour under the stings of a guilty conscience  a slave confined to the gallies , or an exile to punish -- living and labouring for the mutual benefit and happiness of the whole .


Many of my readers will be surprised , and will exclaim , `` how was it possible that Mr. Hunt , surrounded with so many blessings , and appearing so much to enjoy such a rational , desirable , delightful occupation , should have been led away , should have been betrayed into the guilt of dissipation ? ''
Ah , my friends !
how easy is it , in looking back upon past events , upon lost time , how easy is it for us to say , and what a common expression it is , in the mouth of almost every reflecting person , `` If my time were to come over again , how very differently would I act ! ''
But this sort of reasoning is very fallacious , it is unworthy a philosopher .
When a person reflects upon particular events of his life , where his objects had failed for want of foresight , or for want of prudence , it may be excusable in him to express a wish , nay , it is almost impossible for any one to suppress an inward wish , that he had acted with more caution , discretion or prudence  but even a hankering wish of this sort is a weakness , although it may be an amiable and an excusable weakness .
To wish at all for an impossibility , such as the recalling of time that is irretrievably gone by , must be a weakness .
But , even if we could recall it , to assert that [ -- illegible -- ] is in perfect paradise compared with these . ''


The reader will be careful to recollect , that I am not endeavoring to screen those sins that I know I have committed .
As I feel that they will come under the denomination of venial , and not deadly sins , I shall not shrink from the task which I have imposed upon myself , of recording them as often as they occur at the different periods of my history .
I am not insensible of my errors , faults , or frailties  I know that we are all poor frail mortals  but , as my poor father said upon his death bed , `` I have not the least shadow of doubt upon my mind , that a wise , just , and beneficent Creator and Father of all , will pardon my errors . ''
With the same sort of hope , and with a similar impression upon my mind , I pass my numerous hours of solitude here in the most delightful reflections .
Calm , composed and perfectly free from the slightest impatience under the idea of my lengthened imprisonment , I have nothing about me of pining or fretting  and when I nightly lay my head down on my pillow , I invariably enjoy sweet , sound , and uninterrupted repose .
I rise early , refreshed , vigorous and cheerful , always occupied , always looking forward with new and renovated hopes , of living to see the enemies of my country and the persecutors of my suffering countrymen brought to justice .
Though I am a determined and unpromising enemy of those who tyrannize over and oppress my fellow creatures , yet I feel that I am always ready to forgive my personal injuries , and I am never in better humor with myself , and never have a higher opinion of my own character , than when I find my heart divested of all vindictive feelings against the petty tyrants by whom I am surrounded .
For their cruel persecution of myself and my unoffending family , I will , if I live and have the power , deliberately and perseveringly bring them to justice  but I will not do it to gratify a vindictive spirit -- I will do it for the sake of justice itself  not to gratify my own revenge , but for the protection of those who may come hereafter .


To return to my narrative : the letter which , in answer to my unlimited offers , I received from Lord Pembroke , I communicated to the neighbouring farmers , at a meeting held for that purpose .
This quieted their fears , and the account of Lord Nelson 's attack upon the flotilla contributed , in a great measure , to dissipate the general apprehension which pervaded the whole country , that an immediate invasion was actually likely to take place .
The French Government understood this thing well  they knew that it kept the country in a continual state of ferment and apprehension  and therefore they persisted in keeping the army of observation and the flotilla at Boulogne , in order to harrass the British Ministry , who , however , contrived to turn this to their own advantage , as it enabled them to frighten the people out of their money , by an enormous levy of taxes  the supplies voted this year being forty-two millions , and the loan which took place being twenty-five millions .
By this means the taxes this year were increased one million seven hundred and ninety-four thousand pounds .
I believe that nothing but the dread of invasion would have induced the people of England to submit to such enormous drains upon their pockets .
This bugbear , then , was cherished with the greatest care by the Ministers  a striking example of which is , the state of ferment we were placed in at Enford , the centre of the county of Wilts , at least fifty miles distant from any part of the coast , and a great deal further from any part of it where a landing was likely to be attempted .
We all , however , in consequence of Lord Pembroke 's letter , now went very steadily about our business again .


The patriotic and truly illustrious Washington 's Presidency expired in America this year , and he retired into private life , amidst the grateful benedictions of his country , which , under his wise , virtuous , and cheap administration , had , in spite of numerous difficulties , risen to such a magnitude , that its friendship was courted by all the old Governments .
It appeared that the public debt was 78 millions of dollars , not more than 16 millions sterling , which sum was yearly diminishing , and that the annual expenditure of the chief officer of the state was only nine thousand five hundred pounds , not above half the amount of the sinecure of the Marquis of Buckingham or Marquis of Camden , as Tellers of the Exchequer .
What a contrast was exhibited between the expences of Great Britain and those of America !


In England the average price of wheat , throughout the year , was a hundred and twenty shillings a quarter , or fifteen shillings a bushel .
It was estimated , that nine millions of acres of corn were grown in England this year , and the price which the produce sold for may be fairly averaged at twelve pounds per acre  therefore , in the one year , one hundred and eight millions of pounds were pocketed by the land-holders and farmers in the price of their corn only .
I had grown most excellent crops , and of course had come in for my share .
In fact , my corn averaged above four pounds per sack for the wheat , and four pounds per quarter for the barley  so that merely the corn with which I offered , in case of an invasion , to supply the Government , gratuitously , was not worth less than fifteen thousand pounds .
I repeat it once more , let the exclusively loyal gentry -- let the life and fortune men -- let the hole-and-corner addressers come forward , and point me out one instance amongst their whole hordes , of a man who ever volunteered to serve his country to such an extent .
What I this day told Dr. Colston , the Visiting Magistrate , is quite applicable on this subject .
When he was professing every disposition to serve me , I replied , looking him firmly in the face , `` Doctor , doctor !
shew me an act and I will believe you .
One act is worth ten thousand professions .
I ask for nothing but what is reasonable , and consistent with common sense and common humanity  and nothing but what is consistent with your strict duty as a man , a clergyman , and a christian .
Let me see my family at reasonable hours in the day time , so long as they conduct themselves with decorum and propriety , and violate none of the rules of the gaol , and I am content . ''


The reader will see , that this is the burthen of my song , `` Let me see my family . ''
This one simple , this one reasonable request , is all I have asked , is all I do ask , and it is all I shall ask .
But , while you deny me this , talk not to me of conciliation .
All your little , petty , dirty , mean tricks to annoy me I can and do laugh at  I should despise myself , if I could not despise and disregard them .
But , like expert butchers , who , when they are about to cut the throat of their innocent victim , the bleating lamb , know well where to apply the knife , so do you know where to inflict a deadly wound in the most vital part .
There is , to be sure , this distinction between you and the butcher  it is his business , it is his profession , by which he gets his daily bread  and , indeed , the sooner he kills his victim the more merciful he is : but as for you , your conduct is ten thousand times more brutal than that of the butcher , inasmuch as you inflict torture upon a human being , merely for the pleasure of inflicting torture .
And do you really believe , are you so besotted as to flatter yourselves , that you will escape ?
Do you really believe , that `` Where vice and cruelty go before , vengeance will not follow after ? ''
Vain and delusive hope !!!
Justice is slow , very slow , in reaching the minions of power  but she is certain to prevail at last .
This digression I am sure will be excused , and I will now proceed .
This period ( 1801 and 1802 ) may be said to have been the zenith of the farmers ' glory .
If a farm was to be let , scores were riding and driving over each other , ready to break their necks to take it , to rent it at any price .
Not only farmers , but tailors , tinkers , grocers , linen-drapers , and all sorts of tradesmen and shopkeepers , were running , helter shelter , to be farmers  men connected with the press , and cunning attorneys were joining in the chase  men of all professions , indeed , were now eager to become gentlemen farmers .
My father used to class the whole of these under the general denomination of APRON FARMERS .
Never was there a more significant and intelligible term applied to any set of men .
In every parish you now saw one or two of these apron farmers , gentlemen who knew very well how to handle a yard , so as to make short measure in selling a piece of cloth  men who could acquit themselves well at a pestle and mortar , who could tie up a paper parcel , or `` split a fig  '' who could drive a goose-quill , or ogle the ladies from behind a counter , very decently  but who knew no more about the management of a farm than they did about algebra , or the most intricate problems of Euclid .
A pretty mess these gentry made of it !
every one who had saved four or five thousand pounds by his trade must now become a farmer !
They all knew what profits the farmer was making , and they not only envied him , but they made a desperate plunge to become participators with him in the booty .
There was scarcely an attorney in the whole country that did not carry on the double trade of quill-driving and clod-hopping .
Most of them purchased land , even if they borrowed the money to pay for it  and many , many of them , after having farmed and farmed , till they had not a shilling in their pockets to support their families , have been compelled to give up their estates to the mortgagee .
As an illustration of this fact , I could point out numerous instances of this sort of mad folly .
I remember an Irish Barrister , who had married a lady of fortune at Bath , came and purchased an estate in Sussex , adjoining one that I occupied  and this , as he expressed himself , he did , that he might have the benefit of my experience to assist him in the cultivation of it .
He was to take the timber at a valuation , and it is a sufficient proof of his ignorance of these matters , that he really did not know the difference between a hazel bush and an oak tree  for , although he was a very clever and an ingenious man in his way , yet he actually applied to me , to know how they would measure such small timber as that which he pointed out to me , which was nothing more than a hazel bush !
Such was his ignorance of country affairs , that he did not know barley and wheat from grass , nor beans from oats , when growing  and he seriously proposed , as the best method of hatching young ducks , to set them under the rooks who had made their nests in the lofty trees that surrounded his house  and yet this gentleman must be a farmer , forsooth !
But I am anticipating my history .
These facts must , however , convince every rational mind , that this was such an unnatural state of things as could not exist for any lengthened period .
It did , nevertheless , drag on to the end of the war , when all these apron farmers were brushed off their farms , as one would brush from off one 's leg a fly that was stinging it .
These gentry long since quitted the turmoil and difficulty of agricultural pursuits .
Those that purchased have given up their land to the mortgagee  and those that rented have had their stocks sold to pay their creditors  and many of them , cursing the evil hour when they were induced to become farmers , have crept quietly back to occupy the situation behind the counter , as servants , where only a few years before they had reigned as masters .
These were some of the evils naturally attendant upon the bad policy as well as wickedness of one nation going to war to put down and destroy the liberty of another !


I used regularly to attend Devizes market , seldom , if ever , missing a market-day .
After my father 's death I was elected , or rather promoted to his seat , which was that of chairman at the head of the table , at the principal dining room of the farmers , at the Bear Inn , the best Inn of the town .
I have already described some of the scenes that used to occur upon those occasions , as to the way in which the bottle was passed about after dinner  but there is one other important point , connected with these weekly meetings of farmers , which I deem most worthy of recording .
Those parties were composed chiefly of farmers  but there were intermingled several large millers , brewers , maltsters , and corn jobbers from Bath and the surrounding country  and every now and then a gentleman bag-man , or traveller , would join us , which he was sure to do if there was any one in the town .
After dinner the home news of the day having been talked over , foreign news and politics were generally introduced  for , since I had been in the King 's Bench , my opinion was considered as some authority , and very earnest and warm debates used frequently to take place .
For some years before this period all political discussion had been put down with a high hand , by the impudent and boisterous conduct and assertions of one or two of these Bath corn jobbers , who denounced any one as a Jacobin who ever dared to utter a word contrary to the plans of the despots of Europe , or hostile to the measures of Pitt .
As far back as 1794 and 1795 , if any one boldly delivered his sentiments , and reprobated the war as the measures of the ministers , he was not only denounced as a Jacobin , but he was generally turned out of the company , and his arguments , instead of being answered , were silenced by brute force .
However , my father possessed too much manhood and liberality to suffer such a course as that to be taken while he presided .


At our meetings there was an impudent , unblushing , self-conceited fellow of the name of Perry , a miller and corn-dealer of Bath , who was always sure to contradict and insult any one who dared advance a liberal opinion  in which outrageous conduct he never failed to receive the support of those gentlemen bag-men , when any of them happened to be present  so that every young man , whatever were his pretensions to talent , was compelled to keep silence , unless he concurred with the ignorant and slavish doctrines of this hectoring jobber in grain , and the still more consequential knights of the bag .
Having been informed , by a gentleman of Bath , one day , when I was speaking of this Perry 's insolent conduct , that he was one of Mr. Pitt 's agents , paid to promulgate his doctrines , and to put down the arguments of his opponents , I took occasion , when I was in the King 's Bench , to make inquiries upon this subject , and any friend Clifford ascertained , from the most unquestionable sources , that it was one of Mr. Pitt 's plans , to employ and pay , out of the secret service money , almost all the travellers in the kingdom , at least all those who possessed either a sufficient stock of impudence or a talent of speaking or arguing in company , for the express purpose of putting down public opinion , and enforcing and propagating the measures of the ministers , as the most wise and politic  and that these worthies were paid in proportion to their boisterous powers , and their impudence  and the reader will easily conceive that they soon acquired a sufficient stock of the latter , when they knew under what powerful auspices they were acting .
He also ascertained that , in addition to these itinerant propagators and champions of tyrannical and despotic measures , they had from one to three stationary auxiliaries in every principal town in the kingdom , who frequented all places of public resort , and were always ready to denounce any man as a Jacobin and an enemy to his country , who dared to give utterance to an honest , candid thought .
These fellows were so backed on by the local authorities , that the general feeling being also pretty much in their favour , their insolence was in many cases almost insufferable .
Few men chose to enter the lists with them , because they had no chance of fair play , nor any probability of arguing the question with any degree of candour or liberality  and as a man must have either put up with flat ignorant contradiction , and open premeditated insult , or have got into a quarrel with them , conversation on political subjects was for many years effectually banished from almost every public company .
However , since I had returned from my travels ( which is the slang term of going to prison ) , I had acquired a considerable degree of confidence , and , accordingly , the very first time that I found this Mr. Perry pouncing upon one of the company with one of his rude knock-down arguments , I , without ceremony , took up the cudgels , and announced that , as long as I continued to be the chairman of that company , it was my intention to maintain the freedom of conversation , and I called upon the company to support me in my determination .
If they would do this , every man would , I said , be at liberty to deliver his sentiments upon public matters with perfect freedom , as long as he abstained from offering any personal rudeness or insult to any one present , which should not be tolerated from any quarter whatever .
With one or two exceptions , my proposal met with general approbation .
This said , Mr. Perry made a long speech , calling upon the company to sustain their character for loyalty , and to declare themselves church and king men  and he urged them not to tolerate any thing like republican or free principles .
He was heard very coolly , and even met with some disapprobation , upon which , getting warm , he declared that no man should utter any jacobinical expressions while he was present .
This very naturally caused a laugh , and Mr. Upstart sat down , vowing vengeance against all Jacobins .
I replied , and informed him that his notions about jacobinism were thoroughly ridiculous , and that if he ever heard any sentiments delivered of which he disapproved , and , in answer to which he could not find arguments , stated in decent language , the only way for him to act was , to walk out of the room  for he might depend upon it , if he ever insulted any one of the company in future , by giving them the lie , or calling them Jacobins and enemies to their country , if the party would support their chairman , I would put him out of the room .
This was indeed turning the tables upon the loyal gentlemen , and it shews the alteration of opinions of that same company , who , a very few years before , had joined in forcing a very worthy man to quit the same room , merely because he disapproved of the war with France .
This room ever afterwards was notorious for the liberality of sentiment that pervaded the company  and , as long as I remained the chairman thereof , the freedom of rational discussion was preserved unimpaired .


The reader will perceive that I have of late very seldom mentioned the name of Mrs. Hunt .
The fact is , that I did not at this period enjoy that domestic felicity , of which I had heretofore partaken .
I was , as I have more than once stated , gay , thoughtless , and dissipated .
I seldom ever spent a retired , quiet evening at home , enjoying the rational amusements of my own domestic fireside .
We bad always company at home , or I was one of a party abroad  myself and Mrs. Hunt were living a true fashionable life , and we entered into all its levities and follies .
This course of life had drawn us into more fashionable , more accomplished society  and I own that to me polished manners were a great attraction , and that those who possessed them , possessed superior powers to fascinate .
Amongst this number I frequently met a lady , who had been bred up and educated in the highest and most fashionable circles  she was tall , fair , and graceful , and , as far as my judgment went , every charm and accomplishment , both corporeal and mental , that could adorn an elegant and beautiful female , appeared to be centered in her .
At first sight I was struck with her superior air and graceful form , but I soon began to admire the beauties of her mind more than I had at first sight been captivated by her person .
We were , as if by accident , frequently thrown into each other 's society -- a circumstance with which I was very much delighted  and , as it never occurred to me that there could , by any possibility , be any harm in admiring and paying respectful attention to a lovely , elegant , and accomplished female , I never concealed in the smallest degree the pleasure which I felt in her society .
Though for upwards of twelve months , which was ever since we had become first acquainted , my attentions had been very marked , yet they had not attracted any particular notice .
I thought , alas !
and I professed what I thought , that I felt the most pure platonic affection for this lady , and that I was blessed with her friendship in return .
My wife had watched the progress of this attachment with anxiety and pain  she mentioned her fears , and expostulated in becoming terms against the imprudence of my conduct , which might give occasion to the world for ill-natured remarks  and she represented to me that , although my attentions were open and undisguised , they were very pointed and visible to every one , and that people would and did talk about it .
I professed to set at defiance the malignant opinions of the envious and the ill-natured , and , as I was conscious of the purity and honour of my intentions , I was the last man living that would be likely to forego any pleasure , merely because the censorious world chose to make their remarks upon it .
I saw that my wife had not the slightest suspicion of any thing criminal , neither was there the least reason for any such suspicion  but I saw also , that she dreaded the consequence of such incessant -- such devoted attention on my part , which , although it was received with politeness , and the strictest propriety , she nevertheless perceived to be not at all disagreeable .
Though this attachment was as pure and disinterested as platonic affection could possibly be , and although I should quite as soon have indulged an improper thought towards my own sister , yet the society of this lady was now become absolutely necessary to my comfort  we were , therefore , frequently together , and I was miserable if three or four days passed without our meeting -- a circumstance which seldom happened , notwithstanding we lived at a distance of ten miles from each other .


It will be asked , what said the husband of the lady ?
for she was a married woman .
It would ill-become me to say more than is absolutely necessary upon that subject  but , unfortunately he was careless and inattentive , and knew not how to prize the treasure that he possessed  and besides , as he never entertained , nor ever had any reason to entertain , a shadow of doubt respecting his wife , we were constantly left together .
This intimacy had now continued nearly two years , and as the lady was going to stay with her family in a distant county , I was invited ( almost of course ) to pay her a visit while she was there .
I scarcely need say , that the invitation was accepted .
Instead of staying a week or ten days , I remained a month .
During the whole of the time , my attention was incessant  I could not join in any scheme of pleasure or amusement , unless she was one of the party .
Unluckily , too , there was no one to controul us .
Her word was a law , which I resolutely carried into effect .
At length the gentleman getting quite tired of my visit , which was never intended or professed by me to be to him , but to the lady , he left us , and went to London .
Whenever he was asked by his friends or acquaintance , if I would not make one of a party to walk , to ride , to drive , or any other amusement , he invariably answered , `` you must ask my wife , by G --  Hunt is no visitor of mine he is Mrs. ------ 's visitor  '' and I , without any ceremony , admitted this , by saying it was perfectly true , if the lady chose to go I should accompany her , and if she chose to remain at home , I should remain with her  and this determination I invariably followed .


Business , however , called me home , a few days after the gentleman left us , and I went into Wiltshire , about the middle of May , having made a promise to return in July , to attend the races at Brighton .
This was the longest and most tedious six weeks of my life .
I thought of nothing but my intended visit to Brighton races  and such was the anxiety of my mind , that it brought on a serious , and , indeed , alarming fever .
In the fits of delirium I raved for the lady who was the object of my solicitude , and at one period the paroxysms were so violent , that Mrs. Hunt actually thought that I should have been bereaved of my senses  and to calm me , she seriously proposed to send an express for the lady .
In a few days the strength of my constitution overcame the disease , and I recovered .
But I found my life was quite a blank  my very soul was absorbed in thinking and longing for the society of one dear object .
I took not the least interest in the political occurrences of the day  and , for the first time in my life , I grew careless , and totally neglected my business .
Peace had been proclaimed : such an event , at any other time , I should have considered a matter of the highest importance , but that event scarcely excited my attention .
Buonaparte was made first consul for life , and the Legion of Honour was established  this occasioned a great sensation throughout the country , but the discussion of these matters created no lively emotions in my breast  my mind was totally absorbed in contemplating another object .
I now began to feel the fatal effects of indulging such a passion as that of platonic affection .
Though there had never been the slightest variation from the strict line of virtuous friendship , yet , such was its power over me , that I found it irresistible .
I struggled to break the spell , but I found it impossible  every effort that I made , only served to wind it more closely round my heart .
I confessed my weakness to Mrs. Hunt  and , indeed , it was already too visible to her to require any confession on my part .
At length the time arrived for my departure , and the manner of taking leave between myself and Mrs. Hunt , was very different from what it had ever been before  it was distressing to both , and appeared to be clouded with an ominous aspect .


Without dwelling any longer upon this painful subject , suffice it to say , that notwithstanding it was the very eve of harvest , I proceeded on my journey .
I drove my old friend Robert Clare , in my curricle , and our servants followed us on horseback .
We arrived in the neighborhood of Brighton , where we were received with great politeness .
Clare went to visit the gentleman , I , the lady .
We remained a few days before we departed for Brighton , where we had taken lodgings for the race-week .
Instead of being diminished , my attentions to the lady increased every day , and as they became more pointed , and excited the notice of every one , the husband remonstrated , and threatened to take the lady home .
In fact , he was urged on to do this by some of the lady 's family .
I expostulated , but never relaxed my assiduities , and he was indecisive .
A storm was , however , gathering round us , which threatened to burst every moment  and dreading that separation which appeared worse than death , at the thoughts of which I was almost frantic , we took the desperate resolution to put it out of the power of any one to part us .
Brighton was a dangerous place for persons in our situation  there was the Prince of Wales , our present King , living with Mrs. Fitzherbert , in the most open and public manner  this was an example too likely to have a baneful effect upon two persons so doatingly fond of each other , that the very idea of being parted , produced almost a momentary madness .
Such was the result of platonic affection .
Without ever having made the slightest approach to any thing criminal , our attachment was so riveted , that to cease to exist would have been ten thousand times preferable to such a separation , as would have finally deprived us of the power of enjoying each other 's society .
The die was cast -- my curricle was brought to the door about one o'clock in the middle of the day  and I prevailed on her to take a seat , which she did almost in a lifeless state , without knowing where I was going to drive her .
This did not excite the particular observation of our friends who were of the party , as I was in the habit of driving her out almost every day .
As soon as we were seated , I drove off to Lewes .
Upon the road we met the Prince , Mrs. Fitzherbert , and Sir John and Lady Lade , in a barouche , returning from the races .
The moment that we arrived at Lewes , I ordered four horses to a post-chaise , and having written a short letter back to my friend Clare , to explain the cause of our absence , we proceeded to London with all possible speed .
The friends of the lady followed her the next day , and every offer was made to induce her to return  but the fatal step being once taken , there was no retreating , and all entreaties were in vain , though every inducement was offered and repeated for six or eight months .
I shall only add , that though there can be no justification for such a rash step , yet if ever there was a female that had received cause , which greatly palliated , almost to justification , she was that person .
The circumstances were so peculiar and so distressing , that no legal proceedings were ever taken either against her or myself  but , on the contrary , amicable arrangements were made .


Perhaps , and no doubt , it will be said by some , that I am an unfeeling , barefaced offender , thus publicly to blazon forth my own errors .
But I claim the indulgence of my readers to recollect that I have undertaken to write my own history , and , as I have promised to do it faithfully , no consideration upon earth shall induce me to conceal from the public my faults .
They , and particularly the Reformers , shall , if I live , know my character such as it is .
It is a duty I owe to them as well as to myself , and though this is a most painful duty , yet I am determined not to shrink from the task of performing it with a rigid fidelity .
Millions of the most amiable and the most virtuous , if they can not altogether pardon , will know how to make a generous and liberal allowance for the frailties of human nature .
I have a much more difficult labour yet to accomplish , in narrating the separation that took place between myself and my wife , in consequence of this fatal step .
But as I am quite sure nothing I ever did in my life can make me appear half so bad as I have been represented to be , by the venal public press of the country , I shall proceed deliberately and resolutely to disclose the whole .


The circumstance of our departure from so public a place as Brighton soon got into all the newspapers , and the intelligence had reached my home at Chisenbury , long before I got there , whither I was obliged to return , as it was just in the middle of harvest .
I had written to a friend to meet me there , and to prepare Mrs. Hunt for the interview .
Our meeting I will not attempt to describe  it was most painful for all parties  I concealed nothing from my wife , and , when she knew the extent of the evil , with a becoming spirit , she declared her determination not to share a divided heart .
Without going into a detail here , it will be sufficient to say , that a separation was mutually agreed on , and her relations were appointed to meet my attorney , to make the necessary arrangements for carrying it into effect .
I disclosed to my attorney my circumstances as to property , and intrusted him to accede to the most liberal settlement .


How many times , when I have come before the public , have I been taunted by the hireling press , and its still baser agents , that I had turned my wife out of doors to starve !
How incessantly was this falsehood bawled out , repeated , and reiterated , by the dirty hireling agents of the contemptible Westminster Junto , so properly denominated by Mr. Cobbett the Rump Committee !
How often was this lie vomited forth upon the hustings , by the paid tools of the opposing candidates at the Bristol and Westminster elections !
Whenever I have argued for the right of every Englishman to be free , for Universal Suffrage , or have pleaded the cause of the poor , instead of answering my arguments , or controverting my principles of justice and humanity , the answer has been , `` you have turned your wife out of doors , to starve , Hunt , therefore we will not listen to your doctrine . ''
This has been particularly the language of that hypocritical faction the Whigs , or Burdettites  those pretended sham friends of liberty , who , within the last seven years , have done more to palsy public opinion , than all the Tories that ever lived could have done .
This Rump , this fag-end of a committee of Westminster electors , that was once formed to support the freedom of election in that city , but the members of which have , since the management of it got into their hands , converted the power that they have assumed into an engine of the basest corruption , and have proved themselves the most tyrannical suppressors of public opinion , as well as the most determined brutal destroyers of every thing like fair discussion  who , at all their public meetings , whether held in Palace Yard or the Crown and Anchor , have systematically put down , and forcibly prevented from delivering his sentiments , every person that was not one of their own gang  who , with coarse , vulgar , beastly hootings and yellings , have driven every honest public man from their bacchanalian carousals at the Crown and Anchor  this set of dirty underlings I have most narrowly watched , year after year , during a long period  and , as I know all their tricks and shufflings , I will faithfully lay them before the public , as I proceed in my Memoirs .
The ramifications of the mischief they have done , have spread far and near .
They have kept up a correspondence with some of the most patriotic individuals in every principal town and city in the kingdom  by which means they have frequently exercised the power which they thus acquire , of stifling those sparks of popular fervour , that would have long since kindled into an irrepressible blaze of patriotism , had it not been for the sinister exertions of this foul extinguisher of every particle of generous public liberty , that did not tend to promote their own base and selfish ends  always acting , as they have done , under the direction and immediate influence of their Grand Lama , or principal juggler , Sir Francis Burdett , in whose pay they have most of them been , directly or indirectly , for many years past .
Unable to answer my arguments , and dreading the exposure of their hero 's trickery , this gang , with a broad faced , impudent individual , of the name of Adams , a currier , in Drury Lane , at their head , whenever I offered to address them in public , have been always foremost in the cry of , `` Hunt , you turned your wife out of doors to starve  '' and not satisfied with this , these despicable wretches have worn the heels of their shoes off , in running from door to door , and from pot-house to pot-house , to vilify me behind my back , propagating the most bare-faced falsehoods , all of their own fabrication .
I will , by-and-bye , give the reader a specimen of one of the stories invented by this Adams , and related to Mr. Cobbett by the man himself , when he was confined in Newgate , in the year 1812  all their lies ending with the usual burthen of the song , that `` I had turned my wife out of doors to starve . ''
This man , Adams , was a witness in the trial of Wright v. Cobbett , in the Court of King 's Bench , some time since , for a libel  and if he swore that which was attributed to him , Mr. Cobbett neither did justice to himself nor to the public , by declining to prosecute him for perjury .


But I will now proceed to detail the particulars of the settlement which I made upon my wife at the time of our separation  and I have no doubt that any statement , at the same time that it gives the lie direct to the base assertions of the foregoing scoundrels , will convince every unprejudiced , as well as every liberal and rational person in the country , of the dastardly conduct of mine and my country 's greatest enemies , the hypocritical false friends of liberty .
It will be recollected by those who have done me the honour to read my Memoirs , that when I married I received one thousand pounds as a fortune with my wife  five hundred of which I lent immediately to one of her brothers , without ever having taken it out of the house of my wife 's father  which five hundred pounds still remained , and continued to remain in his hands , for several years after my being parted from his sister .
I mention this fact , here , to shew in what light her brothers and family considered this separation .
They looked upon it as a misfortune which all lamented  but it is evident , from this circumstance , that they did not look upon it in a criminal light  for , if they had done so , they would not have continued a moment under such a pecuniary 61


HENRY HUNT .


obligation to me , which by them could have been so easily removed , as they were all by this time in very good circumstances  and the brother , James , who held this sum , was now in partnership with his elder brother , John , the banker at Marlborough .
My wife 's fortune was , as I have said before , one thousand pounds .
The consideration then was , what sum I should secure annually to Mrs. Hunt .
I had given my attorney authority to consent to , nay , to propose , the most liberal allowance  having made him fully acquainted with my property and income , which I authorised him to lay before her brother , who was acting in her behalf .
After a conference , my attorney informed me that he had proposed to allow Mrs. Hunt an annuity of two hundred pounds , and secure it as a rent charge upon my freehold and leasehold estates in Wiltshire and Somersetshire , which he had no doubt would be accepted if I approved of it .
My answer was , `` although this may be considered a liberal and handsome annuity to my wife , when compared with the fortune I received with her , and as a fair allowance , when taking all my property and prospects into consideration , yet , as I am the aggressor , / I >
, I will , as far as I have the power , make at least a pecuniary compensation .
I shall not be satisfied with what might be considered as fair  but I will make her a liberal and generous allowance .
I have now the means , and while I have the means and the will to do her justice , I will put it out of my own power to act otherwise .
Go , and settle the annuity , draw up the deed , and insert therein three hundred pounds a year , and I will sign it immediately , for fear of any accident . ''


This was done as I directed , and it was also agreed that Mrs. Hunt should have the care of our daughter , and I of our two sons , but that we should both have free access to them whenever we pleased .
All this being arranged amicably , and in a manner perfectly satisfactory to Mrs. Hunt and her relations , at least as far as pecuniary affairs went , and as this annuity was regularly paid for nine years before another arrangement was proposed by the trustee , her brother , which I shall faithfully detail when I approach that period of my history , I would fain hope that the calumnious cowards who have so often assailed me , as having turned my wife out of doors to starve , will , at any rate , in future , abstain from propagating such a bare-faced falsehood .
When I think of these things , perhaps I ought to thank them for urging me on to this disclosure of my domestic arrangements  which , as I believe they will not tell to my disadvantage , as to liberality , so I am quite sure that nothing but such overwhelming and persevering calumnies would have ever induced me to disclose them .


It was proposed that Mrs. Hunt should go and live with her relations  but , as I thought three hundred pounds a year was quite sufficient to make her independent of any one , and quite enough to enable her to keep a small and respectable establishment of her own , I recommended that she should take a house , and have her family to herself .
She urged that there would be the expence of purchasing furniture , c. and that she would rather , on that account , take furnished lodgings .
I soon contrived to overcome this difficulty  I was living in a large mansion , Chisenbury House , containing four or five sitting rooms , and ten or twelve bed rooms , amply and expensively furnished with plate , linen , china , and every requisite for a large family , keeping a great deal of company .
I , therefore , without the least hesitation , followed up the liberality of the original deed , by immediately offering a moiety of my household furniture , plate , linen , china , books , c. c. which was more than enough to furnish any moderately-sized house .
This offer was no sooner made than accepted this is another proof of the malignant falsehood of the base editors of the venal press , and of the hireling tools of `` England 's hope and Westminster 's pride , '' the despicable Rump !
`` Well , how did you manage to divide these things ? ''
it will be asked !
Why , in a manner totally beyond the comprehension of these political split-figs , tailors , glass-cutters , leather - dressers , and curriers of the Westminster Rump .
Instead of doing as these fellows would have done under such circumstances , instead of sending for a broker or an appraiser , I acted as follows : I desired her to send for a cabinet maker and his man , and make them pack up a half of every thing , which I should leave entirely to her own choice  and as I was going from home , which I did for the purpose of leaving the whole arrangement to herself , I left an order for my bailiff to place any number of waggons and horses at her disposal , to convey whatever she might choose to have packed up , to her house at Marlborough , and before I left home I placed one hundred pounds , exclusive of the annuity , in her hands , adding , that if she did not pack up the best half of every thing , it was her own fault .
Look at this , ye venal , calumniating crew , and hide your diminished heads .
Ye paltry tools of the Baronet , ye Places , Adamses , Clearys , Brookses , and Richters , belonging to the Rump of Westminster !
You have dragged this statement forth , you have given me an opportunity of doing justice to myself , in this particular .


I understand there has been a great desire amongst this crew , to see how I should get over this part of my domestic history .
The base vermin , some of them , I know , expected that I should follow the example of higher authority and traduce my wife , as a justification for my own errors and frailties .
Gracious God !
-- traduce my wife !
-- calumniate the mother of my children !
Rather than have been guilty of such baseness , rather than have done this , even if she had been exactly the reverse of what she is , instead of being all truth , purity and goodness , if she had been guilty of some errors and indiscretions , even then I would rather have plucked my tongue from my mouth , and have cast it into the fire , much rather than have uttered a breath of slander against my wife , or have whispered a calumny against the mother of my children .


Mrs. Hunt did as I requested her , and the first time I paid her a visit , at her new residence , at Marlborough , which was about a month afterwards , I found that she had not only got furniture enough to furnish a comfortable house , but that she had a room-full over what was necessary .
Some of my readers will stare to hear me talk of visiting my wife , under such circumstances , and after such a formal separation .
But so it was  and I can say further , though we have had the misfortune to be divided , I do not believe that any human being ever heard either of us cast any reflection , or throw out any the slightest imputation against the other .
I have always treated her and spoken of her as the amiable mother of my children , and she , I believe , has spoken of me at all times as the affectionate , though in this respect the unfortunate father , of her children .


Thus have I , without the slightest disguise , given a faithful and unvarnished detail of this melancholy and distressing event .
This has been the only drawback , the only thing that my enemies could ever bring fairly against me , that I was separated from my wife -- an assertion which was too true to admit of dispute  but all the other calumnies against one are as false and as groundless , as that of having turned my wife out of doors to starve .
Having said thus much , I am sure that the reader will not expect that I shall be constantly wounding the feelings of an amiable and extensive family , by dwelling upon and publishing every little anecdote of my private domes tic concerns .
It is enough to say here , that it is now nearly nineteen years since this event occurred , and I will briefly add , that , placing this unfortunate family affliction out of the question , no man living ever enjoyed nineteen years of such uninterrupted domestic felicity with less alloy than I have done .
No man 's home was ever more agreeable than mine was at all times to me  and I sincerely believe , that this alone has enabled me to support and to survive the great public exertions that I have been constantly making for so many years past .


To all those who may exclaim against my errors , I can only say , in the language of the greatest Reformer that ever came upon the earth , `` let him or her that is without sin cast the first stone . ''
How many profligate and abandoned scoundrels will read this , and casting their hypocritical eyes up , `` like a duck in thunder , '' will exclaim and rave against my failings !
How many profligate , debauched rakes , when sneaking home to their wives and families from stews and brothels , will , to disguise their own debauchery , profess to rail still at me !
How many abandoned , though slyly intriguing city dames , will cast their arms around their husbands ' necks , as a proof of their own virtue , or rather to disguise their own frailties , and exclaim aloud against me !
None but the truly virtuous know how to make a liberal allowance for the failings of others .
My father used to observe , and he set it down as an invariable rule , that the most abandoned and profligate secretly intriguing females , were always the most unforgiving , unrelenting persecutors of any one of their own sex , who had committed an error , or fallen into a misfortune of this sort .
A lady , of the parish of Enford , who having been railing in an unmerciful manner against a servant girl who had the misfortune to have an illegitimate child , my father remarked privately to me , that it was a sure proof to him , that she was no better than she should be .
A few weeks afterwards , this very same dame was detected in an intrigue with the house thresher !


I trust the reader will not think that I am endeavoring to justify the crime of incontinency , seduction or debauchery  quite the reverse  there is a very broad distinction between justifying a crime , and making a liberal and humane allowance for the frailties of poor human nature .
Those females who are really chaste , and who practice rather than profess virtue , are always tender and sparing of their censure of the misfortunes and errors of others of their own sex : so it is with honourable and virtuous men  although they would by no means encourage vice , yet they take a very different course to eradicate it , than that of declaiming publicly against those who have not been so successful as themselves in resisting temptation .


How many living instances could I point out , as illustrations of this self-evident proposition .
It was but yesterday I had before me a glaring specimen of the sort of canting hypocrisy which is the object of my censure .
It was a reverend and dignified pillar of the church , as demure as a saint , turning up his eyes , and professing and preaching morality , which I had more than once or twice before heard him do , while , with a sanctified leer , he expressed great horror at my breach of conjugal chastity , or violation of the marriage vow .
The reader will easily imagine the manner in which I eyed him , while he was uttering these truly religious and moral doctrines , when I inform him that , only a few hours before , an old neighbouring farmer had been relating to me and my friends , a little of the private history of this chaste and pious parson .
It seems , by this old gentleman 's account , that this now worthy and dignified clergyman of the Church of England , who was originally a mere clerical adventurer , the better to enable himself to perform that duty which he had recently sworn that he was called by the Holy Ghost to execute , took to himself an antiquated damsel for a wife  but what she was deficient in beauty and youth , she made up in the scale by the weight of her purse  and my informant observed that , during the life time of the `` first madam , '' not a servant girl could live in his house , without giving evident proofs that the rosy-gilled priest was not quite purified from the sinful lust of the flesh , notwithstanding the call he had received from the Holy Ghost , and the all-powerful ordination of the Holy Bishop of the diocese to boot .


I could not only , fill this number , but I could fill a volume , with instances of this sort in this very neighbourhood .
Let me only take half a score of clergyman , and half a score of magistrates , of this part of the county of Somerset  and in merely detailing the scenes of debauchery , seduction and desertion of which they have been notoriously guilty , I could fill a book that would excite the horror and detestation of every rational mind .
Let it be observed that I do not by any means class the whole , nor any considerable portion , of the magistracy or clergy in this list  God forbid I should , because I believe there are many , and I know there are some , very excellent and truly good men amongst them .
`` Well , '' it may be said , `` and what of all this , because some Justices and Parsons are profligate , debauched , and abandoned , would you infer that to be any justification or palliation for your errors ? ''
Not in the least .
I do not wish to assume any such ridiculous proposition .
All I mean to say is , it brings me to this conclusion , that as we are by our very nature liable to err , and that as it is quite clear that those who are the most forward to condemn others are not always totally free from the frailties of human nature themselves  it therefore behoves us , while we have `` the beam in our own eye , '' not to be too officious in exposing the `` mote in the eye of another . ''
But , after all , I will boldly and fearlessly rest my own character upon the following issue .
If any one of those who have been railing against me , will come forward  if any person , male or female , will come forward and establish one act of seduction against me , even from the earliest period of my life , up to this hour  if they will produce one illegitimate offspring of mine , or prove that there ever has been such , even by common report  I hereby solemnly promise not to write , or have published , one more line as long as I remain in this prison .
And further  if any one will come forward and prove , that I have ever been the inmate of a brothel , or been ever seen within the walls of a house of ill-fame , since the day I was married , twenty-five years ago  or that I ever , in the whole course of my life , seduced , and afterwards deserted , a female  I do hereby solemnly declare , that upon such proof being established , I will , within one month from the time I leave this gaol , voluntarily banish myself from this country  and so far from ever appearing again in public , I will never again set foot upon British ground .
I make no protestations of being more virtuous than other men  but after having made this voluntary offer , if no one accept it , if no one come forward , then in common charity , for the sake of the national character , let these my calumniators for ever afterwards hold their peace .
It may be said this is nobody 's business  but this answer will not do  it has been every venal knave 's business  it has been the business of the corrupt scoundrels of Bristol  it was the daily and hourly business of the debauched editors of the public newspapers of that city , when I offered myself as a candidate there at two contested elections .
It has also been the business of the corrupt and profligate editors of almost all the London daily , and most of the London Sunday newspapers , to abuse and calumniate my private character , whenever I have come before the public , at the call of my distressed fellow-countrymen  whether it was at a public meeting , or at a contested election , they made it their business to vomit forth every species of unmanly abuse against me .
It has , even in a still greater degree , been the business of those hirelings composing the Westminster Rump  it has been the particular business of the Whigs , the Burdettites , and the Tories  all equally hostile to real liberty  it has been their business openly and covertly to slander and vilify me , for the last twelve or fourteen years .
I now , therefore , call upon every one of these corrupt and despicable knaves to come forward , either individually or collectively , and substantiate some one of those charges which they have so long , so repeatedly , and so unblushingly preferred against me .
Upon all occasions , they have unequivocally and unanimously denounced me as an enemy to social order , an enemy to the Whigs , an enemy to the Tories , and an enemy , as they say , to the country .


Now , then , is their time to silence me , if they have it in their power to establish one of the crimes with which they have charged me  but if they remain silent , and can not establish any one of their charges against me , what a race of cowardly , profligate beings they must feel themselves to be !
But the fact is , that all


these vermin know that they were propagating the most barefaced and wanton falsehoods against me .
And who are these men that have been the foremost to accuse me ?
Some of the most degraded , swinish , and abandoned of the human race .
And what has been the cause of all their hostility to me ?
Why , merely because I have been the undisguised and uncompromising advocate of the people 's rights and liberties  because I have publicly and unequivocally , upon all occasions , maintained the right of annual parliaments , universal suffrage , and vote by ballot : in this I have been joined by the great mass of the people of England .
and Scotland .
For my public exertions in 1816 and 1817 , to promote this great cause , I received the most cordial testimony of the regard and esteem of my fellow-countrymen -- I received repeated votes of thanks from almost every town and city of consequence in the kingdom , and particularly from the North , and from Scotland .
I believe I had the approbation of nine tenths of the industrious and most valuable classes of the community , because I fearlessly advocated the right -- the constitutional right of all these useful and industrious classes to partake -- practically to partake , of that constitution which compelled them to risk their lives and property , if called upon by the government , in its defence .
This I did , regardless of all , of every faction , whether Whig , Tory , or Burdettite  for at this period there was a considerable faction , composed principally of petty shop-keepers , and little tradesmen , who , under the denomination of tax-paying housekeepers , enlisted themselves under the banners of Sir Francis Burdett , in order to set themselves up as a sort of privileged class , above the operative manufacturer , the artizan , the mechanic , and the labourer .
Thus , at the very time that all these classes of operative manufacturers , artizans , mechanics , and labourers , consisting of three-fourths of the population of the kingdom  at the very time , in 1816 , when almost the whole of these persons had become united in one object , and had held meetings all over the kingdom , and upwards of a million and a half of them had signed petitions to be presented to Parliament , demanding universal suffrage  at this very juncture , which was immediately after the first meeting held in Spa-fields , lo and behold , Sir Francis Burdett , hitherto our great leader in the cause of public liberty , DECLARED OFF and deserted us , by avowing himself the enemy of universal suffrage , and declaring that he would not support any reform that had for its object to extend the suffrage beyond house holders  thus , at one sweeping blow , blasting the hopes , and driving out of the pale of the constitution , at least two-thirds of the population  and that part , too , the most useful and most industrious , and therefore the most beneficial to the nation !
The Baronet declared that he would support the householder suffrage -- that those who occupied a house , and paid King 's and Parish taxes directly to the tax-gatherer , should have a vote for members of the Commons ' or People 's House of Parliament  but that all the junior branches of families , all lodgers , every person who was not the master of a house , should be excluded altogether from any share in electing those who make the laws , by which EVERY ONE 'S liberty , life , and property is to be disposed of .


Up to this time , the Baronet had stood so high in the public estimation , and was so much looked up to and respected , not only by me , but by all those who took a lead in the general cause of public liberty , that his word had hitherto been A LAW in these matters  in fact , he had not only gone with us , but he had run before us , and all our difficulty was , to keep up to his mark , for he was always complaining of the apathy of the people , and declaring that they did not deserve liberty , unless they would exert themselves , and join him in demanding it  and he was everlastingly urging us , who laboured under him for the cause ( Major Cartwright , Mr. Cobbett , myself , and others ) , to excite and rouse the people into action , to support his exertions in the House .
But when , in 1816 , Mr. Cobbett and Major Cartwright had , by their writings , and I and others had by our speeches and resolutions , passed at public meetings , roused the people into a sense of their public duty , to petition the Parliament for their individual , collective , and universal rights , behold the Baronet stopped short , and turning sharp round , declared that he would not go with us  and that he would only support the right of liberty for householders , leaving all the rest of the community in a state of abject slavery and bondage !
Up to this period -- till this fatal decision , with the exception of one or two little obliquities of conduct , Sir F. Burdett had enjoyed the confidence , and received the support of every wise , good , and disinterested man in the nation  because every one believed that he was sincere in his protestations for the universal freedom of mankind .
But , now , for the first time , his supporters dwindled into a faction of shopkeepers and housekeepers -- a little selfish crew , who were anxious to enjoy liberty themselves , and who were elated at the thoughts of becoming a sort of privileged class , above and distinct from the great body of the people .
From this cause arose a new faction , under the denomination of BURDETTITES .


It will be recollected , that , at this period , not one of the Whigs came up to this mark even of householders .
A few of the most liberal of the Whigs , viewing with alarm the rising spirit of the people , thought they must do something -- that they must make some show of approach towards a more liberal system  they , therefore , joined the city cock , Mr. Waithman , and held a meeting at the Free - Masons ' Tavern , where they manfully declared their readiness to support a Reform , upon the principle of triennial , instead of septennial Parliaments  but not one word of any alteration in the suffrage  -- not one of this faction was then bold or honest enough to support the Burdettite faction , even in their humbug of householder suffrage  and the consequence was , that the Burdettites , or little shopkeeper faction , made a great parade about how much further they were disposed to go than the Waithmanite , or Whig faction .


At a great meeting of delegates , from all parts of the kingdom , and particularly from the North , and from Scotland , held at the Crown and Anchor , to settle the sort of Reform that should be adopted by the people , Major Cartwright and Mr. Cobbett proposed to limit the suffrage to householders , for two reasons -- first , upon the plea now exploded , of the impracticability of every man enjoying freedom or universal suffrage  and secondly , for the purpose of joining and still clinging to Sir Francis Burdett , without whose name and co-operation , it was contended that no plan of reform could be carried into effect .
I , however , stood boldly up for the great and just principle of universal suffrage , and moved , as an amendment to the motion made by Mr. Cobbett , that instead of householder suffrage , universal suffrage should be substituted .
After a long and animated debate , my amendment was carried by a vote of sixty  three hands only being held up against it .
For this uncompromising , for this determined support of the principles of universal suffrage , in opposition to the householder plan of Sir Francis Burdett , I have ever since been pursued by the vindictive hostility , both openly and covertly , not only of the Baronet 's Rump Committee , but of the whole of the Burdett faction , who have , in conjunction with the base and hypocritical Whig faction , been ten times more virulent against me , than even the Tory or Government faction .
It may be said , that this is a singular and long digression , and that I am forestalling my history .
It is very true  but I deem it necessary to repeat and reiterate the foregoing circumstances , so that a great number of honest and truly excellent Reformers may be able clearly to account for some part of my conduct , which may hitherto have appeared inexplicable .
Thousands of very worthy friends of liberty , must have been puzzled and staggered by the violent attacks and calumnies that have been levelled at me , in those public prints that have been generally understood to be the staunch supporters of the principles of freedom  but if they will look back , and narrowly examine into the objects and views of these public prints , they will find that they have been merely the vehicles , by which the Burdettite faction have directed their envenomed shafts against me .
Thousands of very sincere and honest friends of liberty have been and are puzzled , to understand how it is , that I have met with such cowardly and unmanly opposition at the Rump Westminster Dinners , at the Crown and Anchor  and thousands of equally worthy and honourable men , are disposed to question my pretensions to public favour , upon the ground of the beastly and factious opposition which I have some time experienced from the Whig Waithmanites , at the Common Halls , in the City of London .
But as I go along , I will undertake to show the cause of that opposition , and expose the motives of that little city faction , as clear as day-light .
Nothing can , indeed , be more plain than this fact , which is , that these factions , one and all , are opposed to the principles of universal Liberty .
They have all of them their little , petty , selfish objects to obtain , and in the pursuit of them , they know their greatest obstacle to be , that they can not any longer make the people their dupes and tools  and they know too , that no man has been so zealously and so perseveringly instrumental as I have been , to keep the people steady in one common pursuit -- that of obtaining something for themselves -- that of struggling for the interest of the whole community  and they know and feel that nothing could ever warp me from my duty to the public  that I could never be bamboozled nor muzzled , nor silenced , nor bribed , by any one of these factions  and this , this it is that has roused against me their rage and their hostility  and in proportion as I have exposed their sophistry so has their malignity increased .
Finding that they could neither answer nor controvert my principles , nor put me down , they have been base enough to resort to slander , and to the most wanton and barefaced falsehoods , which they have trumped up to blacken me .
The separation from my wife was a subject that they never failed to urge against me , after having tortured it into a thousand aggravated shapes  not one of which was true .
If , however , I would but have joined any one of these factions -- would have followed the example of Sir Francis Burdett , and deserted the great mass of the people , by going over to , and joining even the shopkeeper or householder faction , I might have deserted my wife , and left her to starve , with impunity .
I might have been as profligate as any of my calumniators -- might have been as debauched as a Prince , or as abandoned as some of these Justice Parsons , and yet I might have passed for one of the most pious and virtuous characters in the kingdom , particularly if I had put on a little demure sanctified hypocrisy .
I believe there is no other man in the world , besides myself , but who would have been overwhelmed and driven from the field of politics , by the incessant attacks -- by the premeditated and infamous slanders that have been poured out against me .
And it is certainly a fact -- it is quite true , that nothing on earth could have enabled me to keep my ground , but the purity of my intentions , and the conviction of my heart , that the holy cause for which I have been contending , is just and equitable  nor would any thing on earth induce me to persevere , but the solemn conviction that it is the law of God and Nature , that man should enjoy civil and religious freedom , and that no law of God or Nature ever condemned a human being to be either a religious or a political slave .


But now to return to my narrative .
After this great change in my domestic affairs , I made full as great a change in my course of life .
I immediately abolished all the accustomed carousals and feasts that I had been in the habit of giving at Chisenbury-house .
I continued the society of a few select friends , but I cast off the busy , fluttering , flattering throng -- the fawning , cringing crew -- that had been used to crowd my table .
I took a house in Bath , and spent the following winter in comparative retirement , in which I was blessed with the society of two or three rational and intelligent friends .


This being a period of peace , there was very little political news afloat .
The circumstance that most excited public attention at this time , was the visit of Mr. Fox to Paris , where he was received by the First Consul with every mark of regard and respect .
Gracious God !
that Mr. Fox could but have lived to have known that this illustrious man should first become Emperor of France , and now be imprisoned on a barren rock , that the English Government should be his gaoler , and that they should cut him off from all communication with the world , and prohibit him from the society of his wife and child !
If Mr. Fox could but have lived to have known this , or could have anticipated any such event , he would with his manly eloquence have roused the dastard apathy of the people of England into a just sense of this disgrace , and the national dishonour , as becoming parties to so cowardly and unjust a measure .


The hireling ministerial press of the metropolis was now using the most inflammatory language against the First Consul of France , for the purpose , if possible , of creating a new war  and they were daily spreading the most monstrous and barefaced falsehoods against him , to stimulate the fears and the prejudices of John Bull , by representing him as a tyrant and a monster , who had been , and who would be , guilty of all sorts of cruelties and atrocities , and whose aim it still was , to subdue and conquer England , that he might make us all slaves and beasts of burden .
Thus were the credulous people of England duped by the paid ministerial agents of government , while Napoleon was most anxious to remain at peace , and particularly at peace with England , that he might consolidate his own power upon the Continent , and protect the people of France against the inroads and tyranny of the despots that surrounded them .
The infamous and dastardly conduct of the English ministerial writers drew down the execration of the whole civilized world , and the Moniteur , the official newspaper of the French government , announced the indignation and resentment of the First Consul at the conduct of the Court of London , for encouraging and sanctioning such brutal libels .
It declared that `` every line printed by the English ministerial journalists is a line of blood . ''
The reader , who does not recollect the infamous conduct of the ministerial scribes of that day , will find but little difficulty in believing this assertion to be true , when they reflect upon the atrocious and cowardly language of the ministerial hirelings of the present day , and read the obscure balderdash and blood-thirsty principles published in the Dull Post , the Mock Times , and the Lying Courier .


Before I go any further , it is proper for me to remind the reader that it ought never to be forgotten , by the people of England , that Napoleon had been acknowledged by the English government , as the legitimate ruler of France , that very Napoleon whom they now keep a prisoner upon a barren rock at Saint Helena , contrary to every principle of justice and humanity , and in violation of all law , and particularly in violation of the law of nations , notwithstanding Mr. Brougham 's priggish assertions to the contrary .


Notwithstanding the jealousy of the English government , and the cowardly slanders of the English ministerial writers , Napoleon assumed great power in France , which the French people were induced to concede to him , that he might be the better able to contend against the intrigues and treachery of the British ministers : he placed himself at the head of the christian church  he caused a new constitution to be adopted in Switzerland  he compelled the Barbary powers to make peace  he was courted by Prussia  he entered into an agreement , called the Concordat , with the Pope  he granted an amnesty to the emigrants , which created him a host of friends  and ultimately , in the course of this year , the French government appointed him Consul for life , and the new constitution which he had proposed was approved throughout France .
Ambassadors were exchanged between the two powers , England and France , but the administration of England was jealous , suspicious , and in fact never cordially cemented the peace , into which they had been compelled , from circumstances , to enter .
On their part , as it will be seen hereafter , it was nothing more or less than a hollow deceitful truce .


On the nineteenth of November , this year , ( 1802 ) , Colonel Despard and nine other persons were apprehended , on a charge of high treason  and , after many examinations before the privy council , they were ultimately committed to prison , on the twenty-ninth of the same month , to take their trials for high treason .
This plot , as it was called , caused a very considerable sensation throughout the country .
It was stated to have been entered into not only to dethrone , but to kill the King , as he was going from his Palace to the Parliament House , through the Park , by blowing him and his attendants to atoms , by firing the long piece of ordnance at them when they came near the Horse Guards  and it was asserted that Colonel Despard had formed and entered into this conspiracy , to shoot the King and overturn the government , with the said piece of ordnance , in consequence of the ministers refusing to attend to , and liquidate , some claims that he had upon the government .
The ministers contrived to create a considerable alarm throughout the whole empire , amongst the credulous , and such as were easily terrified by the explosion of this ridiculous pop-gun plot .


The ministers , however , were obliged to repeal the income tax , as a bribe to the landed interest , upon whom it was considered to fall particularly heavy , although the removal of it was looked upon as a boon to every one who paid it .
This was a peace offering , such as our present ministers appear determined not to bestow upon us , notwithstanding we are now in the sixth year of peace .
This year there was a loan of twenty-three millions raised .
The taxes were enormous , that of the poor rates alone having amounted to five millions .
The average price of the quartern loaf , during the twelve months , was one shilling .
The prime minister was the Right Honourable Harry Addington , now Lord Sidmouth  Mr. Perceval was Attorney , and Mr. Manners Sutton was the Solicitor-general  the Chief Justice Lord Kenyon , having received his sentence , and been condemned to be banished to another world , by the Judge of judges , Mr. Law was created Lord Ellenborough , and appointed Chief Justice of the King 's Bench .


On the third of January , 1803 , a special commission was issued under the Great Seal , to inquire of certain high treasons committed within the county of Surrey  and on the twenty-first of January , it was opened at the Sessions House at Newington -- present on the bench , Lord Ellenborough , Sir Alexander Thompson , Sir Simon Le Blanc , and Sir Alan Chambre .
The grand jury were sworn , composed of Lord Leslie , foreman , Lord William Russel , Sir Thomas Turton , and others , and after a long speech from the newly made Chief Justice , which , by the bye , was quite unnecessary , the said grand jury returned a true bill against Edward Marcus Despard and twelve others  throwing out the bills that were preferred against SOME OTHERS who were known to have been deeply implicated with Colonel Despard .
The Court then adjourned to the fifth of February , after having , at the request of the prisoner Despard , assigned Mr. SERGEANT BEST and Mr. GURNEY as his counsel .


On Saturday , the fifth of February , 1803 , the court met , pursuant to adjournment , at the Sessions House at Newington , the same Judges presiding as before .
Edward Marcus Despard and twelve others were placed at the bar , and severally pleaded not guilty .
On Monday , the seventh of February , the Court met again at nine o'clock in the morning -- present , Ellenborough , Thompson , Le Blanc , and Chambre , as before .
There were nine counsel employed by the crown , as follow : Attorney and Solicitor General , Perceval and Manners Sutton , Sergeant Shepherd , Plumer , Garrow , Common Sergeant , Wood , Fielding , and Abbott .
Counsel for Colonel Despard , Mr. SERGEANT BEST and Mr. GURNEY .
The prisoner being placed at the bar , the following jury were sworn , Grant Allan , William Dent , William Davidson , Gabriel Copland , William Coxson , John Farmer , John Collinson , James Webber , Gilbert Handyside , John Hamer , Peter Dubree , and John Field .
I am sure the reader will agree with me , that nothing can be more desirable than to record the names of all the parties concerned in such melancholy and bloody transactions , that they may be handed down to posterity for the use and information of the rising generation , that they may be enabled the better to judge of the motives and management of the prosecutors , and the degree of guilt or innocence of the accused .
What a subject for the reflecting mind , to watch the rise and progress of those concerned in the various transactions of this sort , which have occurred during our own time , and within our own memory .
As my opinion is , that Colonel Despard fell a sacrifice to the intrigues and the spy plots of the ministers of that day , and their detestable agents , that the verdict was obtained against him by perjury , and that he was in no degree guilty of the charges that were preferred against him , it will be most interesting to watch the progress of those concerned in his prosecution and trial , and to mark their end .


Upon the trial of Colonel Despard a number of witnesses swore the most outrageous things against him , but the two principal witnesses were two soldiers  one of these men , it is said , left England immediately afterwards , and was never again heard of by any one in this country  the other , as I was informed by Mr. Clifford , confessed upon his death bed , that he had been bribed to swear against the Colonel , that what he had sworn was false , and that he had been instructed what to say , and he did so , for doing which he received a considerable sum .
These were two fellows of the most abandoned character , as came out upon their cross-examination , ( SUCH AS IT WAS ) , but the evidence for the prosecution was so inconsistent , and so ridiculously improbable , that one is astounded at the thought , how it was possible for any twelve men in the kingdom , indiscriminately and fairly chosen , to have said guilty upon such testimony , and that principally upon the testimony of accomplices .
But , what was more extraordinary than all the rest , was , that , although there was a ROOM FULL of witnesses for the prisoner , many of them most respectable , who were ready and willing to disprove a great deal that the witnesses for the prosecution had sworn , and to prove that several of the principal witnesses were not worthy to be believed upon their oath , yet , to the astonishment of the Court , to the grief and sorrow of the prisoner 's friends and relations , to the wonder of the whole country , the counsel for the prisoner never called one of these witnesses .
Gracious God !
the bare recollection of this circumstance freezes one 's blood with horror !
I have received a letter from a friend of the colonel , to say , that when they found the counsel were only calling a few witnesses to character , they , the colonel 's friends and relations , wrote him a note , imploring him to demand that these most important witnesses should be called and examined .
But he returned this fatal answer , `` I have trusted my case in the hands of my counsel , and in them I place implicit confidence  I shall therefore not interfere with them . ''
Oh fatal confidence !


It is not for me to accuse the counsel of having betrayed and sold their client  but it is my firm and unalterable opinion , that , had these witnesses who were in attendance been called for the prisoner , no jury would ever have pronounced the word -- guilty .
Thank God !
I made up my mind long , long ago , never to trust my life or my liberty in the hands of a counsel !
I have not the least doubt , not the shadow of a doubt upon my mind , that , if the government could have been sure that I would have trusted my defence in the hands of a counsel , if they could have indulged in a well-grounded hope , that I would have committed my case to the keeping of the worthy Counsellor Scarlett , but that they would have tried and convicted me and my friends of high treason , for attending the peaceable meeting at Manchester  for which , as it was , they could not even get me convicted of a conspiracy , though they had packed a tractable Yorkshire Whig jury .
But if they could have got me to place a brief in the hands of the worthy and able WHIG SCARLETT , I should have been tried for high treason , and the evidence of Hulton , Entwistle , and Andrew , would have been so beautifully managed , that I am quite sure a packed Yorkshire Whig jury , with the Halls , the Chaytors , the Hultons , the Chadwicks , and the Oddys , at their head , would , under the dexterous management of the worthy hermaphrodite politician , Mr. Scarlett , have , and upon the self-same evidence , found me guilty either of high treason , or of sheep stealing , whichever might have best suited the purpose of the prosecutors .
Under such circumstances , had I left my life in the hands of Mr. Scarlett , notwithstanding I should have subpoenaed , and had in attendance , one hundred and fifty witnesses , to contradict all the perjury sworn by the aforesaid trio , I should not have been surprised if Mr. Scarlett , instead of calling them , had contented himself with calling , perhaps , Parson Hay and Mr. Nadin to my character , under the pretence that , twenty years before , they had known me a very loyal man in the Everly or Marlborough troop of yeomanry cavalry .


The only witnesses called for poor Colonel Despard , were three complete Government men  Lord Nelson , Sir Alured Clark , and Sir Evan Nepean , Bart .
Gracious God !
only look at this !
The counsel for the prisoner well knew that these evidence to character were not worth a straw  for they had not known any thing of Colonel Despard for many years past , and yet these men were called , and others of the most vital importance were not called .
Gracious God !
as Mr. -- now Sir Thomas Lethbridge , would say , it almost makes my hair stand an end upon my head !
Two out of three , viz .
Clark and Nepean , upon their cross-examination , evidently gave such testimony as told much more against him than for him .
But Lord Nelson spoke of him as follows : -- '' We went on the Spanish Main together  we slept many nights together under the same blanket , in our clothes , upon the ground  we have measured the height of the enemy 's walls together .
In all that period of time , no man could have shown more zealous attachment to his Sovereign and his country than Colonel Despard did .
I formed the highest opinion of him at that time , as a man and an officer  seeing him so willing in the service of his Sovereign .
Having lost sight of him for the last twenty years , if I had been asked my opinion of him , I should certainly have said -- if he be alive , he is certainly one of the brightest ornaments of the British army . ''
This was certainly a just and true description of Colonel Despard 's character  but let us see how Lord Nelson finished his cross-examination , by the Attorney General .
What your Lordship has been stating , was in the year 1780 ?
-- `` Yes . ''
Have you had much intercourse with him since that time ?
-- `` I have never seen him since the 29th of April , 1780 . ''
Then as to his loyalty for the last twenty-three years of his life , you know nothing ?
-- `` NOTHING . ''
Gracious God !
and THERE Mr. SERGEANT BEST left his examination .
Let the reader only look back at the trial , and read the mawkish cross-examination of the villain Windsor , by the learned Sergeant , and he will make up his mind to two things the very moment he has finished it : -- the first is , never to feel surprise again at the verdict against Colonel Despard  and the second is , that he will never trust his own life in the hands of an aspiring place-hunting lawyer .


After a very short speech from Mr.SERGEANT BEST and Mr. Gurney , wherein they both apologized to the jury for its length , and a very long and able reply from the Solicitor-General , and a very long summing up by Lord Ellenborough , the jury withdrew for about twenty-five minutes , and a little before three o'clock on the Tuesday morning , they returned a verdict Of GUILTY .
The foreman added , `` MY LORD , WE DO MOST EARNESTLY RECOMMEND THE PRISONER TO MERCY , ON ACCOUNT OF THE HIGH TESTIMONIALS OF HIS FORMER GOOD CHARACTER , AND EMINENT SERVICES TO HIS COUNTRY . ''
The Judge said not a word .
But where is the man of the present day , who has read of the verdict of wilful murder given by the jury , at Horsham Assizes , against the person upon the preventive service , who deliberately shot a man , and who has since read of the pardon that has bean granted to that person , but would have expected that the very strong and emphatic recommendation of the jury , for the extension of mercy to Colonel Despard , would have received some attention .
No !
no !
Colonel Despard had opposed and exposed the Government , and he was hanged in the front of the county gaol at Horsemonger Lane , and after having been suspended about twelve minutes and a half , his head was taken off , ( the King having most graciously remitted the execution of the remainder of the sentence . )
Thus died Colonel Despard , who , though he was not a man of great talent , yet he was , in the language , the words of Lord Nelson , `` as brave as Caesar . ''
But , as the vulgar saying goes , `` the death of the horse is the life of the `` dog , '' and `` it is an ill-wind that blows nobody good . ''
The learned Sergeant BEST displayed such extraordinary talents upon this trial , that he was rewarded with a silk gown within one month afterwards .
It has been confidently asserted that when the Prince Regent had incessantly , but in vain , urged the Lord Chancellor to promote a certain Welsh Judge , this venerable Peer once answered , `` I `` can not conscientiously recommend venality `` to the English Bench . ''
`` Ellenborough , Thompson , Le Blanc , and Chambre , the four Judges , have long , long ago gone to stand at the bar of a special commission to receive the sentence of the Judge of judges  but it is doubtful whether they carried with them so strong a recommendation to mercy as that which was urged , in vain , for poor Despard .
We all recollect how the then Attorney-General , Spencer Perceval , went out of the world headlong by a shot , from the unerring aim of Bellingham .
The junior counsel for the exown , ABBOTT , and the senior counsel for the prisoner , BEST , are both now placed in the same seat in the Court of King 's Bench .
It also is a fact worth recording , that the most violent of all Colonel Despard 's associates had no Bill found against him , although two were preferred , one in Surrey and one in Middlesex .
It came out in evidence , that this person was more violent and more determined than any other , and made use of the most outrageous denunciations against the Government , and against any of his comrades who might betray them , or refuse to go the lengths that he did .
The Government had this evidence , and it came out , upon the examination of Thomas Blades , that this person threatened that he would blow any one 's brains out that showed any symptoms of cowardice , and that he would plant a dagger in the breast of any one who should divulge their secret .
And yet , the same Grand Jury that found the Bills against Colonel Despard and others , threw out the Bills against this said violent and courageous gentleman .
This is exactly the same game that was played by Edwards and Castles  these two scoundrels were the most violent , and urged on their unfortunate victims to deeds of desperation , yet they escaped not only punishment but even indictment .
What a lesson for all Reformers , to avoid the snares of the most violent men , who are generally the agents of Government !
All these worthies contrived to get into my company , Castles ONCE , Edwards ONCE , and this said person who played such an active part in Colonel Despard 's affair ONCE , and only once each  once was quite enough for me .
It has often been said , by my friends , that Providence interfered to prevent my falling into the trap of these villains .
It is very true  but Providence interfered in this way , Providence gave me resolution never to attend any private meetings , never to be concerned in any private cabal , never to get drunk , or associate with persons who frequented public houses  in fact , Providence has filled my heart with a desire to promote the welfare and happiness of my fellow-creatures , by a bold , straight forward , public , open course .
In private life , I have relaxed into all the delightful enjoyments of domestic happiness , where I have very seldom suffered politics and her boisterous train to interfere with my rural felicity  but whenever I have come before the public , I have always , with an inflexible resolution , cast all selfish considerations behind me , and given a loose to that `` amor patria '' with which my bosom ever glows , when I am in the presence of my fellow-countrymen .
I have always said bolder things , and used more of what is called violent language , in public , than I ever allowed to escape from my lips in my happy privacy .
In that privacy I have been in the habit of associating with friends holding different political sentiments from my own , without ever quarrelling with them , or thinking the worse of them , on that account .
My safety has , I repeat , arisen from my political honesty .
I have never joined in any intrigue , any cabal , any faction  I have openly and boldly contended for the natural and legitimate right of every man to enjoy political freedom  and I pray God that I may breathe my last before I alter my opinion upon this subject .


I had now resided in Bath nearly a year , occasionally visiting my farm at Chisenbury and Littlecot .
During my residence at Bath a circumstance occurred of some importance to me and my family .
A brewer , of the name of Racey , had , as I have before hinted , borrowed upwards of seven thousand pounds of my father , without any other security than his own bond , in which sum he was indebted to him at his death .
As he had not paid his interest up regularly , I was induced to look a little more minutely into his concerns  especially as I found that he was living a very debauched life .
My uncle , William Powell , of Nurstead , a quaker , who was left joint trustee and executor with myself to my father 's will , and had taken the most active part in the management of my father 's affairs , appeared to place full as much reliance in the credit of this said brewer as my father had done , and he had several times resisted my importunities , to demand jointly with me better security for this money than the brewer 's own bond .
I argued , that my father had a perfect right to exercise his own judgment , and give what credit he pleased , as it was his own property  but that my uncle and myself , acting as trustees for my brothers and sisters , were not justified in suffering so considerable a sum of money to remain in this man 's hands without better security .
He , however , still persisted that the brewer had a good stock , and a good trade  that he regularly examined his stock every half year , and he found that it was in a flourishing state .
My answer was , the man lives a very debauched life , and therefore his affairs must be in a precarious state  but the quaker was inflexible , and nothing was done in the matter .
The brewer continued his debauched course , and neglected and quarrelled with his family , and my uncle Powell continued his confidence .
At length , the old man carried his excesses so far , that he not only quarrelled with his eldest son , but he actually turned him out of doors .
This young man was a great intimate of mine , with whom I had contracted a sort of school-boy friendship  he , therefore , fled immediately to me for protection , when he was driven from his father 's house .
I laboured with great zeal and perseverance to promote a reconciliation between the father and the son , but I found the former implacable , and rancorously vindictive against his son , who had been interfering about some of his father 's debaucheries  and he was consequently not to be forgiven .
The young man saw that his father 's affairs were going fast to ruin , and knowing the large sum that he was indebted to me and my family , he communicated to me the real situation of his father , and advised me to take some measures to secure the property that he was indebted to us as executors under my father 's will .
I went to my uncle once more , and represented the matter to him , but he was as obstinate as ever : he answered , that I had taken a prejudice against the old man , in consequence of his quarrelling with his son  and that he should decline taking any hostile measures against him  and that he had a large stock of good beer , for he had lately examined it .
I informed him that he was imposed upon , that the old brewer had filled up all his large casks , amounting to between two and three thousand barrels , with small beer , in order to deceive him , and make him believe that it was strong beer .
At this he stared a very incredulous stare , and said that he would look into it , but he delayed it so long that , when he did join me in taking decisive measures , the whole property sold for about two thousand pounds , so that we were minus about five thousand pounds  and every shilling of this loss I attribute to my quaker uncle 's obstinacy -- a failing , notwithstanding all their good qualities , to which this sect is very subject .


I had contracted a great predilection for the son , with whom I had had an intimacy for some years  and , notwithstanding the loss I had sustained by his father , he prevailed upon me to join him in a brewing concern at Clifton , near Bristol : as he had not a shilling of his own , I was to find the cash , and he judgment .
I did this mainly to set him up in business , although I was not without expectations that it might ultimately become a profitable concern .
I therefore engaged to find a capital of six or eight thousand pounds  from two to three of which was to be sunk in building a brewery , the erection of which I was to superintend , and complete the fabric after my own plan .
As soon as this was done , I was only to find the money , and my young friend was to manage and conduct the brewing concern .
I agreed to all this upon one condition only , which was , that there should be nothing brewed in our brewery but genuine beer and porter , made of malt and hops alone .
After some parley upon this point it was at length assented to .


The brewery was built upon the site of an old distillery , at the rising of a spring called Jacob 's Well , at the foot of Brandon Hill , and immediately below Belleview , at Clifton .
The whole was soon completed under my own eye , and finished entirely on my own plan .
I took advantage of the declivity of the hill , on the side of which the premises were situated , to have it so constructed that the whole process of brewing was conducted , from the grinding of the malt , which fell from the mill into the mash-tun , without any lifting or pumping  with the exception of pumping the water , called liquor by brewers , first into the reservoir , which composed the roof of the building .
By turning a cock , this liquor filled the steam boiler , from thence it flowed into the mash-tun  the wort had only once to be pumped , once from the under back into the boiler , from thence it emptied itself , by turning the cock , into the coolers  it then flowed into the working vats and riving casks , and from the stillions , which were immediately above the store casks into which it flowed , only by turning a cock .
These store casks were mounted on stands or horses , high enough to set a butt upright , and fill it out of the lower cock  and then the butts and barrels were rolled to the door , and upon the drays , without one ounce of lifting from the commencement of the process to the end .
This was a great saving of labour .
I left the concern in the hands of my young friend , with every prospect of success , and I then returned to my farm at Chisenbury  having , as I was taught to believe , laid the foundation of a lucrative concern , from which I expected to derive a liberal interest for the money I had advanced , which was about eight thousand pounds , and at the same time afford a handsome income for my young friend .
But such is the uncertainty and precarious state of all speculative concerns of this nature , and such the inconstancy of friendship , that , instead of ever receiving one shilling from this concern , I found it still continue to be a drain upon my purse .
Bills were coming due , I was told , and they must be provided for , or the credit of the firm would be blasted .
Duty , to a large amount , was to be paid every six weeks , and as often I was called upon to assist in making up the sum .
I now began , although much too late , to curse the hour that I became connected with trade .
I , however , did not despair .
I met all the demands , till , having called in a considerable sum of money , which I had lent to a friend , an attorney , upon his note of hand , he gave me bills , payable at one , two , and three months , for the amount .
These were all absorbed at the brewery , and paid away in the course of trade , for malt , hops , c. but the first , second , and third , all the said bills , were as regularly dishonoured as they became due .
So much for friendly attorneys !
and though I had a sufficient sum in my bankers ' hands , Stuckey and Co. to meet the deficiency , with some exertion of my own , yet , such a ticklish thing is credit , and particularly in the illiberal city of Bristol , that I found my bankers always looked shy at any bills that were carried to them afterwards .
My friend , the attorney , renewed the bills , with a solemn promise that they should be regularly paid when they became due  but the word and honour of an attorney , at least of this attorney , was good for nothing .
Fortunately , I only paid one of them away in the trade  for that and the others were as regularly dishonoured as before .


To meet and overcome such treachery , I was obliged to reside a great portion of my time at Clifton  and I soon found that , instead of my receiving regular interest for the money which I had advanced , I was in a fair way of being drained of every shilling I possessed , if I did not make a stand .
My old friend , Waddington , came to visit me  he was a man of business and of the world , and I begged of him to look into the books and advise me .
He did so , and at the end of a couple of hours he returned , and informed me that I had been egregiously deceived , plundered , and robbed , and that he had not the slightest hesitation in declaring , that my young friend , in whom I had placed such unlimited and implicit confidence , was a great villain !
I was thunderstruck , and inquired how he meant to substantiate his charge  his answer was , invite him to dine with us to-day , and after dinner send for the books , and I will make him confess his villainy before your face .
I followed his advice , invited him to dine , and after dinner I sent for the books , under the pretence of explaining something to Mr. Waddington .
The books came  Mr. Waddington turned to a particular account , which he had investigated in the morning , pointed it out to him , and begged to know how he could account for such and such entries .
My gentleman turned pale and equivocated .
Mr. Waddington turned to another and another , upon which my protégé stood confessedly a most complete hypocrite  and having thrown himself on my mercy , he at once obtained my forgiveness , upon a solemn promise of never being guilty of a similar offence again .
Mr. Waddington expressed his astonishment at my forbearance in not having him committed , and ridiculed my folly in continuing to place any confidence in him  adding , `` I hanged one clerk and transported two more , for much less offences than he has been guilty of , and in which I have clearly detected him . ''


The young man shewed the greatest contrition , and after he had vowed reparation in the most solemn terms , he took his leave .
The moment his back was turned , Mr. Waddington declared , that he had not the least doubt in his own mind that , notwithstanding all the protestations which I had heard , he was gone away determined to commit some more desperate act of fraud  and , to convince me of the correctness of his judgment , he got up at four o'clock the next morning , and stole down to my brewery , and there he detected him in the fact of practising upon me a fraud similar to that of which he had been previously convicted by his own confession .
Mr. Waddington came back to breakfast , and informed me of the fact , and urged my taking immediate criminal proceedings against the offender .
I , however , preferred giving him an opportunity to escape , and having ordered my curricle I called at the brewery , to say that I was going to Chisenbury for a few days .
He inquired as follows -- `` Pray , Sir , what day shall we have the pleasure of seeing you back again ? ''
I replied that it would be in about a week .
These were the last words I ever heard from him .
When I returned I found , as I expected , that he had sailed for America , bag and baggage , two days : after I left Bristol .


I discovered that the concern was in a most wretched state  the debts had been collected to a shilling , where they were good for any thing .
The cellars were filled with bad beer , although he had had the unlimited control of the best malt and hops .
I had sent my own best barley down from Chisenbury , and had made fifty quarters of malt a week , for two whole seasons , for which I had no return , and the amount of my losses in this concern is incalculable .
When he first began brewing I made him make oath , before the Mayor of Bristol , that he would use only malt and hops in the brewing of the beer and porter at the Jacob 's Well Brewery .
Some time after this , I had some ground of suspicion that the brewer purchased some small quantity of copperas , to assist his faults in brewing .
I , therefore , ever afterwards made the brewer , as well as his master , take the oath before the Mayor , that they would use nothing but malt and hops in brewing .


When the act was passed , making it a penalty of two hundred pounds to use any drug , ingredient , or material , except malt and hops , in the brewing of beer , Alderman Wood obtained a patent for making of colouring , to heighten the colour of porter .
This colouring was made of scorched or burnt malt , and it was mashed the same as common malt , which produced a colouring of the consistency of treacle , and having nearly its appearance .
As this patent was very much approved of , almost every porter brewer in England used it in the colouring their porter  and amongst that number I was not only a customer of the worthy alderman for colouring , but I was also a considerable purchaser of hops from the firm of Wood , Wiggan c.. in Falcon Square .
I had just got down a fresh cask of this colouring , and it was standing at the entrance door of the brewery , where it had been rolled off the dray , when news was brought me that the new exciseman had seized the cask of colouring , and had taken it down to the excise office .
I immediately wrote to Wood , Wiggan c.. to inform them of the circumstance  upon which they immediately applied to the board of excise in London , and by the return of post I received a letter from Messrs. Wood , to say , that an order was gone off , by the same post , to direct the officers of excise in Bristol to restore the cask of colouring without delay  and almost as soon as this letter had come to hand , and before I could place it upon the file , one of the exciseman came quite out of breath to say that an order had arrived from the board of excise in London , to restore the cask of colouring , and it was quite at my service , whenever I pleased to send for it .
I wrote back a letter by the fellow , to say , that as the exciseman had seized and carried away from my brewery a cask of colouring , which was allowed by the board of excise to be perfectly legal to use , as it was made of malt and hops only , unless , within two hours of that time , they caused it to be restored to the very spot from whence it was illegally removed , I would direct an action to be commenced against them .
In less than an hour the cask of colouring was returned , and the same exciseman who had seized it came to make an apology for his error .
His pardon was at once granted , and so ended this mighty affair  and I continued to use the said colouring , as well as did all the porter brewers in Bristol , without further molestation , as long as I continued the brewery  never having had any other seizure while I was concerned in the brewery .


Now , let the reader look at this circumstance , and compare it with the account , the malignant account , given of it in the Mock Times , which , I think , was given to the public while I was in solitary confinement in the New Bailey , at Manchester , upon a charge of high treason .
That was the time chosen by the cowardly scoundrel , the editor of the Mock Times , to state `` that I had formerly been a brewer at Bristol , and , that I had made oath that my beer was genuine , and brewed solely from malt and hops  but that , in turning to the excise books , they found that , at such a period ( mentioning the term ) Henry Hunt was exchequered , for using deleterious drugs in the making the said genuine beer . ''
This was the time chosen to propagate this infamous , this cowardly , this barefaced falsehood  the very time when I was locked up in solitary confinement , in a dungeon , under a charge of high treason  and this is the hypocrite who pretends never to attack private character .
This fellow , Slop , I never yet saw to know him  but I hope I shall live to look the coward scoundrel in the face .


In the latter end of the year 1803 , an insurrection broke out in Ireland , and the Habeas Corpus Act was in consequence suspended .
Lord Kilwarden , Chief Justice of the King 's Bench in Ireland , was put to death by the insurgents in Dublin .
War had also commenced once more between England and France .
The English proceeded to seize all the French ships they could find at sea  making the people on board prisoners of war .
In retaliation for this act of aggression , Buonaparte seized upon the persons of all the English in France , and treated them as prisoners .
This was blazoned forth as a tyrannical act of injustice , in all the public newspapers , the venal editors of which contrived to keep out of sight the provocation which France had received , and that she only seized the English , and made them prisoners in retaliation .
Addington 's peace was now , indeed , proved to be what Mr. Fox had anticipated , in his speech upon the occasion in parliament , `` a hollow truce  '' for , to use the minister 's own expression , `` he had entered into the treaty of Amiens merely as an experiment . ''
A bill called the Defence Bill was passed  an army of reserve was raised  volunteer corps were again established all over the country  and every measure was used to repel the threatened invasion of the enemy .
This defence bill compelled every parish or district to raise a certain number of men , as volunteers , or pay a fine if it failed to do so .
Having endeavoured in vain to raise their quota , many parishes paid the fine ( which by the bye was not unacceptable to the Government ) .


Amongst the number of defaulters on this occasion was the parish of Enford , the farmers of which had used every means to raise the men  being , in the first place , loth to part with their money , and in the next , not relishing the disgrace of not having influence enough with their labourers to induce them to volunteer .
They had already held two meetings , at which officers were appointed , but no men came forward to put down their names , although they were earnestly exhorted to do so by the vicar of the parish , the Reverend John Prince , who was generally liked by his parishioners .
One of my servants , my bailiff , I believe , wrote to me at Clifton , to inform me of the state of the politics of the parish , which was , that the men were willing enough , but they did not like their officers , and that they wished me as an officer .
My bailiff added , that if I would come to the meeting , on the following Sunday , which was the last intended to be held , and give in my name as their captain , the number , which was to be sixty , would be volunteered in an hour .
Agreeable to this suggestion I drove to Enford on the following Sunday , and , as I was late I drove up to the church door in my curricle .
I was welcomed as usual by the kind and friendly salutations of my old neighbours  but when I came to the church-yard all was solemn silence , and as still as death itself  not one of the parishioners appeared as usual upon such occasions .
I supposed that the meeting was over , and was about to return , when one of the farmers came out of the church and invited me into the vestry , where all the heads of the parish were assembled , as he informed me , with the vicar in the chair .
I followed him into the vestry room , where I found them all in solemn , sober , deliberation , brooding over their disappointment , in not having obtained the names of any of the labourers of the parish .
One of them shortly addressed me , inveighing against this disloyalty and disaffection , and he informed me , that they had just came to an unanimous resolution to pay the fine , and not trouble themselves any farther about it , unless I could suggest some plan to avoid the disgrace and the expence to the parish .
I submitted the propriety of making a proper appeal to those whom they wished to come forward .
They replied by producing a hand-bill , to which they said they had added their personal entreaties  but all in vain , as not one man had come forward , although three persons had volunteered as officers .
I hinted that that was beginning at the wrong end  that the men should have been first enrolled , and then allowed to choose their own officers .


At this moment the sexton came in , to say that the church-yard was full of men  women and children  that the whole parish had assembled when they saw Mr. Hunt drive up to the church  and that the men all said , `` if Squire Hunt would be their captain they would enroll their names , and would follow him to any part of the world . ''
It was proposed that we should go out to them , and hear what they had got to say .
As soon as we reached the door , the cry was raised of Captain Hunt for ever !
accompanied with three cheers .
This was a most gratifying spectacle to me  I was surrounded by all those with whom I had been bred up , those amongst whom I had been born , and with whom , and under whose eye , I had passed my whole life , with the exception of the time which I had spent at school .
I could do no less than address them , and accordingly I mounted on a tombstone ( an excellent rostrum ) -- I spoke to them in a language that they well understood , the language of truth and not of flattery .
I kindly thanked them for the honour they intended me , and the unqualified confidence they appeared disposed to place in me  I recalled to their recollections the happy days that we had spent together in the alternate and rational enjoyment of useful labour and cheerful recreation  we had worked , we had toiled together in the field  we had mingled together in the innocent gay delights of the country wake  I had been present , and had never failed to patronise their manly sports , at the annual festivals of Easter and Whitsuntide  I had contended with them , while yet a boy , in the foot race , at the cricket match , or at the fives court  I had entered the ring with the more athletic , struggled foot to foot for the fall , and had borne off many a wrestling prize for the day , which I had never failed to give to some less powerful or less fortunate candidate for the honour : I had always mingled with and encouraged their innocent sports , but I had never countenanced any drunken revelry .
In fact , I was so well known amongst the young and the old , that they all with one accord exclaimed , if Mr. Hunt will be our captain we will follow where he leads , if it be to the farthermost parts of the earth .
At the same time that I thanked them for , and was highly delighted with this predilection , I endeavoured to prevail upon them to accept those who had offered themselves as their officers  and I pointed out to them the distance at which I should be from them , and the inconvenience it would be to me to attend to instruct them in their duty .
But all would not do  not one man would put his name to the paper  not one female urged her relation on to volunteer .
I must own that I felt a conscious pride in their partiality , and particularly upon this occasion , because a few envious persons had hinted that my family misfortunes , and my separation from my wife , had in a great measure weaned the affections of some of my neighbours from me .


At length , after having tried their sincerity fairly , and found it invincible , I yielded to their wishes , and in an impassioned tone , I announced that I would be their captain  this I did amidst the enthusiastic shouts of the whole assembled multitude , men , women , and children  every man pressing forward to sign his name as a volunteer .
But , having obtained silence , I seriously admonished them as follows : -- `` My kind-hearted , generous , zealous , neighbours and friends , recollect what you are about to do , and pause a little before you sign your names  for I solemnly declare , before God and my country , that I have no other object in becoming your captain , but a sincere desire to serve my country  and , as I should be ashamed to become a volunteer , if I were not ready to lay down my life in defending her shores against the invasion of a foreign enemy , I shall , therefore , not tender my services , or accept of yours , upon any other terms than these : That we volunteer our services to Government , to be ready at a moment 's notice , to march to any part of the united kingdom , whenever we may be called upon , and wherever we may be wanted .
Upon these terms , and these alone , I consent to become your captain . ''


This was again answered by three more cheers , and a general cry of `` wherever you , our captain , choose to lead we will be ready to follow ! ''
The first men who pressed forward , and placed their names at the head of the list , were those very men whom , a few years before , I had caused to be prosecuted for a riot and rescue , at Netheravan .
I never witnessed a more gratifying flattering scene than the village church-yard of Enford exhibited .
Old women were encouraging their sons , others their husbands , young maidens were smiling their willing assent to their sweethearts and brothers , and although there was not a single instance where the men required any of these to urge them on to do their duty in the defence of their country , yet the approbation and smiles of the females gave such a zest to the act , and stamped such a sanction upon the whole undertaking , that one and all burned with the most lively enthusiasm to become willing agents to stem the threatened irruption of the invader , and to repel his aggressions even at the risk of their life 's dearest blood .
With the exception of two individuals , who had taken some pique , every man in the parish capable of bearing arms enrolled himself on that day or the following morning  upon the completion of which I wrote the following letter to Earl Pembroke , the Lord Lieutenant of the County : --


Chisenbury House , August 15 , 1803 .


MY LORD ,


Having observed , with infinite regret , in the public newspapers , that when a general meeting of the various parishes in this neighbourhood took place , the inhabitants exhibited great apathy with regard to the situation of the country , and that only a small portion of the inhabitants of the parish of Enford had signed their names to act as volunteers in defence of their country in case of an invasion , I was induced , yesterday , from a sense of public duty , to come amongst them  and , at their particular and unanimous request , I accepted the offer to command them , agreeable to the provisions of the late act of parliament .
I have the pleasure now to inform you , that all the men in this parish capable of bearing arms , with the exception of two , have voluntarily enrolled their names to act as a company of volunteers , to be at the command of the Government , to march at a moment 's notice to any part of the united kingdom , where our services may be required .
I also beg leave , in addition to the foregoing , to renew the offer which I made through your Lordship two years back , of my life and fortune , without any reservation , to oppose the daring views of our enterprising enemy .
Sir John Poore , your Deputy Lieutenant , has expressed himself much pleased with the zeal and the alacrity with which the people of Enford have come forward , and I have to solicit your Lordship 's early attention to this corps ( in case our services should be accepted ) , as I feel particularly anxious to render their services available as speedily as possible .


I am , my Lord ,


Your Lordship 's obedient Servant ,


H. HUNT .


To the Earl , of Pembroke .


Having dispatched my servant off with this letter , enclosing a list of the names of the volunteers , I appointed to meet them at my house at Chisenbury on the following Sunday , by which time I expected I should be able to give them the answer of the Lord Lieutenant  and in the mean time I returned to look after my brewing concern at Clifton .
In a few days after , I received a palavering letter from my Lord Pembroke , as follows : -- Lower Brook Street , Aug. 18 , 1803 .


SIR ,


I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 15th , enclosing a list of persons who have volunteered in the parish of Enford .
The offer is most liberal and handsome on your part , as well as on the part of those who have joined you in tendering such unlimited service , which , although it far exceeds the limits of the Defence Bill , yet I shall feel it my duty to lay it before the Secretary of State , that it may receive that attention which your patriotic offers merit .
There will be a meeting of Deputy Lieutenants in a few days , when your offer shall be taken into consideration , and receive my early attention .


I am , Sir ,


Your obedient Servant ,


PEMBROKE .


To Henry Hunt , Esq. .


Chisenbury House .


I could easily see that there was a shuffle meant here  and I anticipated that our services were much too zealous and disinterested to meet with the sanction of his Lordship , and so it proved  for when I reached Chisenbury House , on the following Sunday , I found a letter , written by Lord Pembroke to Sir John Melburn Poore , Bart , left for my perusal , as underneath : --


Margate , August , 1803 .


SIR ,


I find that it will not be in my power to forward the offer from Enford , in your division , which was communicated to me by Mr. Hunt , of Chisenbury House .
I must beg that you will state to him , for the information of the members of the proposed company , that I am sorry they can not be included in the county quota , in consequence of there having been a sufficient number already volunteered from that district  but that , in justice to their marked zeal and loyalty , I shall think it my duty to state the offer that they have made , to the Secretary of State , and I shall point it out as an instance of great devotion to the service , to the notice of his Majesty 's ministers , c. c. c..


I am , Sir ,


Your very obedient Servant ,


PEMBROKE .


Sir J. M. Poore , Bart .


When I drove into my front court , at Chisenbury House , I found these brave and zealous fellows drawn up in as good line as I ever in my life saw in a company of regulars , and they instantly saluted me with three cheers .
They had employed a drill serjeant , and had met to perform their exercise two or three evenings during the week , and they could already march and wheel with considerable facility and address .
However , as soon as I had read the letter which had been forwarded by Sir John Poore , from the Lord Lieutenant , I did not keep them a moment in suspence .
I formed them into a hollow square , and having briefly addressed them , I next proceeded to read the letter aloud , which appeared to excite mingled feelings of regret and indignation  every one seemed to feel that zeal and devotedness were not the qualities that were sought for by the Lord Lieutenant .
We had , however , the great consolation of knowing that our promptitude and patriotism , not only saved the parish of Enford from the fine which had been threatened , but also saved the whole district from the fines that would no doubt have been levied to a shilling : for the Lord Lieutenant having said that he declined to forward our offer in consequence of a sufficient number of men in our district having already volunteered their services , they could not after that , with common decency , fine any parish in our district for not offering to volunteer .


I now caused a hogshead of good old strong beer to be rolled out upon the lawn , and , although our services were not accepted in defence of our country , yet that did not prevent us from drinking to her success , and prosperity to her people .
My neighbours , when they had finished their old stingo , were about to depart in peace  but , as is frequently the case , when men have made free with the glass , reason and liberality forsake them , so it was here , for some of them wished to proceed immediately to the house of the miller , who , with his servant , in consequence of some pique against me , had declined to place their names in our list of volunteers .
Elated with liquor , they proposed to inflict summary punishment upon these persons , by giving them a sound ducking in their own mill pond  but this course of proceeding I immediately put down , by justifying the men in their conduct , and contending that they had an equal right to withhold their services as we had to volunteer ours  and thus they escaped the threatened unjustifiable punishment .
The men , however , one and all , renewed their offers to me , that they would be ready and willing at all times to come forward , to undertake any service that I might propose to them  and they added the assurance of their belief , that I would never propose any thing to them that I would not join them in accomplishing .
Thus ended our meeting , and at all events we had the satisfaction of having done our duty to ourselves and our country .


Some time after this , I was informed of a very curious circumstance , relating to this affair .
As soon as I sent in this offer to the Lord Lieutenant , he called a meeting of his Deputy Lieutenants , and laid it before them  pointing out the unlimited and extensive nature of the tender of our services , and expressing a doubt whether he should be justified in accepting it under the provision of the Defence Bill , without some reduction in the numbers , and modification as to the extension of the service tendered .
This , I understood , caused a very long discussion  all of them disapproving of the example set by offering such extensive service  none of the other corps having volunteered to go farther than their military district , Wilts , Hants , and Dorset .
One of these wiseacres exclaimed , in very boisterous language , against accepting the offer , and for this sapient reason -- `` because , '' as he said , `` two hundred men out of one parish had volunteered to march to any part of the kingdom to hazard their lives in the defence of their country , provided they were commanded by an officer of their own choice  ergo , it was highly improper to trust arms in the hands of such a body of men . ''
Though this was very properly laughed at by some of the more rational members of this divan , yet they came to an unanimous resolution to exempt the whole district of Enford from their quotas rather than run such a desperate risk .
Well !
I had all the credit of the offer , without any of the trouble and expence of putting it into execution .
I have detailed these facts as another proof of my enthusiasm .
I never acted from any cold calculating notions of self-interest .
If I thought it right to perform an act of public or private duty , having once made up my mind , I never suffered any selfish considerations to interpose to prevent my carrying it into effect .


After all , the troops of Napoleon never landed , and consequently the mighty heroes of the volunteer corps escaped with whole skins .
Buonaparte , nevertheless , persisted in playing off the bugbear of the French flotilla at Boulogne , by which John Gull was kept in a complete state of agitation and ferment .
Addington 's majorities fell off every day , in the House of Commons  and by Pitt 's intrigues and management he was at length left in a minority  and , as it was considered much too disgraceful a thing even by Addington to hold his place after he had been left in the minority , he resigned , and William Pitt once more wielded the destinies of England , he being appointed prime minister on the twelfth of May , 1804 .
The British navy was unsuccessful in its attempts to destroy the French flotilla at Boulogne  and three trials to set fire to the shipping at Havre also proved abortive .


On the eighteenth of May , Buonaparte was declared Emperor of France , under the title of Napoleon the First .
This act was in fact hastened , if not produced , by the discovery and detection of a real diabolical plot against the life and government of Buonaparte  in which Moreau , Pichegru , Georges , and others , were implicated , and were in consequence arrested .
Moreau was tried , found guilty , pardoned , and exiled .
The Duke D'Enghien , grandson of the Prince of Condé , was known to be on the frontier , connected with these men , and some English agents , who were concerned in the conspiracy .
D'Enghien was urging them on , and zealously endeavoring to raise a rebellion in the French territories .
This he did in a very conspicuous way , relying upon his own security , he being at the time in Baden , a neutral territory  but Buonaparte , setting the Duke of Baden at defiance , entered his territory , and caused the conspirator to be seized and tried , and being found guilty , he was shot .
The despots of the north , Russia and Sweden , remonstrated against this violation of neutral territory  but all the other powers of Europe displayed a more tame and forbearing policy .
As the trial and execution of this sprig of the Bourbons , who was detected in a conspiracy to assassinate Napoleon , and to produce the overthrow of his Government in France , caused a universal howling of all the hireling editors of all the newspapers in this country , against what they called the murder of this Duke D'Enghien , I shall shortly state the charges on which he was unanimously found guilty by the Military Court , which was appointed to try him  the President being Citizen Hulin , General of Brigade .
The FIRST charge was `` That of having carried arms against the French Republic . ''
-- SECOND , `` Of having offered his services to the English Government , the enemy of the French people . ''
-- THIRD , `` Of receiving and having , with accredited agents of that Government , procured means of obtaining intelligence in France , and conspiring against the internal and external security of the state . ''
-- FOURTH , `` That he was at the head of a body of French emigrants , paid by England , formed on the frontiers of France , in the districts of Friburg and Baden . ''
-- FIFTH , `` Of having attempted to foment intrigues at Strasburg , with a view of producing a rising in the adjacent departments , for the purpose of operating a diversion favourable to England . ''
-- SIXTH , `` That be was one of those concerned in the conspiracy planned by England for the assassination of the First Consul , and intending , in case of the success of that plot , to return to France . ''
The court , composed of military officers , after a patient hearing , unanimously found the prisoner guilty of all the six charges .
The president of the court then pronounced the sentence as follows : -- `` The Special Military Commission condemns unanimously to death , Louis Antoine Henry de Bourbon , Duke D'Enghien , on the ground of his being guilty of acting as a spy , of corresponding with the enemies of the Republic , and conspiring against the external and internal security of the Republic . ''
However this young man might be pitied , however much we may have lamented his end , yet he was tried and condemned by the known and written law of France , which was expressed in the following terms : -- Article 2nd , 11th January , year 5 -- `` Every individual , whatever be his state , quality , or profession , convicted of acting as a spy for the enemy , shall be sentenced to the punishment of death . ''
Article 1st , every one engaged in a plot or conspiracy against the Republic , shall on conviction be punished with death .
Article 3rd , 6th October , 1791 .
-- Every one connected with a plot or conspiracy tending to disturb the tranquillity of the state , by civil war , by arming one class of citizens against the other , or against the exercise of legitimate authority , shall be punished with death .
Signed and sealed the same day , month and year aforesaid .
Guiton , Bazancourt , Revier , Barrois , Rabbe , D'Autancourt , Captain Reporter  Molin , Captain Register  and Hulin president .


After all the howling , and all that has been said , about this trial and execution , this Duke D'Enghien had as fair a trial , a much fairer jury , with an unanimous verdict of guilty upon all the charges , and a much more equitable , and ten times more just sentence , than I received from the immaculate Court of King 's Bench .
Hulin was much more justified , by the law of France , in passing this sentence upon D'Enghien , than Bailey was in passing a sentence upon me of Two Years and Six Months incarceration in this infamous jail .
It is very true that Bailey was only the mouth-piece of the court , and I am ready to admit that , though he passed the sentence upon me , yet , he was so far from concurring in it , that he actually wrote down `` not one hour , '' as the whole of his share of the punishment that he thought I ought to receive .
There was , however , the pure and venerable judge -- , as he was denominated by the amiable Castlereagh alias Londonderry , when my Petition was rejected by the Honourable House on the 15th instant , May , 1821 , the day when Sir Francis Burdett brought forward his long-promised , long-delayed , frequently put-off motion , upon the Manchester massacre .
Oh !
the venerable Judge !
I thank you kindly for that , my Lord -- I will always follow so good and worthy an example as that of your Lordship  in future he shall always be designated by me as the venerable Judge !
Jeffries was indeed also a venerable Judge , and Jeffries came to an end the most appropriate for such a venerable Judge .
Talk of Hulin indeed !
he was a paragon of justice , humanity and mercy , compared with my Lord Shift-names ' venerable emblem of purity .
I think it was Mr. Horne Tooke that used to say , that it was as difficult to know who and what our nobility were , as it was to know a pickpocket or a highwayman , the former changed their names as frequently as the latter  and really the remark is a perfectly correct one !
The famous Mr. Drake , the notorious English plenipotentiary at the court of Munich , was at the head of this conspiracy , while holding the situation of English Ambassador to the Elector of Bavaria .
Ten of his original letters were seized by the police of the Republic , and in the report of Regnier , the Chief Justice , the following extracts from Mr. Drake 's letters were introduced .
In addressing one of his correspondents , an active conspirator , as he thought , who had undertaken to assassinate the First Consul , but who was nothing more or less than an agent of the French Police , he writes with a brutal fury worthy of the part he plays .
The letter is dated Munich , December 9 , 1803 .
`` It is , '' says he , `` of very little consequence by whom the Beast is brought to the ground  it is sufficient that you are all ready to join in the chace . ''
There was also another of these precious diplomatic agents of the British Government , a person of the name of Spencer Smith , Minister from England at Stutgard , acting as a conspirator against the person of the First Consul and the Republic of France , who was wise enough to employ a Frenchman , named Pericaud , as his confidential secretary .
In one of his letters Drake uses the following language : `` You should , '' says he , `` offer the soldiers a small increase of pay beyond what they receive of the present Government . ''
In the report of the Grand Judge , he speaks of Mr. Drake as follows : -- `` an English Minister such as Mr. Drake , can not be punished by obloquy -- this can only mortify men who feel the price of virtue , and know that of honour . ''
He adds , `` Men who preach up assassination and foment domestic troubles , the agents of corruption , the missionaries of revolt against all established governments , are the enemies of all states and all governments .
The law of nations does not exist for them . ''
In the second interview of Mr. Rosey with Mr. Drake , when he was devising the plan for destroying Buonaparte , Mr. Rosey says , he , Drake , spoke as follows , when speaking of the fall of Napoleon : `` Profit , when the occasion shall offer , by the trouble in which the rest of his partizans will be plunged .
Destroy them without pity  pity is not the virtue of a politician . ''
In fact it appears very evident , that the plan was to assassinate the First Consul , and thereby to produce a fresh revolution in France .


Soon after this , Captain Wright , who landed Georges , Pichegru , and their accomplices , on the coast at Dieppe , was taken in a corvette by the French gun-boats , and was sent off to Paris in the diligence , accompanied by the Gendarmerie .
This Captain Wright , after very urgent negociations through the Spanish Minister at Paris , was ordered to be given up to the English by Talleyrand  the French Government having refused to exchange him as a prisoner of war on any terms .
Having been engaged in this plot to assassinate Buonaparte , he was treated as a spy , and might have been tried by the law of France and executed as such .
The French Government , however , thought it a sufficient disgrace to him as a man of honour , to refuse to exchange him , but to give him up as a boon to the Spanish Ambassador .
Wright , it is said by his keepers , cut his throat in the prison  but the English hireling newspaper editors made a great clamour against Buonaparte , to persuade John Gull that he had been murdered in prison  though it would be difficult to find any good reason for this , when he might have been tried and executed by the law of France , upon the same principle that D'Enghien was convicted .


Mr. Cobbett , who had now become celebrated for his political works , particularly his Weekly Political Register , had about this time began to write very freely in the cause of Liberty .
Being a most powerful writer , he had attacked with great success the tyrannical measures of the Irish Government , and he was , therefore , prosecuted for a libel upon the Earl of Hardwicke , Lord Redesdale , Mr. Justice Osbourn , and Mr. Marsden .
The trial came on before Lord Ellenborough and a Middlesex special jury , and he was found guilty , of course .
He also had an action for damages brought against him by Mr. Plunkett , Solicitor-General of Ireland  and this action being also tried by a Middlesex special jury , he had , of course , a verdict against him , with # 500 damages .


Mr. Pitt was now again in power , and he endeavoured to make the public believe that he had assented to the wishes of the nation , by an union with Mr. Fox , whom he professed to have recommended to his Majesty to appoint one of the cabinet .
This was one of Mr. Pitt 's artful and hypocritical shuffles  he contrived that the King should object to the admission of Mr. Fox  while at the same time he managed so as to make the nation think that he studied their wishes by recommending Mr. Fox to the King  and thus he fixed upon his Majesty the odium of disregarding the prayers of the people , and objecting to Mr. Fox from merely personal motives .


I was living at Clifton at this period , and during the summer I visited Cheltenham with my family .
At the latter place I frequently met Mr. Fox , who was drinking the celebrated waters , for his health , which had become greatly impaired in consequence of his attending so incessantly to his parliamentary duties .
He was accompanied by Mrs. Armstead , the lady whom he afterwards married , and to which lady the people of England have had the honour to pay twelve hundred pounds a-year , ever since the death of Mr. Fox .
Mrs. Armstead appeared to be a very delightful woman , with whom this great statesman and senator evidently lived in a state of the most perfect domestic harmony .
They were almost always together , seldom if ever were they seen separate -- at the pump-room in the morning  at the library and reading-room at noon , when the papers came in  at the theatre , or at private parties , in the evening  Mr. Fox and Mrs. Armstead were always to be seen together .
The Duke of Bedford was then recently married to his present Duchess .
Mr. Fox and his lady were frequently of the Duke 's party  in fact , they were as one family .
Cheltenham was then very full of gay company  amongst whom a great deal of dissipation and intrigue were going on .
It was frequently made a subject of remark , that Mr. Fox and Mr. Hunt appeared to enjoy more real happiness , more domestic felicity , than any of the married persons at Cheltenham , with the exception of the Duke and Duchess of Bedford , who lived a retired domestic life at that time  and , from what I have heard , have continued to do so ever since .


I remember sitting in the library with Mr. Fox , on the morning when the news arrived by the post , that Sir Francis Burdett was elected the representative for the county of Middlesex , by a majority of ONE .
Mr. Fox was greatly elated with this momentary success of the Baronet  but he expressed his doubts upon the final issue of an inquiry before a Committee of the House of Commons .
This famous contest for Middlesex had caused considerable anxiety throughout the country , and a party of us , amongst whom was Mr. Fox , used to assemble daily on the arrival of the post at the library , to hear the state of the poll .
This election had been carried on fifteen days with unabating enthusiasm .
Sir Francis Burdett was backed by all the men and women of the county possessing liberal principles  he had besides an immensely long purse , the contents of which were lavished upon his partizans with an unsparing hand .
Ninety-four thousand pounds was the price of the two elections , which came out of his own pocket  besides all the gratuitous assistance that he received from his friends and partizans .
Mr. Mainwaring was the treasurer of the county  his father was the chairman of the County Quarter Sessions .
The father had been rendered by a committee of the House incapable of sitting in that Parliament , he having been convicted of treating during the previous election .
The son , therefore , a mere clerk to the magistrates , was set up against Sir Francis  this son being a man without the slightest pretensions to a seat in Parliament for a rotten borough , and much less for the county of Middlesex , either as a man of fortune , a man of rank , or a man of talent .
In fact , it was a ministerial contest against Sir Francis Burdett  most of the partizans of Mr. Mainwaring declaring , at the time , that they voted against Sir Francis , and not for Mainwaring .
I was one of those who thought that this was a great triumph in the cause of liberty , and I was therefore excessively rejoiced that Sir Francis Burdett should have been successful against all the magistracy , and all the ministerial aristocracy of the metropolitan county .
But now , when I look back , and read the speeches of the Honourable Baronet , I only feel surprised that I could have been such a dupe as to expect that any real benefit would ever arise to the people from his exertions .
All his promises , all his protestations , I now perceive to have been general  there was nothing in them specific and tangible .
The great cry raised against Sir F. Burdett 's principles at that time was , that he had been the associate of the traitors Despard and O'Connor .
This was most infamous , and was resented by every upright and honest freeholder in the county .
The Baronet was evidently the most popular candidate  but what gave the greatest eclat to his election was the lavish expenditure of his cash to bribe the electors .
Henry Clifford was his counsel , and he himself was a host .


The newspapers of the next day , however , brought us an account which blasted all the sanguine hopes that we had entertained the day before .
At the final end of the scrutiny the Sheriff declared the numbers on the poll to be the same as they were the day before , at three o'clock , and these were the numbers by which he ought to decide the election .
They were as follow : for Mr. Mainwaring , 2828 -- for Sir Francis Burdett , 2823 -- and Mr. Mainwaring was of course declared duly elected by a majority of five votes .
Thus ended this great political contest , in which so much money was spent , and of which drunkenness , riot , bribery , and perjury , were the most prominent characteristics .
On the 29th of October , one of the most atrocious acts of tyranny , robbery , and lawless plunder , took place , which ever disgraced the character of any nation , namely , the British navy captured three Spanish frigates , with upwards of three millions of dollars on board .
This unparalleled act of aggression was committed upon the property of Spain , a nation with whom England was at peace , and this plunder was what is called Droits of the Admiralty , which is claimed by the crown  so that , when the crown chooses to become a robber upon the high seas , and plunders a state to enrich itself , the people of England are called upon to spill their best blood in defending an act which , if committed in common life , would entitle the robber to a halter .


Soon after this , by way of retaliation , Buonaparte caused Sir George Rumbold , a British Minister , to be seized at Hamburgh , by a detachment of French soldiers , who carried him off to France .
The law of nations was , in fact , set at naught by all the Belligerent Powers  in most cases the weakest went to the wall .
The English Ministers violated every known and heretofore received principle of the law of nations .
Buonaparte always took care to retaliate in the most prompt and decisive manner  and thus the subjects of both powers were at once rendered the sport and the victims of their tyrannical rulers .
There was no safety in neutral territories , nor any safeguard in the hitherto acknowledged law of nations .
The conspiracy formed by the English Ministers to assassinate Napoleon was detected , and all their agents , who were concerned in so hellish a plot , were exposed and denounced by every civilized state in Europe .
Moreau was banished to America  Pichegru strangled himself in prison  Georges and D'Enghien were executed  Drake had a narrow escape with his life  Captain Wright cut his own throat in a French prison  and thus the whole conspiracy was as completely frustrated , and its agents as completely punished , as were the agents of the Cato-street conspiracy : both of them were got up by the same parties , and the only difference was , that the former was ten times more atrocious than the latter .


The King and the Prince of Wales , who had been long at variance , had a meeting on the 12th of November , 1804 , when a reconciliation took place between them .
Every body now expected to hear that the Prince 's Debts were soon to be paid off .
About this time there were great discussions relative to who had the legal care and education of the Princess Charlotte of Wales  and while in London the English Ministers and the Opposition were squabbling about this mighty concern , the coronation of Napoleon by the Pope , took place in Paris , where he was crowned Emperor of France .


I trust that my introducing these events , as they occurred , will not be deemed superfluous by the reader .
I do it , because it is my intention , as it has been all along , to give a brief history of the political occurrences of my own time , and within my own recollection .
It is , I think , not unadvisable to put upon record some of the transactions of the English Ministers for the last twenty years , and dispassionately place them in their true light .
At the period when these things were done the public mind was in a state of heat and effervescence -- it was in such a fever of political delusion and delirium , that what was written and published at the time , particularly by the diurnal press of the day , instead of enlightening , was calculated only to mislead and deceive the people .
Far from recording fairly what was passing in the world of politics , the principal object of the great mass of public writers , and more especially of the conductors of public newspapers , was to disguise and conceal the truth  they were all in the pay , or under the influence , of the two great political factions , the Ins and the Outs , the Tories and the Whigs , both interested in keeping the people in the dark .
They were both struggling for nothing but place and power  their great end and aim were the same .
The watch-word which , notwithstanding their ostensible difference in principles , was common to them , was this -- `` keep the people in ignorance , or neither of our parties will be able to plunder them . ''
Therefore , though to the superficial observer , they appeared inveterately hostile to each other , yet I repeat , that they had the same object in view , and this was proved beyond all the possibility of doubt when the Whigs came into power .
For twenty long years had Mr. Fox and his party been inveighing against the measures of Mr. Pitt  yet , the moment Mr. Fox and his friends came into place , they not only adopted all the measures of Mr. Pitt , but they even followed up the most obnoxious of those measures towards the people with an unfeeling and arbitrary severity .
This being the case , I shall take leave , as I go along , to represent public events in their true colours , in such as they must strike every rational , dispassionate , and unprejudiced mind .


At this period invasion was still the general topic  it was in every person 's mouth , and nothing else was either thought of or talked of .
It was the subject of every one 's almost hourly inquiry , both in London and the country , even in the most remote parts .
Mr. Cobbett well described it at the time , `` a state malady  appearing by fits and starts  sometimes assuming one character , and sometimes another .
At last , however , it seems to have settled into a sort of hemorrhage , the patients in Downing-street expectorating pale or red , according to the state of their disease .
For some weeks past it has been remarkably vivid  whether proceeding from the heat of the dog-days , or from the quarrellings and fightings , and riotings amongst their volunteers , it would be hard to say , but certain it is , that the symptoms have been of a very alarming complexion for nearly a month . ''


Notwithstanding all the terror which was felt , the fact is , that Buonaparte never seriously intended to invade England  but he knew that the gun-boats at Boulogne kept this country in a continual state of tremor , and put it to an enormous expense  it was evidently the policy of France to let us alone , provided that she could keep us in a state of agitation and ferment .
It is very curious to observe how well this answered the purpose of Pitt as well as of Napoleon .
Mr. Pitt had , in the first instance , to raise the spirit of the country , or rather to delude John Gull , created a false and unfounded alarm of invasion by Buonaparte , long before the latter ever dreamed of it , and the trick succeeded to a miracle .
Pitt knew that he could not get such immense sums from the pockets of the people , unless he could work upon their fears  and this gave rise to the bugbear of invasion .
John , as was expected , took fright , and the whole country was in consequence thrown into a violent ferment .
Volunteer corps and voluntary subscriptions were every where the order of the day  John opened his purse-strings widely , and patiently suffered the rapacious and cunning Minister to dip his griping fist into the treasure as deeply as he thought proper .
Napoleon , who had some of the most intelligent men in the world about him , soon discovered the state malady of poor John Gull , and he and his councillors lost not a moment to set about prescribing a dose , which they were sure would increase the nervous fever that had taken possession of the whole country .
Their prescription was a very simple one , it merely consisted in ordering gun-boats at Boulogne .
Napoleon played Pitt 's own game off to such a tune as he did not expect .
Pitt created the alarm to raise taxes  Napoleon fell into the scheme , in order to continue the call for taxes upon the pockets of Gull , and to exhaust the resources , and waste the wealth of the country , which at that time appeared to some people to be absolutely inexhaustible .
This Boulogne flotilla was therefore a mere playing upon the fears of the people of England , but it was a most ruinous war upon the national finances .


This was the time when the people of England were made drunk , and indeed mad , by the deleterious potions that were administered by Pitt and his colleagues , in the shape of Acts of Parliament , for raising volunteer corps , catamaran schemes , car projects for conveying troops , c. c. with every other species of folly and profligacy .
The taxes raised this year were little short of SIXTY MILLIONS .
-- In February the quartern loaf was eight-pence  by December it had risen to one shilling and four pence halfpenny .
Those were rare times for the farmers and the yeomanry  and they did not forget to make their poor neighbours feel their power .
This rise in the price of corn was caused by the CORN BILL , which was carried through the House of Commons for the purpose  but its operation was arrested in the House of Lords , till the 15th of November .
Mr. Cobbett was still one of the great advocates for war , and he wrote some very able but very mischievous papers , to prove that war did not operate to raise the price of bread , and that for the last fifty years bread had been cheaper in war than in peace .
This he did for the purpose of discountenancing and reprobating the cry that had been raised of `` Peace and a large loaf . ''
Mr. Cobbett 's Register at this time became a very popular work , and the great talent displayed by the author caused it to be universally read .
I , for one , became one of his constant readers and zealous admirers , although I did not agree with many of his doctrines .
Notwithstanding the great talent he displayed , and the knowledge in matters of political economy which it was very evident that he possessed , I could never be convinced that war in any way either promoted the freedom or happiness of the people , much less that it ever produced cheap bread , or contributed to the comfort of the poor .
I must , however , do Mr. Cobbett the justice to say , that he condemned the Corn Bill , and , in glowing language , boldly and ably pointed out the folly as well as the injustice of Corn Bills , to raise the price of grain .
I did not know Mr. Cobbett at that time , but I own that I longed to become acquainted with so celebrated a public writer , who had afforded me so much pleasure in the perusal of his literary works .
It will be but doing common justice to him , as well as to myself , to observe here , that I have never failed to read it from that day up to the present hour  and that I have received more pleasure in reading his works , and have derived more information from him , ten times ten-fold , in subjects of political economy , than I ever derived from all the other authors I ever read besides .
Mr. Cobbett , at that time , censured in strong terms the volunteer system , and ridiculed their pranks and squabbles with the most cutting irony  for he was at that time the mighty champion of a standing army .
Mr. Cobbett had been a soldier , and a zealous , active , and intelligent soldier  therefore , as such , it was not only excusable in him to be an advocate for that system , with which he was so well acquainted , and whose power he so well knew , but his predilection was quite natural .
He , however , then little thought what a monster he was nourishing , in the shape of a standing army .
Sir Robert Wilson also was bred a soldier  and he also published a pamphlet , addressed to Mr. Pitt , under the title of `` An Inquiry into the present State of the Military Force of the British Empire , with a view to its re-organization . ''
This pamphlet was in favour of a regular army , in preference to the volunteers .
In fact , the whole nation was mad  and as drunk with fear now , as they had been in the commencement of the war with France with folly and boasting .
We long since began to feel the baneful effects of that war , and we are now tasting its bitter fruits , with all their appalling evils .
We have now a standing army in good earnest  and now that army is kept up , in the sixth year of peace , to compel John Gull to pull out of his pocket the last shilling , to pay the interest of that debt , which , in his drunken , insane folly , he suffered his rulers , to borrow , in order , as they first told him , to humble the power of the French Jacobins  a debt which was greatly enhanced to humble Napoleon  and , lastly , it was brought to its climax to restore the Bourbons .
The people of England were drunk , wickedly drunk , when they went to war to destroy the principles of liberty in France  for , be it remembered , to their shame , that the people sanctioned this war -- they were duped and deceived , it is true , but it was certainly a popular war with the great mass of the people of England .


Being now arrived at the summit of power , Napoleon became more than usually anxious to secure that power .
It was his interest , as it had long been his object , to be at peace with England  and in order to secure this desirable object , he wrote a letter to the king of England , with his own hand , offering the fairest terms , and expressing a sincere desire to put an end to the spilling of human blood , and to see the two nations at peace with each other .
Common courtesy , and the rules of good breeding , entitled him to an answer .
But , instead of this , the Secretary of State merely informed the French Minister , that the King , by treaty , was obliged to act in concert with his allies .
As soon as this slight was offered to the Emperor of France , preparations were immediately renewed for invading England .
Mr. Pitt finds that his difficulties have increased since his former administration  he therefore makes an effort to strengthen the Government by an union with the Addingtons , and the late Prime Minister is raised to the peerage , by the title of Viscount Sidmouth .


On the 24th of January , 1805 , war was declared by England against Spain .
In fact , it was absolutely necessary to declare war against Spain , or restore the three frigates and the three million dollars of which we had robbed them  and not choosing to be honest , and do an act of justice to that nation , war was inevitable .
I have this moment found a copy of the letter addressed by Napoleon to the King of England , which I will insert , that the rising generation may be able to judge for themselves of the characters and dispositions of the two monarchs , George the Third and Napoleon the First .
The letter is as follows : --


`` SIR AND BROTHER , January 2 , 1805 .


`` Called to the throne of France by Providence , and by the suffrages of the senate , the people , and the army , my first sentiment is a wish for peace .
France and England abuse their prosperity .
They may contend for ages  but do their Governments well fulfil the most sacred of their duties , and will not so much blood , shed uselessly , and without a view to any end , condemn them in their own consciences ?
I consider it as no disgrace to make the first step .
I have , I hope , sufficiently proved to the world that I fear none of the chances of war  it besides presents nothing that I need to fear  peace is the wish of my heart , but war has never been inconsistent with my glory .
I conjure your Majesty not to deny yourself the happiness of giving peace to the world , nor to leave that sweet satisfaction to your children : for certainly there never was a more favourable opportunity , nor a moment more favourable to silence all passions , and listen only to the sentiments of humanity and reason .
This moment once lost what end can be assigned to a war which all my efforts will not be able to terminate .
Your Majesty has gained more within ten years , both in territory and riches , than the whole extent of Europe .
Your nation is at the highest point of prosperity  what can it hope from war ?
To form a coalition with some powers of the Continent ?
The Continent will remain tranquil  a coalition can only increase the preponderance and continental greatness of France .
To renew intestine troubles ?
The times are no longer the same .
To destroy our finances ?
Finances founded on a flourishing agriculture can never be destroyed .
To take from France her colonies ?
The colonies are to France only a secondary object  and does not your Majesty already possess more than you know how to preserve ?
If your Majesty would but reflect , you must perceive that the war is without an object , without any presumable result to yourself .
Alas !
what a melancholy prospect to cause two nations to fight merely for the sake of fighting .
The world is sufficiently large for our two nations to live in it , and reason is sufficiently powerful to discover means of reconciling every thing , when the wish for reconciliation exists on both sides .
I have , however , fulfilled a sacred duty , and one which is precious to my heart .
I trust your Majesty will believe in the sincerity of my sentiments , and my wish to give you every proof of it , c..


`` NAPOLEON . ''


Instead of his Majesty , George the Third , writing an answer to this pacific letter from the Emperor Napoleon , a letter was written by Lord Mulgrave , addressed to M. Talleyrand , the French Minister , couched in equivocal terms , and which concluded by saying that his Britannic Majesty had no power to act for himself , and that he could do nothing without consulting with his allies upon the Continent .
After this conciliatory epistle from the Emperor of France , and the answer , or rather the failure of an answer , from his Britannic Majesty , no one that reads this letter of the Emperor Napoleon and the answer of Lord Mulgrave will ever believe or say that Napoleon was the cause of the continuance of the war .
What oceans of blood might have been spared if the King of England , if George the Third , had accepted this liberal and candid offer of peace and reconciliation from Napoleon !


The reign of George the Third may , with the greatest propriety , be called the bloodiest reign in the annals of history .
If his Majesty felt that he , having the power , neglected such an opportunity , that he threw away the delightful pleasure of sparing the lives of his fellow creatures , of stopping the effusion of human blood , if he felt this , I for one do not wonder at his Majesty 's illness -- the bare reflection was more than enough to drive any man out of his senses , to have distracted the strongest brain .
Oh God !
what a reflection !
The pages of British history from that hour , that fatal hour , when the answer was written by Lord Mulgrave , dictated by the hand of a cold-blooded policy , from that hour , I say , the pages of history have been tarnished  blood having been shed , which , by a more humane policy , might have been prevented .


Let us now return to our domestic politics .
At length a Committee of the House of Commons declared that George Bolton Mainwaring was not duly elected , and ought not to have been returned for the county of Middlesex  but that Sir Francis Burdett was duly elected , and ought to have been returned .
This was a sad blow for the saints , who were the principal supporters of Mr. Mainwaring .
Sir Francis Burdett now took his seat , out of which he had been unjustly kept at the beginning of the Sessions by the temporising and partial conduct of the sheriffs of the county of Middlesex .


At this time , in March , 1805 , the tenth report of the commissioners of naval inquiry was laid before the House of Commons , which report implicated Lord Melville and Mr. Trotter in the crime of defrauding the public of the monies entrusted to them , intended to discharge those accounts as connected with the office of Treasurer of the Navy , an office held by my Lord Melville .
Trotter , Lord Melville 's deputy , who had a salary of no more than 800l .
a year , was found to have increased his funded property since 1791 , a period of fourteen years , to eleven thousand three hundred and eight pounds one shilling PER ANNUM !!
-- Lord Melville , on his examination before the commissioners , being asked , upon his oath , `` whether Mr. Trotter had ever applied any of the naval money for his ( Lord Melville 's ) benefit or advantage ? ''
-- he refused to answer , for fear of criminating himself .
What came out upon this inquiry before the Commissioners of Naval Inquiry , now absorbed the whole of the public attention , and caused an universal sensation throughout the country .
This said Lord Viscount Melville was that Henry Dundas , Esq. who was formerly a Lawyer in Edinburgh , became Lord Advocate of Scotland during the American war , and a strong supporter of Lord North 's administration  was then made Treasurer of the Navy at the same epoch that Mr. Pitt first became Chancellor of the Exchequer , in Lord Shelburn 's administration  again became Treasurer of the Navy in the administration of Mr. Pitt , in 1784  then became President of the Board of Controul for India affairs , and afterwards Secretary of State for the War Department , retaining all the three offices in his own person till the year 1800 , when he gave up the Treasurership of the Navy , still keeping fast hold of the other two offices till he resigned , together with Mr. Pitt and the rest of that Ministry , in the month of March , 1801 .
This same Henry Dundas , who was again brought into place by Mr. Pitt , and put in greater power than ever , was , on the 8th of April , 1805 , degraded by a censure of the House of Commons , inflicted by a solemn vote , on the motion of Mr. Whitbread , who brought the affair before them with great manliness , ability , and perseverance .
The eleventh resolution moved by Mr. Whitbread , and carried by a majority of the House against all the influence and exertions of Mr. Pitt , was as follows -- `` That the Right Honourable Lord Viscount Melville , having been privy to , and connived at , the withdrawing from the Bank of England , for purposes of private interest or emolument , sums issued to him as Treasurer of the Navy , and placed to his account in the Bank , according to the provisions of the 25th of Geo .
III .
chap .
31 , has been guilty of a gross violation of the law , and a high breach of duty . ''


Public meetings were on this occasion held all over the kingdom , calling for a rigid inquiry into the conduct of Lord Melville , and petitions were presented by the electors of Westminster , the Lord Mayor , Aldermen and Citizens of London , the electors of Southwark , from Salisbury , from the county of Surrey , city of York , the counties of Norfolk , Hants , Hereford , Bedford , Berks , Northumberland , Cornwall , Essex , c. c. against Lord Melville .


A county meeting was called for Wilts , at Devizes .
I had myself written to the old Marquis of Lansdown , proposing to sign a requisition to the Sheriff , which his Lordship immediately complied with  but our High Sheriff , Sir Richard Colt Hoare , took that opportunity to take a trip into Wales , or some part of the West , without leaving any orders at home where his public or private letters were to be forwarded to him .
In consequence of this circumstance , our county meeting was delayed three weeks or a month , and before it could be held , articles of impeachment were exhibited and agreed to by the House of Commons against Lord Melville .
The meeting , however , having been at length advertised by the High Sheriff , to be held at the Town Hall at Devizes , a great number of freeholders assembled , and amongst that number were myself , Mr. Hussey and Lord Folkstone , the two members for Salisbury .
In consequence of the decision of the House of Commons , to impeach Lord Melville , Mr. Hussey and Lord Folkstone recommended , that there should not be any petition sent up from the county of Wilts , because it would be prejudging the question before the House .
Finding that no petition was to be submitted to the meeting , I sat down and drew up some resolutions , expressive of the indignation of the freeholders at the conduct of Lord Melville , and their approval of that of Mr. Whitbread .
Amongst the number was a censure upon the High Sheriff , for his delay in calling the meeting , and his gross negligence in being absent from the county at such an important period .
It was here that , for the first time , I addressed my brother freeholders at a county meeting .
Mr. Collins , of Salisbury , seconded my resolutions , and they were carried by acclamation  but in consequence of the earnest entreaties of the venerable Mr. Hussey , who was the father of the House of Commons at that time , backed by those of his colleague , I , being young in politics , was prevailed upon to withdraw my vote of censure upon the conduct of the Sheriff , after having heard from him an explanation and an apology .


This was my first public entry into political life .
I had always borne the character of an independent country gentleman  but I had never taken any decisive part publicly in politics till this occasion .
I was very successful in my maiden speech , as it might so be called , for which I was highly complimented by Mr. Hussey and by Lord Folkestone .
But , as I said before , by compliments and by flattery they wheedled me out of the main jet of my resolutions .
The fact was , that my resolutions were too sweeping , as they cut at the Whigs as well as the Ministers .
They contained a general condemnation of all peculations and peculators  and Mr. Hussey , as well as Lord Folkestone , who was a very young man and a very poor orator at that time , were neither more nor less than Whigs : it was therefore necessary , by a ruse de guerre , to get rid of my resolutions , which they found I was sure to carry , by a large majority of the meeting .
The public spirit evinced by the Wiltshire freeholders was , however , an earnest of their future patriotic disposition to take the liberal side of the question in public matters , whenever they might again be brought upon the carpet .


On the 25th of May , three men , who had falsely sworn themselves freeholders of Middlesex , to vote for the popular candidate , were , upon conviction , sentenced to seven years ' transportation each .
On the 26th of May the Emperor Napoleon was crowned King of Italy at Milan .


On the 13th June , 1805 , a resolution was passed by the House of Commons , and that the fullest House that ever was known , for ordering the Attorney-General to commence , in the Court of King 's Bench , a criminal prosecution against Lord Melville , for having used the public money for private purposes .
This resolution of the Honourable House gave universal satisfaction to the people throughout the country .
The examination of Mr. Pitt before the committee excited general interest , and nothing else was talked of or thought of in the political world .
His shuffling , equivocating testimony , so much resembles what has been going on , during the last ten weeks , within these walls , that I will here insert some of his answers before the committee .
It will be recollected that Mr. Pitt was a man who , whenever it suited his purpose , did , with a most surprising power of memory , revert to all the arguments and opinions of his adversaries , for a space of time , comprising his whole political life  not with doubt , hesitation , or embarrassment , but with the most direct , unqualified , and positive assertion .
The following were his answers before the committee .


Answers .
Times .


He thinks , c. ... ... ... 6


He rather thinks ... ... .
2


He thinks to that effect ... 1


He thinks he understood .
1


He conceives ... ... ... 7


He believes ... ... ... ... 8


He rather believes ... ... 1


He believes he heard ... .
1


He understood ... ... . .
3


He understood it generally ... ... ... ... .
2


He was satisfied ... ... 1


He was not able to ascertain ... ... ... ... ... 1


He can only state the substance ... ... ... ... . .
1


He did not recollect ( Non mi ricordo ! )
... ... ... 9


He really did not recollect 1


Answers .
Times .


He had no recollection ... .
1


Did not know from his own knowledge ... ... ... 3


Did not know that it occurred to him ... ... .
1


Was not in his contemplation ... ... ... ... ... 1


Did not occur to his mind 1


No impression was left on his mind ... ... ... . .
1


He could not say ... ... 2


He could not undertake to say ... ... ... ... ... 2


He could not speak with certainty ... ... ... . .
1


He could not speak positively ... ... ... ... . .
1


He could not state the substance very generally . .
1


ANSWERS .
TIMES .


He did not at present recollect ... ... ... ... 2 He could not recollect with precision ... ... . .
2 He could not recollect at this distance of time . .
1 He could not recollect with certainty ... ... . .
1 His recollection did not enable him ... ... ... 1 To the best of his recollection ... ... ... ... 4 As well as he could recollect ... ... ... ... 2 Could not pretend to recollect ... ... ... ... 1 Not able to recollect at this distance of time ... 1 He had a general recollection ... ... ... ... 4 He could not state with accuracy ... ... ... . .
3 He could not state precisely ... ... ... ... .
3 He could assign no specific reason ... ... ... 1 He did not know ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Not that he knew of ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 He had no means of forming a judgment ... ... . .
1 He did not think ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 He had no knowledge ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 He could not judge ... ... ... ... ... ... .
1 Probably ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
1 He was led to suppose ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 He was led to believe ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 He was persuaded ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 He learnt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 He heard surmises to that effect ... ... ... . .
1


ABSTRACT .


He thinks , rather thinks , or thinks he understood ... ... ... 10 He conceives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . .
7 He believes , rather believes , c. ... ... ... ... ... ... .
10 He understood , was satisfied , c. ... ... ... ... ... ... .
6 Not able to ascertain , could only state the substance ... ... .
2 Did not recollect , to the best of his recollection , c. ... ... 31 He could not say , speak with certainty , c. ... ... ... ... .
6 Did not occur to his mind , c. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 He could not state with accuracy , precision , c. ... ... ... .
7 He had no knowledge , not led to believe , to suppose , c. ... ... 16 I am perfectly convinced ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 No , I believe it impossible ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . .
1


104


Now it is almost impossible to imagine that a witness could have made such answers to 104 questions , unless he deliberately and pertinaciously meant to conceal and withhold the truth by equivocating .


Mr. Pitt 's memory , be it observed , was equally bad and treacherous upon the trial of poor old Hardy , the shoemaker , and Mr. Horne Tooke .
He then could not recollect any thing that was likely to tell in favour of the prisoners : when their exculpation was likely to be the result of a plain honest answer , `` Non mi ricordo '' was his reply .
That Mr. Pitt had connived at the peculations of Lord Melville , was clearly proved  and also that he had lent Boyd and Benfield , two ministerial Members of the Honourable House of Commons , 40,000 l. of the public money , without interest .
These transactions being made known by means of Mr. Whitbread 's exertions in Parliament , the public mind was in a violent ferment .
Petitions were poured in from all parts of the country against the conduct of Lord Melville , and the people were delighted at the resolution passed by the House , ordering the Attorney-General to commence criminal proceedings against him in the Court of King 's Bench .
But they were very much mortified at the notice of the motion given by Mr. Leicester , on the 25th , for the rescinding the resolution passed on the 13th of June , and thus to do away with the vote of the House on that night , in order to substitute an impeachment of Lord Melville , instead of the criminal prosecution .


On the twenty-sixth of June , an impeachment was ordered by a vote of the House , instead of a criminal prosecution .
This was considered , by every honest man in the country , to be a measure adopted for the purpose of screening the newly made noble delinquent .
Mr. Cobbett took up the discussion of these proceedings , with his accustomed zeal and ability  and his Weekly Political Register was universally read , not only in the metropolis , but all over the kingdom .
His clear , perspicuous , and forcible reasoning upon this transaction , convinced every one who read the Register  he proved to demonstration that Mr. Pitt had been privy to and connived at his friend Lord Melville 's delinquency , and it was made evident , to the meanest understanding , that the public money had been constantly used for private purposes , and to aggrandize the Minister 's tools and dependants .


This was a mortal blow to Mr. Pitt , and it is with great truth said that this was the primary cause of his death .
His friends had always cried up his integrity and disinterestedness , and his total disregard of wealth .
This was very true as to himself  but he aggrandized all his friends and supporters  every tool of his ambition grew rich and fattened upon the public money  and having carried on this trade for so many years , and to be caught out in this barefaced fraud at last , I believe went far towards breaking his heart  I am sure he never well recovered it .
To be detected in lending Boyd and Benfield , two Members of Parliament , 40,000 l. of the public money , without interest , was bad enough : but for that he had impudence enough to offer something like an excuse  and lame as that excuse was , yet he obtained a bill of indemnity for his violation of his duty .
But to have connived at Sawney 's tricks , and to be detected in it , was too much for his proud spirit to bear !
He was , however , determined at all hazards to screen and protect him from punishment  and hence the House was surprised into a vote , to rescind the solemn decision of the House for Lord Melville to be criminally prosecuted by the Attorney-General , little Master Perceval .
Oh !
what shuffling and cutting there was amongst the Minister 's tools in the Honourable House  but Mr. Whitbread was made of too stubborn stuff to be driven from his purpose !


In the meanwhile , the whole country was alive to the transaction , and watched with a scrutinizing eye every step that was taken by the wily Minister , who was beset in every quarter .
Mr. Cobbett contributed more than any other individual to bring this nefarious affair fully before the public eye .
As I had taken a conspicuous part at the Wiltshire County Meeting , I called on Mr. Cobbett the first time that I went to London after it had occurred , as I was desirous to obtain a personal interview with a man who had afforded me so much pleasure by his writings , and who had given me weekly so much useful information as to politics and political economy .
He lived in Duke-Street , Westminster , where , on my arrival , I sent in my name .
I was shown into a room unfurnished , and , as far as I recollect , without a chair in it .
After waiting sometime , the great political writer appeared  a tall robust man , with a florid face , his hair cut quite close to his head , and himself dressed in a blue coat and scarlet cloth waistcoat  and as it was then very hot weather , in the middle of the summer , his apparel had to me a very singular appearance .
I introduced myself as a gentleman from Wiltshire , who had taken a lead at the county meeting , the particulars of which I had forwarded to him .
He addressed me very briefly , and very bluntly , saying that `` we must persevere , and we should bring all the scoundrels to justice . ''
He never asked me to sit down  but that might have arisen from there being no other seat in the room except the floor .


I departed not at all pleased with the interview .
I had made up my mind for a very different sort of man  and , to tell the truth , I was very much disappointed by his appearance and manners , and mortified at the cool reception which he gave me .
As I walked up Parliament-Street , I mused upon the sort of being I had just left , and I own that my calculations did not in the slightest degree lead me to suppose that we should ever be upon such friendly terms , and indeed upon such an intimate footing , as we actually were for a number of years afterwards .
It appeared to me , that at our first meeting we were mutually disgusted with each other  and I left his house with a determination in my own mind never to seek a second interview with him .
I thought that of all the men I ever saw , he was the least likely for me to become enamoured of his society .
The result was , nevertheless , quite the reverse  we lived and acted together for many years with the most perfect cordiality  and I believe that two men never lived that more sincerely , honestly , and zealously , advocated public liberty than we did , hand in hand , for eight or ten years .
Although , perhaps , it would be impossible to pick out two men more different , in many respects , than we are to each other  yet , in pursuing public duty for so many years together , there never were two men who went on so well together , and with such trifling difference of opinion , as occurred between Mr. Cobbett and myself .
It was , however , some years after this , before we became intimate .
I constantly read his Political Register with unabated admiration and delight , for even at this time he far surpassed every other political writer , in my opinion .


At this period , 1805 , many volunteers having refused to pay their fines for not attending their drills , under an idea that it was not compulsory , the magistrates decided that they were legally liable , and compelled them to pay their arrears .


On the 31st of August , the old humbug of invasion having been again played off by Buonaparte , Sir Sidney Smith attacked the flotilla off Boulogne , by means of catamarans , but with very trifling success , he having done but very little mischief to the enemy .


On the 8th of September , hostilities commenced once more between Austria and France  and , on the 2d of October , the success of the French arms began , by the defeat of the Austrians at Guntzburgh , and was followed up by the action of Wirtingen on the 6th .
On the 7th , the French army defeated the Austrians on the Danube  and on the 14th , Memmingen surrendered to the French .
On the 16th , six thousand Austrians surrendered to Soult  and , on the 17th , Ulm was surrendered to the French by the Austrian General Mack .
On the 19th , the Austrian army was again defeated near Ulm by the French  on the same day the Battle of Elchingen was fought , where the Austrians were again routed  and on the 20th , the French forces in Italy passed the Adige .
Werneck surrendered with 15,000 men to Murat .


As a counterbalance to the wonderful uninterrupted success of the French arms on the continent , Lord Nelson defeated the French and Spanish fleets , off Trafalgar , on the 21st of October .
In this matchless naval engagement , the English sailors under Nelson took and destroyed twenty-four ships of the enemy  in which action the brave Admiral fell .
This splendid victory of Lord Nelson 's roused for a time the drooping spirits of the English Ministers , who had before been almost overwhelmed by the news of the repeated and uninterrupted success of the French troops over the Austrians  and as the Russian army had now joined them , the enemies of the French boasted that the campaign would end in favour of the allied armies of Austria and Russia .
On the 31st of October , however , the French defeated the Austrians once more on the Adige .
Sweden now joined the Austrians and Russians , and declared war against France .
On the 10th of November , the Austrians were again defeated by the French at Moelk .
On the 11th , Marshal Mortier defeated the Russians  and on the 13th , the French army entered VIENNA .
On the 16th , the French defeated the Russians at Gunstersdorff  and on the 2d of December , the memorable and decisive battle of Austerlitz was fought , where the combined armies of Austria and Russia were signally defeated , and routed with immense loss .
On the 6th of the same month , Austria sued for an armistice , which was granted by Napoleon  and on the 26th , Napoleon compelled her to sign a treaty of peace at Presburg  upon which occasion he bestowed the title of King upon the Electors of Bavaria and Wirtemburgh , the latter of whom was the husband of the Princess Royal of England , and elevated her to the rank of Queen of Wirtemburgh .
Thus did our most powerful enemy raise one of the Royal Family of England from the rank of a petty Electress to the rank of Queen  and , under all the circumstances , this was a very remarkable event .
On the 27th of the same month Buonaparte caused his brother Joseph to be crowned King of Naples .
This wonderful man now had at his command all the crowned heads of Europe .
He made Kings and Queens with as much ease , and with as little concern , as ginger bread dolls are made for a country fair .
The proud , haughty tyrant , the Emperor of Germany , was at his feet , and Alexander trembled and obeyed his nod .
The fortune of war was , during the campaign , most propitious to Napoleon  he beat the enemy in every quarter , and success attended every movement of his armies : to be sure , his different corps were commanded by the most intelligent , brave , and renowned generals in the universe  such as never before adorned any age or country .


The death of Nelson , at the battle of Trafalgar , although it did not detract from the brilliancy of the victory , was , nevertheless , a great drawback upon the pleasure that the news would have otherwise afforded to the country  for every individual laid aside , on this occasion , all feelings of political hostility , forgot his errors and his crimes as a politician and a man , and lamented the loss of the hero .
No one will ever dispute Nelson 's cool , determined presence of mind , in the midst of danger and the greatest difficulties  he possessed this admirable quality in a super-eminent degree .
His presence of mind , which never deserted him in the midst of danger , is the sure indication of real courage  and this merit will be freely conceded to Nelson , even by those who abhorred his political subserviency .


Mr. Pitt severely felt the loss of the gallant admiral  and what with the detection and exposure which was made by the 10th Report of the Naval Commissioners , and the disgrace that was consequently brought not only upon himself and his bosom friend Lord Melville , but upon the whole of his administration  and what with the repeated and signal success of Napoleon and the French armies in Germany , the health of the Heaven-born Minister was so affected that he was obliged to go to Bath for his recovery .
I shall never forget my seeing him leave York House , with his friend , about 10 o'clock in the morning on the very day that he received the dispatches of the news of the battle of Austerlitz .
He walked down Melsom-street smiling and laughing with his friend , on their way to the Pump-room .
In the mean time the dispatches arrived express , and were delivered to him there , as I learned afterwards .
I met him again , walking down Argyll-street , in his way home to his lodgings , in Laura-place .
I observed the alteration in his countenance , and remarked to my friend , with whom I was walking , `` that some bad tidings had arrived  that Mr. Pitt looked as if he had received his DEATH-BLOW . ''
If he had been shot through the body , the alteration in his countenance and manner could not have been more evident  he could scarcely reel along as he leaned upon the arm of his friend  his head hung down upon his chest , and he looked more dead than alive .
In ten minutes after this I arrived at the Library .
The mail had brought the papers , which confirmed the news of the complete overthrow of the combined Russian and Austrian armies at the battle of Austerlitz .
Mr. Pitt returned to town , and I believe that he never left his house afterwards .
Such an accumulation of difficulties and disasters was too much for his already shaken mind to support , and his death , I believe , was caused thereby .
He never held his head fully up after the vote of the House , which declared his friend Lord Melville to have been guilty of `` a gross violation of the law , and a high breach of duty . ''
He made every personal effort in his power , and used his all-powerful interest to prevail upon a majority of his tools in the House to agree to the amendment which he proposed to substitute , in the stead of the above important and convincing declaration  namely , he moved to leave out the words `` gross violation of the law , and a high breach of duty , '' and insert in lieu of them , the words `` contrary to the `` intention of the law . ''
But the Ministerial Members of that Honourable House , corrupt as Pitt had made them , scouted his motion  his own tools voted against him , and he and his friend Melville were left in a minority upon his own dunghill .
This was too much for his haughty , stubborn spirit to bear .
To be handed down to posterity , so deservedly covered with the infamous charge of having connived at peculation  for the Heaven-born Minister to have been defeated , and convicted of having winked at the plundering of the people , and betraying his sovereign , who had confided to his hands the guardianship of their treasure , was too much even for his impudent , overbearing spirit to support  and he lingered out the remainder of his existence , and descended to the grave a wretched example of bloated pride , and detected mal-administration .


The public were greatly indebted to Mr. Whitbread for his exposure of these delinquencies in Parliament  but they were much more indebted to Mr. Cobbett , for his unwearied exertions , his able , clear , and perspicuous expositions of the whole of the transactions , which were published in his Weekly Political Register  which Register was universally read , with the greatest avidity , from one end of the kingdom to the other .


The Parliament was prorogued to the 21st of January , 1806 , and meanwhile no exertions were spared by the Opposition , or Whigs , to keep the public feeling alive , as to the delinquency of Lord Melville , and to prepare them for his impeachment at the next meeting of the Parliament .
The people of England had never thought for themselves , but had been hitherto made the puppets of the two great contending factions of the state , the Whigs and the Tories , alternately taking part sometimes with one and sometimes with the other  and the great object of these factions appeared to be always to join in keeping the people in a state of ignorance , and that faction that could best dupe and deceive John Gull was sure to be in place and power .
The Pitt faction had succeeded in this their amiable occupation for a great length of time .
In the years 1793 and 1794 , they had so contrived to addle the brains of the multitude that their heads had been wool-gathering ever since  their vision had been then so mystified , and their brains had been so confused by the mountebank tricks of Pitt and his associates , that nothing but the pen of a Cobbett could bring them to their right senses again .


I was a constant reader of Cobbett 's Register , and although , as I have said , I had been rather disgusted with the man at my first interview with him , yet I was quite enraptured with the beautiful productions of his pen , dictated by his powerful mind .
I was become a professed politician  I had imbibed the sentiments of Lord Bolingbroke , that `` the Constitution of England is the business of every Englishman . ''
I therefore made politics my study , and I looked for Cobbett 's Register with as much anxiety as I had heretofore looked to the day and hour that the fox-hounds were to meet  and if by any accident the post did not bring the Weekly Register , I was just as much disappointed , and felt as much mortified , as I had previously felt at being disappointed or deprived of a good fox-chase .
I beg it to be understood , however , that I by no means had given up the sports of the field , which I enjoyed with as great a zest as I ever did  but when I returned from the pleasures of the chase , or retired from the field with my dogs and my gun , instead of spending the remainder of my time in routs , balls , and plays , in drinking or carousing with bacchanalian parties , I devoted my leisure hours to reading and studying the history of my country , and the characters of its former heroes and legislators , as compared with those of that day .
No man enjoyed more domestic happiness than I did  my home was always rendered delightful by its inmates studying to make each other comfortable  and thus , instead of its being a scene of strife and quarrelling , as the homes of some of my friends were , it was quite the reverse  let me be occupied abroad how or where I would , I always returned to my home with pleasure  and the certainty of being received with open arms and a sincere and gratifying welcome , always made me long for that delight whenever I was absent .


The poor had felt considerable relief by the fall in the price of bread , since the commencement of the year , when the quartern loaf was as high as one shilling and four-pence half-penny  but it had now fallen to ten-pence .
The misery that had been entailed upon the poor during the winter of 1804-5 , in consequence of the enormous price of all sorts of provisions , was most heart-rending and revolting to the feelings of every one possessing a particle of humanity .
I did every thing that lay in my power to relieve the wants and sooth the sorrows of my poor neighbours in the parish of Enford  I took care that my own servants should not want any of the common necessaries of life , but numerous little comforts , and hitherto esteemed necessaries , were , however reluctantly , obliged to be dispensed with .


I saw with pain a sad falling off in the character of the labouring poor  they were for the most part become paupers , while those who still had the spirit , and the pride to keep from the parish book were suffering the most cutting penury , and the greatest privations .
I have often witnessed the contending struggles of a poor but high-spirited labourer , and seen him submitting to the most pinching want before his honourable feelings would allow him to apply for parish relief  himself , his wife and children , almost driven to a state bordering upon starvation , before he could bring his mind to admit the degrading idea of asking for parochial alms .
Many and many is the half-crown that I have slipped unobserved into the hand of such a man , to enable him the better to overcome the hardships of winter  with the fond , but futile hope , that the next harvest might enable him to surmount his difficulties , and with the fruit of his honest labour procure bread to stop the mouths of his half-starved wife and children .
My means had been greatly curtailed by the cursed brewery at Clifton , which was a perpetual drain upon my purse  for all that I acquired by the good management of my farms was devoured by the calls made from the brewery .
This rendered me less able to assist my poorer neighbours  but I have the consolation to reflect , that I did my best .


A Bill , which has been lately before the House of Commons , to protect dumb animals from the brutal treatment of more brutal man , reminds me of an occurrence or two that happened to myself , and which , in justice to my character , ought not to be omitted .
As I was riding to my farm at Widdington , one summer 's day , with the Reverend William White , the present Rector of Teffont , in Wiltshire , who was on a visit at my house at Chisenbury , we perceived a brute , in the shape of a man , belabouring with a large stick a poor ass , who had sunk down under the weight of his load , a large heavy bag of ruddle .
Exhausted by the heat of a meridian sun , the poor beast lay prostrate upon the ground , totally deprived of the power of rising with his burden upon his back .
I sharply rode up , and warmly remonstrated with the huge two-legged brute upon his inhumanity , and offered to assist him in unloading the beast , to enable him to rise , and to help him to reload the animal after he had risen .
This was rudely refused , and with an oath I was desired to mind my own business  while the fellow continued , in a most unmerciful manner , to beat the wretched unresisting beast upon a raw place on the upper end of his tail .
Exasperated at the fellow 's brutality , I rode up to him , and having seized his bludgeon , as he was brandishing it in the air about to apply it once more to the already lacerated rump of the poor ass , with an effort of strength I wrenched the bludgeon from the inhuman monster 's hand , and threw it with great violence sixty or seventy yards over the hedge , into an adjoining corn-field .
Gnashing his teeth with rage at being deprived of his implement of torture , and determined to be revenged for my interference , the ruffian immediately drew out a large clasp knife from his pocket , and seizing the ass by the tail , and exclaiming , `` I will show you that I have a right to do what I please with my own beast , '' he instantly cut off his tail within two inches of his rump , and with savage ferocity he began kicking the wounded part with all his might , with a pair of thick-topped shoes .
This was too much for me to witness , without making an effort to relieve the wretched animal , and punish its brutal master .
I sprung from my saddle , and having consigned my horse to the care of my acquaintance , the parson , I flew to rescue the poor beast from its inhuman tormentor .
The ruffian instantly turned to meet me , and having raised the clasp knife in a menacing attitude , he swore , with the most blasphemous imprecations , that he would plunge it into my heart , if I approached him another inch .
My friend , the parson , urged me to forbear  but , keeping my eye steadily fixed upon that of the monster , while his hand was still raised with the bloody knife suspended , I gave him , as quick as lightning , a blow from my fist , which took the villain under the left ear , levelled him with the earth , and made him bite the dust .
The knife fell from his hand , and I instantly seized it , and before the two-legged brute , who lay stunned upon the ground , could rise , I cut the girth which bound the load upon the back of the ass , and relieved him from his burden .
The cowardly ruffian still lay sprawling , fearing to rise , because he dreaded a repetition of my chastisement , which I was most anxious to have given him if he had stood upon his legs  but which I declined to do while he was prostrate .
The fellow now began to beg for mercy , and pretended to be very sorry for his conduct .
The parson now proposed to give him a severe hiding for his villainous treatment of the poor beast  but as the coward would not get off his breech , but remained seated upon the earth , and declared that he would not get upon his legs while I remained , he saved himself from a severe and well-merited drubbing .
He very coolly offered to sell me the mutilated beast , which I instantly purchased for five shillings , to save him from again falling into the hands of his cruel master .
I had it sent home , and the greatest care possible was taken of it .
But with all my care and attention , the poor thing never recovered from its ill-treatment  it lingered for four or five months and died .
This was the only ass I ever was master of in my life  in fact , I always objected to the keeping of an ass , because I could not bear to see the ill-treatment to which they are generally subject .


I could relate several similar instances , wherein I have placed myself in the most imminent peril , urged on by an impetuous abhorrence of tyranny , even when that tyranny is exercised towards a beast .
One other instance will , perhaps , induce the reader to think that my detestation of cruelty has often led me not only into acts of indiscretion , but that my rashness upon such occasions has been almost bordering upon criminal enthusiasm .
Coming down Newgate Street , one Monday afternoon , I saw a considerable crowd of people surrounding a drover , who held a butcher 's knife in his hand , brandishing it in the air , and threatening any one that might approach him .
I inquired the cause of the fellow 's conduct , and his being thus surrounded by the enraged multitude .
A beautiful ox was pointed out to me on the other side of the street , which stood trembling ready to drop down .
To save himself trouble in driving the beast , the ruffian , who had undertaken to conduct it to Whitechapel for a butcher , had severed the tendon Achilles with his sharp knife  a practice which , I am informed , frequently occurs in London and which is called hamstringing .
The populace , men and women , appeared very much enraged against this monster of a drover , and two constables , with their staves , stood ready to seize him  but he kept them and the whole crowd at bay , with the violent brandishing of his knife , and threatening destruction to any one who attempted to meddle with him .
Several efforts were made to seize him , which he dexterously avoided .
At length , I rushed up to him , and felled him to the earth , with a tremendous and well-directed blow with my fist under the ear .
He was immediately seized by the constables , and the knife was taken from him .
But I was not to get off quite so easy with him as I did with the ass-driver .
The fellow , being disarmed , instantly stripped in buff , and offered to fight the man who had knocked him down .
All eyes were fixed upon me , a perfect stranger , and the general exclamation was , -- `` Have nothing to do with him , Sir  '' but , as the constables appeared to doubt whether they had the power to hold him in custody , there being no law against a drover maiming his beast , unless his master disapproved of it  and as I saw the fellow was likely to escape without further punishment , I instantly accepted his offer , and volunteered to punish him myself , urged on by the pitiable appearance of the poor ox , a beautiful animal which had not moved one inch the whole of this time .
I therefore imprudently stripped , and having consigned my clothes into the hands of a bye-stander , I set to , and in three rounds I beat my man blind  and having a fourth time knocked him down , without receiving any injury myself , he declined to meet me again .
My clothes and watch were honestly returned  and , having replaced them on my back , I departed , receiving the hearty thanks of the surrounding multitude , without being recognised by any one .
In fact , I was not at all known in London at that time .
I laughed heartily , as an account of it was read the next morning , in the newspapers , while I was at breakfast in the coffee-room , at the Black Lion , Water Lane  the whole party joining in the praises of the man who had chastised the brutal ruffian .


One more circumstance of this sort will , I should think , be quite enough to convince the reader that I was always a determined foe to baseness and cruelty .
As I was sitting with some ladies on a hot summer 's day , in a front room of the Fountain Inn , at Portsmouth , with the window open , looking into the High-Street , observing the passing crowd , it being a fair day , we discovered an ill-looking fellow pilfering some articles from the stall of a poor woman opposite .
This transaction was also observed by Admiral Montague , the Port Admiral , who was sitting in the adjoining room of the inn , with a friend , amusing himself with observing the passing scene .
We hailed the poor woman , who detected the fellow in the fact  but , having dropped the articles on the pavement , he vociferously declared that he had never touched them .
A crowd soon collected , particularly of women , and demanded that he should be taken into custody .
He drew his knife , ( always the ready resort of a coward ) and placing his back in a corner against the wall , he set them all at defiance , and for a considerable length of time successfully resisted every attempt to secure him .
At last he was , to all appearance , getting the better of his assailants , and by loudly asserting that she had most wrongfully and maliciously accused him , he was absolutely endeavoring to turn the tide of popular indignation against the poor woman who had detected him .
The fact was , that the terror excited by his violence overcame the zeal of his accusers  and if it had not been kept up by three or four women , he would not only have escaped with impunity , but he would have turned the tables upon the poor woman whom he had endeavoured to rob .
These women , however , kept up an unceasing battery with their tongues , which he at length began to put down by violence , pushing them away with one hand , and threatening them with the upraised knife in the other .
This scene lasted nearly a quarter of an hour , and although my fingers itched to punish the ruffian , yet I was restrained by the entreaties of the ladies who were with me .
At last he struck one of the women a violent blow , and knocked her down .
This drew upon him the execration of the enraged multitude  but no one attempted either to disarm or to seize him .
A second blow , inflicted upon a decent looking female , roused my indignation at the cowardice of the bye-standers , and I hastily left the room , crossed the street , and having walked deliberately up to him , pretending to inquire what was the matter , before he was at all aware of my intentions , and just as he was about to relate his story , I , with a well-directed blow , with my fist under the ear , laid him sprawling upon the pavement  his knife was seized , and I left him unarmed to the care of the Portsmouth ladies that surrounded him , who did not fail to punish him with their talons .


As I was passing over the street , on my return to the inn , Admiral Montague , who had witnessed the whole affair , looked out of his window and warmly gave me his personal thanks , for the summary justice which I had inflicted upon the ruffian thief , who had kept the street in an uproar for nearly half an hour .
I went back to my party very well satisfied with the exploit I had performed  although I felt so very sensible of the danger I had incurred , that I promised my friends faithfully that I would never again volunteer in such dangerous service .
About two hours afterwards , I very unexpectedly received a warrant from Sir John Carter , the Mayor , to attend immediately at his office , to appear to a charge of a violent assault , committed in the public street , c. c. I took my hat and attended the Mayor 's officer instantly , without the slightest hesitation  but as the Admiral had left the inn I had no witness with me .
I , however , sent the waiter to bring the woman who had been robbed , and one of those who had been assaulted by the ruffian , to follow me to the house of the Mayor  but , almost as soon as I had arrived there , and before the fellow had finished making his charge , in walked the Port Admiral Montague , who having heard the circumstance , came immediately to give evidence of the facts to which he had been an eye-witness from the window of the inn .
The gallant Admiral related the circumstances , and passed a high eulogium upon my courage and public spirit , in which he was cordially joined by his friend Sir John Carter  and the fellow , who was a pot-house keeper , from Ryde , in the Isle of Wight , escaped with a very severe reprimand , the poor woman having declined to prosecute him .


If I were not fearful of tiring the reader , I could continue a long chain of rencontres of a similar nature , which occurred to me in my youthful days  but as I have , I think , given quite sufficient to delineate the decisive character of the author at that period , I shall proceed , with other matters  only just observing by the way , that a frequent recurrence of such events obtained for me the name of a very violent young man , though , nineteen times out of twenty my violence was exercised in the cause of humanity  or in protecting and defending the weak and helpless , against the aggressions of the rich and powerful .


Returning from London , in the Ba -- mail , on a very severe frosty moonlight night , as we were passing Cranford-bridge , the coachman got one of the hind wheels firmly locked and entangled in that of a heavy brewer 's dray , which gave us a most violent shock and nearly overturned the coach .
A plentiful share of the slang abuse , usually arising upon such occasions , passed between the coachman and guard of the mail and the driver and attendant of the dray .
The wheel of the coach appeared to be so firmly entangled in that of the dray , that it required a considerable exertion to release it  and the guard was entreating the passengers to assist him .
But an Irish officer of dragoons , who was sitting by my side , very coolly answered , that as coachee had got into the scrape he might get out of it again and be d -- d. For once in my life I was determined to follow such a selfish example  but , just as I had made up my mind to sit still and enjoy my own ease and comfort , the Irishman , who was looking out of one of the windows of the coach on the opposite side to that where the dray stood , exclaimed `` by Jasus there is a fellow fallen from off his horse into the water , and is drowning . ''
The moon shone almost as bright as day , and , as this happened within half a dozen yards of the coach window , it was perfectly visible to the Irish officer , who still sat perfectly cool , and as unconcerned as possible  observing , as he leant back in the coach , `` the fellow is actually gone to the bottom , and I saw the last of him as he sunk . ''
Till now I really thought the gentleman had merely witnessed the ducking of some one who had fallen into the pond  but this last observation induced me to call loudly to the guard to open the door  and , quite forgetting my determination to follow the officer 's doctrine and example , `` to take things coolly and let every one look to himself , '' I sprang out of the coach to the edge of the water , where a hat floating thereon was the only visible proof that any one was in the water .
The Irishman , however , who still sat snug in the coach , and who never budged an inch , affirmed with an oath that the man had sunk exactly under where the hat was floating .
The life of a fellow creature being at stake , cold , calculating prudence was instantly banished from my ardent mind  and , without waiting another moment , I plunged into the water , which I found was beyond my depth , and having swam to the spot , which was only a few yards , I came instantly in contact with the body , which I seized and dragged to the water edge , and , with some difficulty , assisted by the guard , he was hoisted out of the pond .
The Irishman had lustily , but perhaps very prudently , ordered the coachman , at his peril , not to leave his horses , although a passenger on the box had the reins in his hand .
By this time assistance came from the inn ( I think the Crown ) , kept at that time by a person of the name of Goddard .
Amongst the number of those who flocked to witness this distressing scene was a young man , who exclaimed , in a frantic agony of voice and gesture , `` it is my father ! ''
and he instantly seized the apparently drowned man by the heels , and held him upright , with his head upon the ground , his feet in the air , as he said , to let the water run out of him  an old , vulgar , and long exploded practice , which has proved in almost every instance fatal .
I expostulated , but in vain  I pitied the agonised feelings of the youth , while I struggled to release his father by force from the fatal posture in which he had , although with the best intention , unguardedly and obstinately placed him .
He , however , resisted my efforts with personal violence , in spite of the expostulations of the guard .
Seeing that I was likely to have my humane intentions frustrated by the young man 's obstinacy , and , as no time was to be lost , I resorted to my usual knock-down argument , and levelled the son with the earth , to save the life of the father .
This I did so effectually that he was totally incapable of resistance  and , with the aid of the guard , I bore off the drowned man upon my shoulders to the inn , about a hundred yards distant .
Dripping wet , and covered with mud , I assisted to strip him before the kitchen fire , and instantly proceeded to use the means recommended by the Humane Society , ( and by which means I had once restored to animation a female who had attempted to drown herself ) .
By chafing the body with warm cloths , rubbing in brandy about the heart , applying bottles filled with hot water to his feet , c. in which the guard manfully and zealously assisted the whole time , declaring that the coach should wait as long for me as I liked , in a very few minutes my labour and exertion was rewarded with symptoms of returning animation , by the twitching of one leg  upon which a fresh hot bottle was applied to his foot  we redoubled our exertion , and in another minute he opened his eyes and became sick .
I now left him to the care of his son , the guard , and others , to continue the rubbing , while I went with the landlord and changed my clothes , having remained twenty minutes in the same state in which I had left the water , which being very muddy , I had spoiled at least ten pounds worth of wearing apparel .
The landlord , however , furnished me with what I had not got in my trunk .


When I returned down stairs , I perceived my patient , who I was informed was an old post-boy , sitting in the settle of the tap-room , quite recovered  and when I was pointed out to him by his master , as his deliverer from a watery grave , the fellow attacked me in the most violent and abusive manner , and called down horrid imprecations upon my head for having saved him from that end which I now found he had courted , by throwing himself off the horse 's back , with the intention of destroying himself .
I was so exasperated with the fellow 's ingratitude that it was with difficulty the landlord and the guard restrained me from inflicting upon him summary chastisement for his insolence  but the conviction of his insanity soon weighed still more powerfully with me to ensure my forbearance than any thing the landlord or the guard could have urged for his protection .
At this moment my fellow passenger , who had never before appeared , but who had taken the advantage of this delay to get a comfortable cup of coffee , in a warm parlour , walked in , and began to moralize with me upon the folly `` of troubling myself with other people 's business  '' and , as he did this with a very grave face , it had the desired effect , and I really began to meditate and to calculate which of the two , he or I , was the most extraordinary being  and I was almost disposed to concede to him the palm of being the most rational , a fact of which he appeared thoroughly to be convinced , and in which opinion he was strongly confirmed , after I got into the mail , and related to him the adventure of my having nearly lost my life , a few years before , in saving a female from being drowned in a deep river , on a Monday , who contrived to put an end to her existence and find a watery grave on the following Thursday , in a ditch which contained only eighteen inches of water .
We travelled as far as Marlborough together , where we parted  he proceeded to Bath in the mail , and I to my home at Chisenbury , in my curricle .
Parliament met on the 21st of January , and on the TWENTY-THIRD DAY OF JANUARY ,1806 , the Heaven-born Minister , WILLIAM PITT , DIED , at his house at Putney .
This man had , for nearly a quarter of a century , reigned triumphant over the people of England with the most despotic and arbitrary sway , by the means of a corrupt majority of a set of boroughmongers , who called themselves and their agents the House of Commons  thus pretending to be the representatives of the people of England , while , in fact , they might as well have been said to represent the people of Algiers as the people of England , a majority of them being returned by one hundred and fifty-four individuals .
I may , I believe , venture to give my opinion of the House of Commons , such as it was constituted in the days and reign of Pitt .
The banishment act would , of course , preclude me from speaking of the present House of Commons with the same sincerity and freedom  therefore , whether there be any resemblance in the present House of Commons to that of the House as it was constituted in the reign of Pitt , I must leave for the determination of those who have paid attention to their proceedings .


On the death of Mr. Pitt , the then House of Commons immediately voted that his debts should be paid by JOHN GULL , and that he should have a public funeral , at JOHN 'S expense !
This was all perfectly in character , for it was voted before the Talents or Whigs came into place and power .
A ministry , a new ministry , was now made up of most heterogeneous materials  it consisted of men differing as widely from each other as any of the factions could differ  Fox and Grenville united , and , to crown the whole , Lord Sidmouth made one of the cabinet .
Mr. Fox , who had been the determined opponent , the violent contemner , of all the measures of Mr. Pitt , formed an union with Lord Grenville , who had been the constant supporter of the very worst measures of Mr. Pitt !
As for Lord Sidmouth , all the Addingtons appeared determined to have a `` finger in the pie ! ''
let who would be in office , the Addingtons appeared determined to have a share of the plunder , by joining them .
Such opposite characters , such vinegar and oil politicians , were not likely to amalgamate so as to produce any good for the people  they might , indeed , combine to share the profits of place , but they were sure never to agree in any measure that was likely to promote the freedom and happiness of the people .
This , however , was called a Whig administration  and it will not be unuseful to record the names of those personages who composed this Whig administration .
They were as follow , which I beg my readers to peruse attentively : --


Right Rev. Dr. C. Manners Sutton , Archbishop of Canterbury .
Thomas Lord Erskine , Lord High Chancellor .
Dr. William Markham , Archbishop of York .
Earl Fitzwilliam , Lord President of the Council .
Viscount Sidmouth , Lord Privy Seal .
William Lord Grenville , First Lord of the Treasury .
Lord Henry Petty , Chancellor of the Exchequer .
Earl Spencer , Viscount Howick , and Right Honorable William Windham , Secretaries of State .
Right Hon. Thomas Grenville , First Lord of the Admiralty .
Sir David Dundas , Commander in Chief .
Right Hon. Charles Abbot , Speaker of the House of Commons .
Right Hon. Sir William Grant , Master of the Rolls .
Edward Lord Ellenborough , Chief Justice of the Court of King 's Bench .
Sir Arthur Pigott , Attorney General .
Sir Samuel Romilly , Solicitor General .
Right Hon. Sir William Scott , Judge of the Admiralty .
Right Hon. Richard Brindley Sheridan , Treasurer of the Navy .
Earl Temple and Lord John Townsend , Paymasters of the Army .
Francis Earl of Moira , Master General of the Ordnance .
Right Hon. Richard Fitzpatrick , Secretary at War .
John Duke of Bedford , Lord Lieutenant of Ireland .


Here , my friends , you have a pretty correct list of the Whig administration , or `` All the Talents , '' as they were facetiously and ironically called , or rather nicknamed , who were called to office upon the death of Mr. PITT , a man of brilliant talents , and irresistible eloquence  but a man who turned these great gifts of the Supreme Being to the destruction of human liberty , and who directed his powerful genius , and the great facilities that were given him by his having the direction of the resources of this laborious and enterprising nation at his command , to the very worst of purposes , to the annihilation of the rights and liberties of his countrymen .
Some of the poisonous effects of the Pitt system the nation has long been tasting , but the cup of bitterness and misery that it has produced is now filled to the brim , and its baleful contents are beginning to act fully on this once prosperous nation , and to blast and wither in the bud the very prospects of its once happy people .
Mr. Pitt , in his younger days , before his ambition got the better of his principles , had been a reformer  but when he once got into place and power , he became the greatest apostate that ever existed  and , true apostate like , he endeavoured to hang his former associates and companions in that cause which he had so basely abandoned and betrayed .
If there ever lived one man more deserving the execration of the whole human race than another , Mr. Pitt was that man .
He corrupted the very source of justice , by bribing and packing the pretended representatives of the people  but it required the Whigs , the base Whigs , to put a stamp upon the system which Pitt created , to make it a perpetual bar and an everlasting curse to the nation .


The Whigs were at this time become popular with the nation at large , and possessed the confidence of the thinking and honourable portion of the people .
The friends of rational liberty looked to them with , what was believed to be , a well-grounded hope , for some relief -- some relaxation from the horrors of that accursed system which Mr. Fox and his friends had so ably and so zealously opposed for nearly twenty years  that system which they had invariably condemned and exposed , as the greatest curse that could befal a nation  and for having persisted in which infamous , impolitic , and ruinous course so long , they had predicted the downfall of this country .


I own that I was one of Mr. Fox 's most enthusiastic admirers .
I was too young and inexperienced a politician , to doubt for a moment the sincerity of his professions  I had for many many years watched his ardent and eloquent opposition to the measures of Mr. Pitt , and my whole heart and soul had gone hand in hand with him .
I own I indulged the most confident hope that he would now realize all his former professions .
Now that he was in place , and had a large majority of those who called themselves the representatives of the people at his command  now that he had the power to do good , I , for one , expected that he would tread in the `` stern path of duty , '' and set about restoring those rights and liberties of the people , the loss of which he had so pathetically , and for so many years , expatiated on , and deplored .
But , alas !
my fond hopes were soon blasted  the expectations of the whole nation were soon disappointed .
The very FIRST act of the Whig ministry was a death-blow to the fondly-cherished hopes of every patriotic mind in the kingdom .
Lord Grenville held the sinecure office of Auditor of the Exchequer , with a salary of four thousand pounds a year  but being appointed First Lord of the Treasury , with a salary of six thousand pounds a year , it was expected , of course , on every account , that he would resign his former office of Auditor of the Exchequer , it appearing too great a farce to give a man 4,000 l. a year to audit his own accounts  and , besides the barefaced absurdity of the thing , it was evidently illegal .
In spite of this , these new ministers , dead to every sense and feeling of shame , brought in a bill , and it was passed a law , solely for the purpose of enabling Lord Grenville to hold , at one and the same time , these two offices , which were so palpably incompatible with each other  namely , First Lord of the Treasury , and Auditor of the Exchequer .
This shook the faith of every honest man in the country .
I own that I was thunder-struck , particularly as Mr. Fox brought the bill into the House of Commons himself , and maintained it with his usual ability , and appeared quite as much in earnest and as eloquent in a bad cause as he had heretofore been in a good one .
A vote , as I have already mentioned , had passed the House to pay Mr. Pitt 's debts , before these ministers had actually taken their places  and now another vote was passed by them , to erect , at the public expense , a monument to his memory , upon the score of his public services !
and this vote was passed , recollect , by the very same men who had declared , for the last twenty years , that the measures of Mr. Pitt were destructive to the nation , burthensome and oppressive to the people , and subversive of their dearest rights and liberties .
But Mr. Fox was now in place !
the case was now completely altered !!


Mr. Fox 's friends now began to doubt his sincerity , and recalled to their recollection the former professions of Mr. Pitt .
In a speech , delivered in his place , in the House of Commons , on the 26th of May , 1797 , Mr. Fox had , in the following words , reminded Mr. Pitt of his former professions : '' My opinion ( said Mr. Fox ) is , that the best plan of representation is that which shall bring into activity the greatest number of independent voters .
That Government alone is strong that has the hearts of the people  and will any man contend , that we should not be more likely to add strength to the state if we were to extend the basis of popular representation ?
In 1785 , the Right Honourable Gentleman ( Mr. Pitt ) pronounced the awful prophecy , ` without a parliamentary reform the nation will be plunged into new wars  without a parliamentary reform you can not be safe against bad ministers , nor can even good ministers be of use to you . '
Such was his prediction , and it has come upon us .
Good God !
what a fate is that of the Right Honourable Gentleman , and in what a state of whimsical contradiction does he now stand ! ''
This was the sarcastical language of Mr. Fox , in 1797 , when speaking of the apostacy of Mr. Pitt  but which might have been very fairly retorted upon himself in 1806 .


At the moment when I am writing this , at half past one o'clock on Thursday , the nineteenth day of July , 1821 , I hear about thirty of the poor half-starved populace of Northover giving three cheers in honour of His Majesty 's Coronation , or rather in honour of a dinner and some beer , which , I understand , is given to them by Mr. Tuson , the attorney of the place .
The system that has made him rich has made his neighbours poor , and he very properly spews his generosity and his loyalty , by giving his poor neighbours a dinner upon this occasion .
Poor , deluded , debased wretches !
I envy not your feelings  a few months since you were amongst the first voluntarily to address the Queen upon her escape from the fangs of her persecutors , and you voluntarily illuminated your houses upon the occasion .
But now your pinching wants , the cravings of your half-starved carcases , give a sort of involuntary action to your lungs , and , in spite of yourselves , your bellies cry `` God save King George the Fourth  '' and the sound issues from your mouths , in hopes of having the space which the wind occupies in your stomachs replaced with beef , pudding , and beer .
But this is one of the dog-days !
-- God save King George the Fourth , they cry  huzza , again , again , and again !
All that I chuse to say is , that it is two years ago , the twenty-first of next month , that Lord Sidmouth addressed a letter to the Manchester Magistrates , which expressed , by command of His Majesty , `` THE GREAT SATISFACTION HIS MAJESTY derived from their prompt , decisive and efficient measures for the preservation of the public tranquillity . ''
God preserve His Majesty from having any occasion to thank the magistrates again for the perpetration of such horrid crime .


I trust the occasion will be an excuse for this digression .
Let us now return to the period of 1806 .
The new ministry began to act so decided a part , that they no longer kept the nation in any suspence as to what course they would pursue .
They not only trod in Mr. Pitt 's steps , by adopting all his measures , but they greatly outdid him in insulting the feelings of the people .
As their THIRD act , they appointed Lord Ellenborough the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , ( a political Judge ) `` one of the cabinet . ''
This was a most unconstitutional measure , and calculated to render the ministry justly unpopular .
The FOURTH step they took was to raise the INCOME TAX from six-and-a-quarter to ten per cent .
The FIFTH thing they did was , to exempt all the King 's funded property from the operation of that tax , while they left that of the widow and orphan , even down to the miserable pittance of fifty pounds a year , subject to all its inquisitorial powers .
Their SIXTH measure was , to raise the incomes of all the younger branches of the Royal Family , from twelve to eighteen thousand a year .
Their SEVENTH measure was , to bring a bill into the House , to make all private breweries liable to the excise laws  thus daringly meditating the violation of an Englishman 's boast , `` that his house is his castle . ''
But , most fortunately for the country , the Whig ministry were , in this one instance , left in a disgraceful minority by their own tools , the mock representatives of the people .
Their EIGHTH measure was , to continue the French war , expressly for Hanover  Mr. Fox unblushingly declaring , that `` Hanover ought to be as dear to us as Hampshire  '' although the act of settlement expressly declares it to be a breach of the compact between the king and the people , to go to war on account of any of the king 's foreign possessions .
Their NINTH measure was , to draw up a bill , which they left in their office , making it , in Ireland , transportation for any person or persons to be seen out of their houses , in any of the prescribed districts , between sun-set in the evening and sun-rise in the morning  and this was to be carried into effect without the sanction of a jury , and merely by the fiat of two magistrates !
TENTH , and lastly , they abandoned the cause of the Catholics , in order to save and keep their places , when they found that the King made that abandonment a sine qua non : they had always , for many many years , when in opposition , supported the Catholic claims for emancipation , and had pledged themselves that , whenever they had the power , they would carry that measure into effect  and , as soon as they thought that they were firmly seated in the saddle of state , and their feet well fixed in the stirrups , they brought that measure forward in Parliament , having first gained the execration of every independent man in the united kingdom , for having acted in the way which I have above described .


The ten preceding political acts of the Whig ministry , of `` All the Talents , '' as they impudently called themselves , had rendered them sufficiently odious throughout the whole country  and it only required this last act of theirs to render them as despicable as they were detested .
As soon as they gave notice of their intention to bring forward the Catholic claims , the old leaven , the refuse of the Pitt faction , who had only wanted a plausible opportunity , began to bellow aloud for the safety of Mother Church , and the Protestant Ascendancy  declaring that the church , the established religion , was in danger .
They had always their intriguers about the person of the old bigotted King George the Third , who immediately took the alarm , or rather took this opportunity of getting rid of a ministry that he never liked , and with whom he had never acted cordially , although they had , in the most subservient manner , complied with all his whims and prejudices .
Now was the time then for the remains of the Pitt faction to make an effort to dislodge their enemies from their strong hold of place and power !
Alas !
alas !!
the despicable Whigs now began to cry for help from the people  from that people whom they had so infamously deceived .
They , however , called in vain for the protecting hand of that people whom they had so basely betrayed  they called in vain for the helping hand of that people whom they had insulted and oppressed , and whose voice they had treated with contempt and derision , when basking in the sunshine of power .
The people had been enlightened  the people had read Cobbett , and they were no longer to be deluded , and made the tools of a despicable , a hypocritical , and a tyrannical faction , such as the Whigs had proved themselves during their administration .
The King was well advised of this by the old PITT creatures  he therefore treated the Whig ministers with very little ceremony  he made a very serious affair of their intention to make him violate his coronation oath  he demanded that they should abandon the Catholics , or abandon their places .
The place-loving Whigs made no parley even with the King , but instantly and unconditionally agreed to comply with his demand  thus deserting the Catholics and their own principles together , to save their places .
The King was astonished and disappointed  he had no idea that they would have acted so basely , and Lords Liverpool , Eldon , and Castlereagh were foiled for a moment , in their attempt to dislodge them  but their best ally was the hatred and the indignation which the people evinced towards the Whigs .
Taking advantage of this , the Outs urged the King on to insult his then ministers , by demanding a written pledge from them , that they would never bring forward the measure any more in Parliament  thus openly evincing that His Majesty would not take their words .
The paltry Whigs did all they could to save their places  they bore kicking with wonderful patience  they were as subservient as spaniels  they promised every thing , and they prayed lustily  but the King was determined , and persisted in demanding a written pledge .
This was such a premeditated , barefaced insult , that they could not submit to it .
They would bear kicking privately , but it was too much to be kicked and cuffed so publicly , and to be asked to sign their names to their own condemnation  this was too much for the most degraded of men to bear with any degree of temper .
They now remonstrated , but their remonstrances were in vain  the King despised them for their meanness as much as he had before detested them for their insolence , and , without any further ceremony , he gave them one more kick , and kicked them headlong out of place and power .


Thus fell the bass Whig faction , never to rise more !
deservedly execrated by all honest men , lamented by none but those who profited by their being in office , by their hangers-on , and by such men as Mr. Waithman , the city patriot , who was looking out for a place with as much eagerness and anxiety as a cat would watch to pounce upon a mouse : a few such men as these were mortified and hurt at the fall of those to whom they were looking up for situations of profit , and for pensions , which were to be extorted from the pockets of the people  but the nation at large rejoiced at the downfal of these upstart , hypocritical pretenders to patriotism .
The people knew that they should not gain any thing by the change  they knew that the Pittites were open and avowed enemies to the liberties of the people  and , therefore , they did not expect any good from them .
But the Whigs had professed every thing , and performed nothing  they had grossly deceived the people , and , in revenge for their treachery , everyone rejoiced at their fall .
How many a good and staunch friend to Liberty did I know , at this time , who became for ever neutralized , in consequence of having been deceived in Fox  they now made up their minds never again to place any confidence in any political professions , from whomsoever they might come .


Mr. Pitt was interred , with great funeral pomp , on the 22nd day of February .
On the 29th of April , the Commons impeached Lord Melville  and , after being convicted by the unanimous verdict of the whole nation , he was acquitted by a majority of his brother peers .
On the 12th of June , peace was signed between the Emperor of France and our magnanimous ally the Emperor of Russia : on the 20th of July , and on the 6th of August , the sanctified Emperor of Austria abdicated the throne of Germany , and declared himself the hereditary Emperor of Austria .


On the 13th of September , Mr. Fox died at Chiswick .
Oh !
what an injury has the character of human nature sustained by his not having died one year before !
If Mr. Fox had been taken from this world at the time when Mr. Pitt died , his name would have been immortalized , and he would have been handed down to posterity as one of the brightest and purest instances of political patriotism .
But , alas !
he unfortunately lived to make one of the Whig ministry , one of the `` Talents '' in 1806 , and his deeds are recorded in the TEN acts of the Whigs , as I have enumerated them above .


About this period the conduct of the Princess of Wales was investigated by a committee of the privy council .
This affair , which was called the `` Delicate Investigation , '' lasted some time , and caused a considerable sensation throughout the country .
It created great anxiety amongst politicians to ascertain what was the nature and extent of the inquiry  but it was studiously kept a profound secret , very much to the injury of the Princess , because , amongst the Prince of Wales 's friends , there were not wanting friends , aspersers of character , to whisper away her fair fame .


Lord Lauderdale went to Paris on an embassy , to negotiate peace , but soon returned without any successful termination of his mission .
Mr. Fox was buried by a public funeral , in Westminster Abbey , on the 10th of October , and was attended by his numerous friends , which composed a great portion of the men of talent belonging to both Houses of Parliament .
One act of the Whig ministry deserves to be recorded with the highest praise  and this is a proof that few men are so worthless but they possess some good qualities .
If the Whig ministers had , in other respects , conducted themselves with even a small portion of becoming decency towards the nation  and , if they had not perpetuated a system of white slavery at home , which they certainly did in almost every measure that they proposed to and carried through Parliament , they would have been immortalised by the abolition of the black slave trade abroad .
But , in this measure of abolishing the slave trade , the canting Saints , with Wilberforce at their head , joined them with as great an avidity as they supported every measure to curtail the rights and liberties of the people at home .
Lord Henry Petty stamped his character as a statesman , by becoming a humble imitator of Mr. Pitt , even so far as to eulogise the greatest of all frauds and humbugs , the 11 Sinking Fund . ''
But this was always a subject which tickled John Gull 's ear , at the same time that it puzzled his brains , and emptied his pockets .


The Parliament was dissolved , and a general election took place in November , 1806 .
The Whigs thought that , at all popular places , they should bring in their friends with a high hand .
They , however , were very much deceived  -- they were warmly opposed every where , and , instead of being , as they had heretofore been , the popular candidates , they were in all quarters unpopular , and nothing but ministerial influence gained them their seats .
In several places they were thrown out .
The electors for the borough of Southwark rejected Mr. Tierney , and he was obliged to come in for a ministerial rotten borough .
Mr. Sheridan was opposed by Mr. Paul , for Westminster , where he was evidently far from being popular .
The Whigs being in place and power , exercised the most unconstitutional means to carry their elections  they proved themselves much more barefaced in exercising their corrupt influence than the Pittites ever had , and they unblushingly set the opinion of the people at complete defiance .
In Hampshire , Lord Temple behaved in the most arbitrary manner , and attempted to dictate in the most overbearing way  but , in doing so to Sir William Heathcote , he behaved so insolently , that the old Pittite of a baronet exposed him to his party , which caused the greatest indignation in the breast of every independent freeholder throughout the county and the kingdom .


One of our members for Wiltshire , Ambrose Goddard , of Swindon , being old and superannuated , resigned , and one of an old family , RICHARD LONG , of Rood Ashton , was to be foisted upon the county by an arrangement made between two clubs , without consulting the wishes of the freeholders .
Mr. Goddard had resigned in consequence of some questions that I had put to him at a former election , as to his neglect of duty  which neglect he confessed arose from ill health and inability to attend in his place , in consequence of his age  and this rendered it too ridiculous for him to offer himself again .
Mr. Richard Long , of Rood Ashton , was a fox-hunting country squire , without any other qualification to be a Member of Parliament than that of belonging to an ancient family of the county  in fact , he was proverbially a man of very inferior knowledge , remarkable only for being a stupid country squire , who , although a sportsman , scarcely knew how to address his tenants on his health being drank on a rent-day .


At a former election for the county , I attended on the day of nomination , at the townhall at Devizes , and , after Ambrose Goddard and Henry Penruddock Wyndham , Esgrs. , had , in the usual form , been proposed and seconded , when the sheriff was about to put it to the vote , I stepped forward , and desired that , before the show of hands was taken , I might ask a question or two of the candidates who were the late members .
This produced a murmur amongst the old electioneering stagers of the county  and Mr. Salmon , an attorney , who , from his overbearing disposition in the borough of Devizes , had acquired the name of `` King Salmon , '' cried , order !
order !
and begged that the sheriff would proceed to the regular business of the day .
I was young and bashful , but in so good a cause I was not to be put down so easily , although I had never attended at an election meeting before  I therefore respectfully , but firmly , addressed the High Sheriff , and demanded to exercise the right of a freeholder , by asking some questions of the candidates as to their former conduct in Parliament , of which questions I expected a specific answer , before I gave them my suffrage again .
I was once more called to order by some of the ministerial sycophants  but , I added , that , unless I was permitted to put these questions , and received a satisfactory answer , I should feel it my duty to propose some other candidate .


The High Sheriff , Hungerford Penruddock , Esq. , who , by the bye , had an eye himself to the future representation of the county , now interposed , and decided that as a respectable freeholder of Wilts Mr. Hunt had an undoubted right to put any questions which he might think proper to the candidates , before he proceeded to take the show of hands .
Poor old Mr. Goddard mumbled out that he had represented the county for forty years , and had never before had any question put to him .
A profound silence now pervaded the hall , and I proceeded as follows : -- '' Mr. Goddard , I wish to ascertain how you gave your vote in the House of Commons when the bill was brought in imposing a duty of TWO SHILLINGS PER BUSHEL upon malt ?
Wiltshire is a very considerable barley county , and many of your constituents are large barley growers , whose interests are seriously affected by this measure , which will take a very great sum of money annually out of their pockets .
How did you give your vote upon that occasion ? ''
Mr. Goddard hesitated , and stammered out , in a very feeble voice , `` I have been incapacitated by old age and ill-health from attending my duty in Parliament , for the LAST TWO YEARS .
I have never been in the House during that time , and , I fear I shall never be able to attend again . ''


I next turned round and addressed Mr. Wyndham , the other candidate , as follows : -- `` Well , Mr. Wyndham , as your colleague was ` incapacitated ' by old age from attending at all in the House , how did you vote upon this important measure , which so materially affects the interests of your constituents ? ''
Mr. Wyndham , placing his finger upon his right temple , as if to recollect himself , pertly and affectedly replied , '' ` Pon my honour , Mr. Hunt , I can not charge my memory whether I was in the House or not upon that occasion . ''
Upon this , I addressed him , at considerable length , shewing how many acres of barley were grown in the county of Wilts , and what an enormous sum of money would be taken out of the pockets of his constituents  and I proved that this was a tax that affected them a great deal more than the income tax , about which there had very properly been so much said .
I added , that , in this additional duty upon malt and beer , one brewer in the town of Devizes would pay more than the whole inhabitants of the town , amounting to a population of six or seven thousand persons , would pay by the income tax  I urged , that the members for all the other barley counties in the kingdom -- Norfolk , Suffolk , Hertfordshire , Sussex , Hampshire , c. had opposed the measure with all their power and influence  therefore , I wished to know what measures he had taken to oppose and resist the passing of it ?
But all the answer that I could get from our worthy and efficient Member of Parliament , Mr. Wyndham , was , '' ` Pon his honour he could not recollect , could not charge his memory whether he was in the House or not when this measure was discussed and passed ! ''


My efforts on this occasion were , however , in vain , I had no one to second my exertions and inquiries , and the independent electors of Wiltshire proceeded to the business of the day , and once more returned the above two worthy , capable , and efficient representatives , to watch over their rights and liberties , to be the guardians and trustees of their property , and to assist in making those laws which have brought the country to its present state .
I warned them , I began to warn them , thus early  and I continued to warn them against such apathy , such dereliction of principle , as long as I remained amongst them in that county .
My having dared to ask a question and to expose the two venerable representatives of the county in such a public manner was an offence not to be forgiven  and accordingly I was set down as a jacobin and leveller , and was looked upon with an evil eye by the cunning supporters of the system , the parsons , lawyers , and attorneys .
I received the thanks of many of the freeholders privately  but the poor sycophants did not dare to shew their , approbation publicly .
How many of them are there who , when they read this , will recollect the circumstance with shame , and feel a pang of remorse that they did not stand forward at the time to obey the dictates of their conscience .


We will now return to the dissolution of the Parliament in 1806 .
On that occasion I made one more effort to rouse my brother freeholders of the county into a sense of their political rights .
In order to stimulate them to the exercise of those rights , I called upon them in a public address , which I sent to be inserted in the Salisbury and Winchester Journal  and , taking care that there should be no pretence for refusing it , I sent the money to pay for it as an advertisement  but the time-serving proprietors of that paper refused to insert it in the columns of their Journal  I therefore had it printed and published in numerous handbills , which I caused to be pretty generally circulated .
It also obtained admission into one of the Bath newspapers , and Mr. Cobbett , to whom I sent one of the bills , gave it a place in his Political Register .
It will be impossible for me , in these Memoirs , to give all the public documents of this sort which I have sent forth to warn my fellow-countrymen of their danger , and to exhort them to stand up to maintain and defend their rights and liberties  but I will insert this , my first printed address , as I find it in the tenth volume of Cobbett 's Political Register , published in November , 1806  and it will shew that I have always been consistent in my public conduct , and always maintained the same independent principles from that time to this .


`` Mr. Hunt 's Address to the independent Freeholders of the County of Wilts .


`` GENTLEMEN , I flatter myself that a few lines addressed to you by a brother freeholder , ( one who has ever lived among you , and has ever been most sincerely devoted to the liberty and independence of the county , ) will not , at this critical period , be deemed obtrusive , nor wholly unworthy of your serious consideration .


`` Considering , with many of the best disposed characters in the kingdom , that the fate of this country will be in a great measure decided by the approaching election , I think it highly important , that every freeholder should be exhorted to think and act for himself on this occasion .
Let every man remember , that by bartering his liberty at this awful period , he may speedily endanger the very existence of his country .
If you duly reflect on the present situation of the Prussians , and every other power on the Continent that are opposed to our powerful enemy , I think you will agree with me that this moment is the most awful in the history of Europe .
Old England , our country , is not yet subdued  let us hope that she never will  but , it is by every thinking man confessed to be in a very perilous situation -- in such a situation that it can not possibly much longer support its independence , without the extraordinary sacrifices and exertions of the people .
Therefore , it behoves you , my brother freeholders of this county , at this moment in particular , and let me conjure you , as the greatest boon you can bestow on your country ` diligently and impartially to inquire whether all the evils we endure , and all the dangers that threaten us , are not to be ascribed to the folly and the baseness of those who have so shamefully abused their privilege of choosing Members of Parliament . '
The dangers I allude to will ( I fear ) be increased by every post we receive from the Continent  the evils are a system of taxation , which must be felt by us all ( to say the least of it ) to have trebled the paupers of this county , within the last twenty years .
No country is willing to attribute its ruin to its own baseness , but if you tamely submit to have a man thrust down your throats , to be a representative for this county , by the Beckhampton or the Deptford Club , or any other party of men whatever , without your considering whether he be a proper independent character , and capable of executing such an important trust , at this eventful period  if you basely and tamely submit to this worst of degradation -- whether it be from indolence , or whether it be from the worst of all human dependence , the fear of offending Mr. Long or Mr. Short -- you will be a disgrace to your country , and be curst by your posterity for your pusillanimous surrender of those liberties and just rights that were so gloriously secured to you by your forefathers .
I beseech you , let no man deceive himself  if he act in this manner , I am persuaded that he may live to be convinced that he has , by losing this opportunity , been in a great degree instrumental in his country 's ruin .
-- Is there a man among you so insensible as not to feel the weight of the present taxes , and yet so hardened as to go to the hustings and give his vote to a mere cypher : -- to a man from whom he has not the least reason to expect any thing but a tame acquiescence in the measures of any one who happens to be the minister of the day !
The man who is now looked out to be our new representative , his very best friends do not speak of any qualification that he possesses , to make him worthy of that honourable situation  they only tell us of his uncle 's long purse !
therefore , in good truth , we may as well be repre - sented by his uncle 's old three-corner'd hat .
And as for the other member , even in his youthful days he was no better in the House of Commons than an old woman .
Is there no honourable and independent man to be found in the county of Wilts , capable of sustaining such a charge ?
I , myself , have no doubt but there are many  but it is that cursed long purse , and an idea that the freeholders of this county will never exert themselves for their independence , that deter many from stepping forward that would do honour to the trust reposed in them .
There are a number of freeholders in this county that are independent , if they would for one moment think themselves so .
Then let us say we will have a man of our own choosing , as free of expense to himself as we would wish him to be honest and true to the confidence reposed in him .
But if you let this present opportunity slip , I , for one , will never despair  I shall look on you with feelings of contempt and indignation  I shall wait patiently for the day when we shall be enabled to exert ourselves effectually for the preservation of those just rights and liberties that are the bulwarks of our glorious and blessed Constitution .


I am , Gentlemen , with great respect , Your obedient humble servant , `` H. HUNT . ''


`` Chisenbury House , Oct. 30th. , 1806 . ''


This appeal to the freeholders of Wilts gave great umbrage to the numerous friends of Mr. LONG , or rather to the whole of the friends of the Pitt system , which evidently included Whigs as well as Tories  but it produced no beneficial effect upon the senseless and inanimate freeholders of the county of Wilts .
I was considered a very impudent fellow for my pains , though the almost universal whisper amongst the freeholders was , `` what Mr. Hunt says is true enough , but what use is it ? ''
The election took place , and Mr. Wyndham and Mr. Long were chosen without any opposition .
The Whig ministry , or , ironically speaking , `` All the Talents , '' were discarded in the Spring of 1807 .
Lord Eldon took the seals of office , and , to the astonisbment of the whole nation , Mr. Perceval was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer , and the whole gang of Pitt 's underlings came into place  and the Ministry was consequently composed of Castlereagh , Canning , Liverpool , the Roses and Longs  while , to crown the whole , Sir Vicary Gibbs was appointed Attorney General .
As soon as the new Ministers were firmly seated in the saddle and settled in their places , they caused the Parliament to be once more dissolved .


During the last election , the people of Westminster , in consequence of the exertions of Mr. Paull and the able friends by whom he was surrounded , had made such a rapid progress in political knowledge , that they were quite prepared to break the trammels in which they had hitherto been bound by the two political factions of Ins and Outs , nicknamed Whigs and Tories .
This change was brought about by the strenuous personal efforts of Mr. Cobbett , and by the excellent , clear , patriotic , and convincing addresses which he weekly published in his Political Register , seconded by the assistance of some very intelligent , public spirited men , amongst which number was a very worthy young friend of Liberty , Mr. ABRAHAM HEWLINGS , and the famous Mr. POWELL , the attorney , who lately cut such a conspicuous figure in the character of attorney for the prosecution of the Bill of Pains and Penalties against the Queen .
By these persons the spirit of the electors of Westminster appeared to be roused to a proper sense of the power which they possessed , to return their own members in spite of the intrigues of the two factions .


Mr. Paull had become very popular by the exertions which he had - ' made to bring the Marquis Wellesley 's conduct in India before the public , by an impeachment  and it was pretty generally believed that he would come in for Westminster at the head of the poll .
The moment that the Parliament was dissolved , he and his friends in Westminster were upon the alert , and a meeting was called at the Crown and Anchor , to consult upon the best means of securing his return , which was doubted by no one  however , the cursed bane of all political liberty , jealousy interposed .
Sir F. Burdett and Mr. Paull had been upon the most intimate terms , and the Baronet had strained every nerve to promote and secure the return of Mr. Paull for Westminster  and if he could have secured the return of that gentleman by his own interest and popularity , Mr. Paull would have been returned  but the misfortune was , that Mr. Paull had himself become very popular , deservedly popular , sufficiently so , indeed , to have secured his seat by his own exertions , if Sir Francis Burdett had stood neuter .
But Mr. Paull had no wish of this sort  he by no means desired to push himself above Sir Francis Burdett in the scale of political popularity  neither , on the other hand , was he quite prepared to act as the tool and puppet of Sir Francis Burdett .


Mr. Paull not having the slightest idea of the working of the green-eyed monster , jealousy , in the Baronet 's breast , a dinner meeting of Mr. Paull 's friends was advertised for the next day , at the Crown and Anchor , Sir Francis Burdett in the chair .
The time arrived , the party assembled , but Sir Francis Burdett did not appear  a circumstance which threw a damp upon the meeting .
Mr. Jones Burdett , however , attended , and read a letter from his brother , Sir Francis , addressed to the meeting , censuring in strong language the use that , without his consent , had been made of his name , and reflecting upon Mr. Paull .
This caused a very unpleasant sensation in the meeting , and an elucidation of the business was demanded by some of the party .
It appeared that Mr. Paull and his friends had announced the name of Sir Francis to be in the chair , as they had frequently done on a former occasion , without previously consulting the Baronet .
Following the generous and undisguised impulse of his heart , and acting upon the principle of `` do as you would be done unto  '' Mr. Paull had used the Baronet 's name , under the firm conviction that his friend Sir Francis would hurry to his post at a moment 's notice to assist him , as he , Mr. Paull , would have done , at any hour of the day or night , to have served Sir Francis .
But Mr. Paull was deceived  and some of his friends , who knew Sir F. Burdett better than he did , saw that the apple of discord had been thrown down by the implacable fiend jealousy , they anticipated what would follow , and they retired from the contest in disgust .


Mr. Paull , having had such a gross insult offered to him by a man whom he had hitherto esteemed his friend , and being wounded at such a moment in the most sensitive part , called upon Sir Francis Burdett for an explanation  and this being refused , he demanded satisfaction in the field , as a dernier resort , when he found that no terms of conciliation were likely to be acceded to by the Baronet .
They met , and on the first fire both were wounded .
Sir Francis Burdett received his antagonist 's ball in his thigh , and Mr. Paull had the top of his shin bone shot away .
They were both severely wounded .
This caused a great sensation , not only throughout the metropolis but also throughout the kingdom .
The public press , which was hostile to both the parties , made the worst of the affair  but they leaned to the Baronet , and affected to pity him , as having been stung by a viper of his own fostering .
The truth was , that the press upon this occasion , as upon all others , had a leaning to the Aristocracy , and Sir Francis Burdett was no mean part of the Aristocracy .
He was an old Baronet , with very large landed property , although he was supposed to have spent nearly a hundred thousand pounds , four years of his income , in his contests for the county of Middlesex .
Sir Francis Burdett had besides endeared himself to the friends of Liberty all over the kingdom , by his public spirited exertions in and out of Parliament  and no man was a more warm and zealous admirer of the Baronet than I was .
Like the great majority of his friends , I was enraged with Mr. Paull , and condemned his hasty , and , as I considered it , ungrateful attack upon the life of his patron , Sir Francis .
This feeling was propagated with great assiduity by that part of the public press which was called liberal  and , taking advantage of this feeling , together with the pity excited by the severe and dangerous wound he was supposed to have received , the friends of the Baronet immediately came to a determination to propose him as a candidate for Westminster .
Mr. Clayton Jennings , a barrister , took the lead , and during the contest appeared every day on the hustings as the Baronet 's `` locum tenens . ''
However , few , if any of those who assembled as a Committee , were electors , and it was with the greatest difficulty that they could get the promise of two householders , to propose and second the nomination of Sir Francis Burdett .
The great fear was , that the proposer and seconder would make themselves liable for the expenses of the hustings  and , as they had no reliance on the Baronet to indemnify them , this difficulty increased almost up to the hour appointed for the nomination .
At length a Mr. GLOSSOP , a tallow-chandler , volunteered to propose the Baronet , if any one would second him  which , after a great deal of persuasion , one ADAMS , a currier and leather-dresser in Drury-lane , agreed to do .
But , such was the dread of the expense , and so little acquainted was this person with the rights and duty of an elector , that , when it came to the pinch , as I am credibly informed , he actually run from his agreement , and refused to do it  so that the Baronet , when proposed , would have been left without a seconder , had not a young man , of the name of COWLAM , stepped forward and performed the office .
I have heard poor COWLAM laugh most heartily at the timidity and meanness of this ADAMS , who , when the danger was over , claimed the merit of having seconded the Baronet at the nomination  which claim he has repeated ever since , and , on the merit of this he bravely swaggers and struts about at all the Rump dinners , he being one of the most conspicuous and notorious members of that August body .
COWLAM , who was much too honest and sincere a lover of liberty to remain long either a dupe or a tool of this gang , let me into almost all the intrigues , tricks , and gambols of the junta of Westminster patriots , which I shall expose and lay bare to public view , as I proceed with my Memoirs .


The public mind was very much agitated by the duel of Sir Francis Burdett and Mr. Paull , but the newspaper editors all appeared to throw the blame upon the latter  and even those who at the former election had warmly supported him , with very few exceptions , abandoned him .
The cry was raised against him , and he was basely deserted by those who , even at the risk of their lives , ought to have supported him .
In justice to a much lamented deceased individual , the late Abraham Hewlings , Esq. , I must state that he stood firmly and honestly by his friend Paull , to the last moment  but the cry was for Burdett , and his friends gathered those laurels which poor Paull had so deservedly won at the former election .
If Sir F. Burdett had only stood neuter , nothing could have prevented the return of Mr. Paull  but with the support of Sir F. Burdett , similar to what he had received from him at the former contest , his election would have been sure .


The friends of the Baronet carried his election with a high hand , and he was returned at the head of the poll , by an immense majority  there having been polled for him 5,134 electors .
Lord Cochrane polled 3,708  so that Sir Francis bad a majority of 1,426 votes above Lord Cochrane , the other successful candidate  Mr. Sheridan polled only 2,615 , so that the votes of Sir Francis nearly doubled those of Mr. Sheridan , the late member  Mr. Paull polled no more than 269 votes .


The friends of freedom , throughout the whole country , were delighted with the success of Sir Francis and Lord Cochrane  or rather with the triumph of the electors of Westminster , in having thus rescued the representation of their city out of the hands of the two great factions of the country , which had always divided the representation of that city between them  the Whigs and Tories having each returned a member .
This was , therefore , considered as a great triumph for the friends of reform  for neither Sir F. Burdett nor Lord Cochrane was considered as being a Whig or a Tory , but as a friend to the liberties of the people .
Lord Cochrane was certainly an officer of his Majesty 's navy , but he had on various occasions , during the last Parliament , expressed himself as a friend to an inquiry into the abuses of Government , and particularly into the abuses of the navy , with which he was intimately acquainted , and to expose which he had proved himself to be both able and willing .
To some of the electors of Westminster he had likewise pledged himself to support the cause of Reform in the House of Commons .
He was consequently considered a more eligible member for the electors of Westminster than the brilliant Mr. Sheridan  and he was accordingly elected with Sir F. Burdett .


I was at this time residing in Belle Vue , at Clifton , winding up the brewing concern , in which I had unfortunately embarked .
I had returned home out of Wiltshire , late at night , and had lain longer in bed than usual , when the servant came to my room , and informed me that an opposition was anticipated for the election at the city of Bristol , as a new candidate had offered .
This new candidate was Sir John Jarvis , an Irishman , who was the Commander of the Bristol Rifle Corps of Volunteers .
I knew something of the politics of Bristol , but I could not fathom the drift of this opposition , as I could not make out what claim Sir John Jarvis had to be a more popular character than the late members , Colonel Baillie and Mr. Bragge Bathurst .
To be sure Mr. Bathurst was a ministerial man , a brother-in-law of the Addingtons , and therefore very unpopular  but as Sir John Jarvis was also a ministerial man , there appeared something mysterious in the business .
However , the servant informed me that the populace were drawing him round the city in his carriage , and that he was evidently the popular candidate .
After all , it ought to be no great wonder that any one should have been popular that was opposed to Mr. Bragge Bathurst .


On hearing this intelligence I put on my clothes , and having taken a hasty breakfast , I proceeded towards Bristol , determined to be an eye-witness of the proceedings of the election .
When I got upon the Exchange all was confusion , Sir John Jarvis was addressing the people in an incoherent , unintelligible speech , in which , however , he professed great patriotism , and vowed that he would oppose Mr. Bathurst to the last moment , and keep the poll open as long as there was a freeman unpolled .
He then alighted from his carriage , and retired into the large room in the Bush tavern , where he was followed by a great number of the electors , and others  and amongst that number I made one .
He was attended by a noisy blustering person , who I found was an attorney , of the name of Cornish , who also was professing what he would do , and how he would support his friend Sir John Jarvis .
Hundreds of freemen pressed forward , and offered their copies of their freedom , as an earnest that they would voluntarily give him their votes  but it struck me that all was talk , and no one appeared to take any efficient steps to promote or secure the election of Sir John Jarvis , who himself appeared to be all bluster , and to be acting without the least system or arrangement , calculated to secure even the first requisites to commence an election .


I now took the liberty to ask the candidate whether he was prepared with any one to propose and second his nomination  to which he gave me a vague and unmeaning answer , apparently as if he did not understand what I meant by a person to propose and second him .
I then appealed to Mr. Cornish , the worthy attorney , who answered me in a similar manner  and he evidently appeared not to be in the secret any more than myself .
I next addressed the multitude , to inquire which of them was prepared to propose Sir John Jarvis , and which to second the proposition ?
All said they were ready to powl for Sir John , but no one was engaged to perform the necessary part of the ceremony to which I had alluded , and it likewise seemed very plain that neither Sir John nor his attorney took any pains to secure any one to do this .
At this critical moment intimation was given , that the Sheriffs were proceeding with the other Candidates to the Guildhall , to commence the election .
Sir John and his agent were about to move very deliberately towards the scene of action , when I addressed him as follows : -- `` I see that you are either unaware of the forms to be observed , or you are unprepared , Sir John .
If , however , when it comes to the proper time , no one else proposes you , I will : though I am no freeman of Bristol , yet I will undertake to do this , as it will give your friends an opportunity of coming forward , and it will prevent the Sheriffs from hastily closing the election , which they are very likely to do if you are not prepared with some friends to propose and second your nomination . ''
He answered , as we went along together , `` Very well , Sir . ''
In this way we proceeded to , and entered , the Guildhall , and mounted the hustings together .
The usual proclamation being read by the Under-Sheriff , an old mumbling fellow , of the name of Palmer , some one proposed Colonel Baillie , the late member , as a fit and proper person to represent the city again .
Colonel Baillie was a Whig member , and Colonel of the Bristol Volunteers , being a Whig , or Low-party-man , as they called him .
This proposition was received with very general cheers and approbation .
The next person proposed was Mr. Bragge Batburst .
He being a ministerial man , the speaker was repeatedly interrupted with loud shouts of disapprobation , which continued without intermission till the conclusion of the speeches of those who proposed and seconded him .
The Sheriffs were now about to proclaim these two candidates duly elected .
There stood Sir John , looking as wild as a newly taken Irishman , fresh from the bogs of that country  and there stood the electors , bawling Sir John Jarvis for ever !
while the Sheriff was very deliberately proceeding to declare the proposed candidates duly elected .
As I had narrowly watched their motions , I now stepped forward , and addressed the electors in at least an animated speech , in which I proposed Sir John Jarvis as the most eligible person to represent them in Parliament .
During the time that I was thus addressing them , the most dinning uproar arose .
I was loudly and enthusiastically applauded by the multitude , the great body of the electors  and as loudly and earnestly opposed and hooted by the well-dressed rabble upon the hustings and its vicinity , consisting of the whole of the Corporation , the Clergy , the Attorneys , and their myrmidons  but I persisted and delivered some wholesome truths as to the state of thraldom in which the electors had hitherto been bound and held by the two factions of Whigs and Tories , who had always in Bristol divided the representation and the loaves and fishes between them , leaving the electors nothing but the empty name of freemen .
The people were in an ecstacy of joy to hear this language , which so completely corresponded with their feelings , which was so very different from that which they had been accustomed to hear from the candidates of the contending factions , and which language of truth also enraged the agents of those factions almost to a state of madness .
The violence and threats of those despicable agents were open and undisguised , and exceeded all bounds  nay , some of them actually proceeded to personal violence , and began to lay hands upon me , to pull me down .
As , however , I was no chicken , I easily repelled those who ventured too near , and threatened them , if they did not keep at a distance , that I would call in the aid of those who would soon make a clearance of the hustings , if they were disposed to try their hands at an experiment of that sort .
The people immediately took the hint , and rushed forward to support me , and to punish those who had assailed me  but I told them there was then no occasion for their interference , as the gentry were peaceable .


I proceeded with my haranguing , and those who were not in the secret actually began to be alarmed , for fear there should be a contested election , which they had by no means expected .
I eulogised Sir John Jarvis , cried his patriotic virtues up to the skies , and descanted upon his talent , his resolution , and his invincible love of religious and civil liberty .
I saw that those around me were astonished at my language , and , what was rather surprising to me , I perceived that Sir John looked as much astonished as any of my hearers  and the reader will also be astonished when I inform him , that I had never seen Sir John Jarvis before in my life , to speak to him , and in fact that I knew nothing about him .
I only spoke of him that which my imagination suggested to me an honest candidate ought to be  and , what is more extraordinary , as I was a stranger in Bristol , so the people were strangers to me , for I saw scarcely a single person amongst the whole assemblage whom I could call by name .
I recollect there was one old Alderman , of the name of Bengough , who was almost frantic during my speech , and some of his friends were obliged to hold him down by mere force .
The cry was , who is he ?
What is his name ?
Is he a freeman or a freeholder of the county ?
At the intervals when the multitude gained silence for me , by overwhelming and drowning the clamour of my opponents with their shouts of hear him !
he shall be heard !!
Bravo , Bravo !!!
c. I went on with my speech .
The Right Honourable Bragge Bathurst , the White Lion , or Ministerial Candidate , stood near me in great agony , which I did not fail to heighten , by giving him a well-merited castigation for his time-serving devotion to the Ministers , his never-failing vote for war , and for every tax which was proposed to be laid upon the people .
I urged the absolute necessity of the Electors of Bristol returning a member the exact reverse of Mr. Bragge , which I described Sir John to be .
But these compliments to the popular Candidate , appeared to be received by no one less graciously than by Sir John himself  and instead of his giving me , by nods or gestures of assent , any encouragement to pursue my theme when I met his eye , which at first I frequently sought , I received the most chilling frowns and discouraging shakes of the head .
Though I had no doubt now but I had mistaken my man , I , nevertheless , concluded by proposing him as a Candidate to represent the city of Bristol in the ensuing Parliament which proposition was received by nine distinct and tremendous cheers .


Silence being restored , the Sheriff demanded , in a very respectful tone , if I was either a freeman or a freeholder ?
I replied that I was a stranger in Bristol , I was neither as yet  but that I hoped soon to become both .
This caused immense clamour , and Alderman Bengough and his supporters , some of the well-dressed rabble of the city of Bristol , roared out lustily , `` turn him out , turn him out . ''
My friends , however , or rather supporters , who were as to numbers and physical strength more than twenty to one , reiterated , `` touch him if you dare ! ''
I contended that it was not at all necessary for a Candidate to be proposed either by a freeman or a freeholder  that Sir John was entitled to offer himself without any such formality , and that if one man polled for him that made him a legal Candidate  and I urged him to do so , but he stood mute and shuffled from the point .
Now , for the first time , I began to discover that it was all a hoax , and that the patriotic Irishman was nothing more nor less than a scape-goat , a mere tool in the hands of the White Lion club , or ministerial faction  a mere scarecrow , whom they had set up to deter any other person from offering himself , or rather to prevent the freemen from seeking another Candidate  and it must be confessed that their plan succeeded to a miracle .
In the midst of this squabbling the Sheriffs very coolly declared that Colonel Baillie and the Right Honourable Bragge Bathurst were duly elected , without any opposition , and the return was made accordingly .


I was at that time a complete novice in electioneering matters , neither had I the least idea of offering myself , or indeed any ambition to be a Member of Parliament .
I was , however , so completely disgusted with the conduct of the Sheriff , the factions , and their tool , Sir John Jarvis , that I addressed the enraged multitude , who felt that they had been cheated and tricked out of an election , and I promised them that , whenever there was another vacancy or a dissolution of Parliament , I would pledge myself to come forward as a Candidate , or bring some independent person , who would stand a contest for the representation of their city .
The people were excessively indignant at the treatment which they had received , and they hooted , hallooed , and even pelted Mr. Bragge and his partizans out of the Hall , and with considerable difficulty the latter reached the White Lion , where a gaudy gilded car was provided , as usual , in which the Candidate was to be chaired .
I left the scene in disgust , and returned to my house at Clifton .
Before , however , I had taken half my dinner , which was waiting for me when I reached home , a messenger arrived , either a Mayor 's or Sheriff 's officer , to inform me that the populace had hurled Mr. Bragge Bathurst out of his car , and that he had escaped with great difficulty into a house , which the mob were pulling down , and had nearly demolished  and that Mr. Bragge 's life would certainly be sacrificed if I did not come down to Bristol and save it , by interfering with the populace to spare him .


The event which occasioned me to be called back to Bristol was not wholly unexpected  for when I left the Guildhall I had overheard some of those who appeared to take the lead , and to have influence over the populace , solemnly declare their determination to have an election , even if it were at the expense of the life of Mr. Bathurst , against whom they vowed vengeance in such a tone and manner that I thought it proper to warn his friends  and , accordingly , before I left the town , I penetrated on horseback through the crowd in Broad-street , and with considerable pains and risk gained access to the White Lion , amidst the conflicts of the populace and the constables , or , more correctly speaking , bludgeon-men , employed by the White Lion club .
The blood was streaming from their broken pates , and amongst the number of the wounded Mr. Peter Clisshold , the attorney , stood conspicuous , with his head laid open , his skull bare , and the blood flowing in streams down upon the pavement , as he stood under the archway of the White Lion gate .
( He will recollect it if he should read this . )
I desired to see some of the Committee , who came to me immediately .
I communicated to them what I had overheard , and I strongly recommended , on the score of policy , that they should not attempt to chair their friend Mr. Bathurst , for , if they did , it was my decided opinion that some serious mischief would happen .
They , however , informed me that they had determined at all hazards to have Mr. Bathurst chaired immediately  and , I shall never forget the exulting manner in which Mr. Clisshold declared that they had five hundred bludgeon-men sworn in as constables , and , as they would act in concert and in a body , they were more than a match for five thousand of the mob .
I replied that I had done my duty , in communicating that which came accidentally to my knowledge , and if they had not prudence enough to benefit by the information , it was their business and not mine .
I then retired through the immense multitude , mounted on my beautiful grey horse , Model , the populace making way for and cheering me as I passed .
As I have before stated , I no sooner arrived at home , and was seated at my dinner , than a message was brought , requesting my interference with the populace , who were demolishing the house into which Mr. Bragge Bathurst had retreated , after he had been handled so unceremoniously by the enraged people .
If I had done by them as I know they would have done by me , I should have taken my dinner very quietly , and left the fury of the multitude to be quelled by those who had created it .
But , actuated by the sublime precept , `` do as you would that others should do unto you , '' I ordered my horse to be instantly re-saddled and brought to the door  and having mounted him I was in High-street , the scene of action , in a few minutes .
There I found the people assembled , in immense numbers .
Having broken in the windows and window frames of the house in which the hapless member , Mr. Bathurst , had concealed himself , they only waited for a cessation of throwing brick-bats and stones to rush into the house  which , if they had once done , his forfeited life would have been the inevitable price of the temerity of his friends .


The moment I galloped up there was a partial suspension of hostilities , and the multitude received me with three cheers .
No time was to be lost  one moment 's indecision would have been the death-signal of the Right Honourable Bragge Bathurst .
I did not hesitate an instant  but , taking off my hat , I addressed them in a tone of expostulation , condemning their folly  and I then declared that I had a measure of much greater importance to communicate to them than that of wreaking their vengeance upon Mr. Bathurst , and if they would follow me , I would instantly , upon reaching Brandon Hill , communicate it to them .
This was said by me with so much confidence , that they instantly assented to my proposition by three cheers .
`` Come , follow me , then , my Lads , '' I firmly rejoined , as I wheeled my horse round , and the whole crowd , consisting of many thousands , instantly began to move after me up High-street , down Clare-street , over the draw-bridge , through College Green , and upon Brandon Hill , over the high gate of which I leaped my horse .
As soon as I got upon the center of the gravel walk that leads across the hill , I halted and began to address them .
My only object was , to draw them from the victim of their intended vengeance .
But having , by a bold and decisive effort , effected this purpose , I had now a painful and rather a dangerous duty to perform , that of satisfying the enraged multitude that I had not duped them .
I therefore boldly censured their hasty and indiscreet conduct , in proceeding to such a violent measure as that of seeking the life of one who was merely the agent of a corrupt system .
This was received with partial murmurs  but I , nevertheless , continued successfully to combat the indiscreet violence of the most sanguine , and , I soon found that , by dint of reason and argument , I had prevailed upon the great majority to agree with me .
I then took occasion to dilate upon the consequences that must have followed the taking the life of a fellow creature , without the intervention of judge or jury .
I was instantly answered , that their opponents had taken the lives of a great many , without judge or jury , some years before , when the Herefordshire militia , with Lord Bateman as their Colonel , had fired upon the inhabitants during the disturbances on Bristol bridge .
I was obliged to admit the truth of this , and urge the folly of following so bad and murderous an example .
I then informed them who I was , and told them that I would pledge myself to come forward , on the very next election , and give those who had votes an opportunity of exercising their franchises for a Candidate who would not betray and desert them , as Sir John Jarvis had that day done .
This proposition was received with cheers .
I also told them I would immediately form some plan , to enable the freemen to take up their freedom , by means of a voluntary weekly subscription amongst themselves  which plan should be carried into execution without delay .
And as they had done me the kindness of patiently listening to , and acting upon , my recommendation to give up the desperate project which they had formed , I begged to offer them a drink of my genuine beer , not as a bribe , but as an earnest of my intention to carry my promise into execution .


Pointing now to my brewery at Jacob 's Well , at the bottom of the hill , I said , once more , with confidence , `` follow me , my Lads ! ''
Till this time I was not even known by name to one in twenty of the multitude .
This proposition was received with applause , and they followed me to the door of my brewery , where I ordered three hogsheads of strong beer to be rolled out and divided amongst them .
This , together with my promise of future attention to their rights of election , restored them to good humor  and , upon my addressing them again , they promised to return to their homes as soon as they had finished their beer , which they did , almost to a man , without even the slightest disturbance taking place afterwards that night .
I had no sooner drawn the people from the house in which Mr. Bathurst was concealed , than he took the opportunity of escaping out of the city , in a return post-chaise , to Bath .
Thus did I save the life of a man whose partizans would have put me to death , without the slightest remorse , if they had had it in their power .
Many liberal-minded persons , of all parties , applauded my conduct and presence of mind  but I was informed that one of the leaders of the White Lion club said , when he was told of the means that I had used to draw the people from their premeditated victim , that he only wished the mob had broken into my cellar , and turned into the streets all my beer , amounting at that time nearly to three thousand barrels  and this was the only thanks I ever received from any of the faction , from that day to this .
As for Mr. Bathurst , he never had the manliness nor the candour to acknowledge the service in any way .
But the Right Honourable Gentleman possibly may have thought of the circumstance when he was sitting as one of the Privy Council , who advised the thanks that were given , in the name of the King , to the Manchester Yeomanry and Magistrates !
What must have been the feelings of this Right Honourable Privy Councillor when , as one of that immaculate body , he advised the prosecution against me for attending the Manchester meeting  and advised it , that a sort of blind might be obtained for the deeds that had been committed by the military bravoes on that day !
What must have been the feelings of this gentleman , if the recollection that I had saved his life came across his mind , at the time when in all probability he was one of the same Cabinet who advised the length of the imprisonment that the Judges of the Court of King 's Bench should impose upon me !
Ah , Mr. Bragge Bathurst !
what will be your feelings when you read this ?
When your life was in jeopardy , the power of saving that life was accidentally placed in my hands  I hesitated not to save that life , at the imminent risk of my own  and how grateful has been the return !
But , Mr. Bathurst , I am a million times happier a man in my dungeon than you are in a palace .
It was reserved for Mr. Bragge Bathurst , as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , to reward Parson Hay for his deeds on the 16th of August 1819 , at Manchester  to reward him with the living of Rochdale , with , it is said , two thousand five hundred pounds a year !
But I am a much happier man in my dungeon than Parson Hay , or his relation , Mr. Bragge Bathurst , is  though the one is the Rector of Rochdale , and the other Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , with all its revenue and patronage .


The news soon after this reached Bristol , that Sir Francis Burdett had been returned at the head of the poll for Westminster , by a large majority .
This gave new life and spirits to the friends of liberty all over the kingdom , and no one participated more warmly than I did in the general joy which this news created , for I was one of the Baronet 's most enthusiastic admirers .
I immediately proposed a public dinner in Bristol , to celebrate the joyful event  but I could get no one to join me .
There were several who said that if the dinner took place they would attend it , but they would not take upon themselves any of the responsibility of ordering such a dinner , nor of the risk and expense attending the getting of it up .
There was , for one , a Mr. Lee , a surgeon , who was very ready to join in the dinner to commemorate the Westminster victory , but he shrank from bearing any part of the onus of setting it on foot , either in purse or in person .
But , having once proposed a measure , I was not to be foiled in that way .
I therefore , after some considerable difficulty in finding any one to take the order for a dinner for such a purpose , took the whole expense and responsibility upon myself , by ordering dinner for a hundred persons , at the large room in the Trout Tavern , Stokes ' Croft .


The dinner was now advertised and placarded , myself to be in the chair .
In the mean time , every effort was used to run down the dinner , and to intimidate persons from attending it  and on the morning of the day that was appointed for our meeting , the walls of the city were placarded with the following notice , from authority -- `` DANGER to be apprehended from the proposed dinner to be held this day at the Trout Tavern , '' c. c..
The word DANGER was printed in letters six inches long .
The soldiers were ordered to be upon duty , and every species of threat and intimidation was resorted to , in order to deter people from attending the much-dreaded dinner .
Nevertheless , in spite of all this , a hundred persons sat down together , not ten of whom had ever seen each other 's faces before .
I took the head of the principal table , and Mr. Lee that of the other .
We spent a most gratifying day , in the greatest harmony , and parted with the same good humor  every one being pleased with his entertainment , which had proved `` the feast of reason and the flow of soul  '' in the fullest sense of that phrase .
The authorities used every laudable endeavour to make a disturbance , and create that danger which they pretended to apprehend  and the time-serving despicable editors of the Bristol Newspapers joined in the cry .
Nay , some of them bellowed aloud and declared that this dinner meeting , to celebrate the triumph of the electors of Westminster over the two corrupt factions , the Whigs and Tories , was the forerunner of a revolution  and they insinuated that I , who was the promoter of this dinner , was the instigator of the riots which occurred on the day of the election , and that the fellows who met to dine were the very same who assembled and threatened the life of their amiable and patriotic member , Mr. Bragge Bathurst .


These falsehoods did not , however , either prevent or disturb our dinner .
The infamous hand-bill did indeed produce what its manufacturers called a mob , for the people assembled in the street , opposite the Trout Tavern , in great numbers : but upon their being addressed by me , and cautioned not to suffer themselves to be caught in the trap laid for them by their enemies , but to retire peaceably to their homes , they gave us three cheers and dispersed immediately .
It was very fortunate that they did so , for it was ascertained that the tender-hearted authorities were so excessively anxious to preserve the peace which they had sworn to keep , that they had called out the military , in order to disperse , at the point of the bayonet , that multitude which they had themselves collected together by their ridiculous and evil-disposed hand-bill of `` Danger , c. '' My timely advice and admonition to the people had , however , deprived them of their prey , and thus the sacrifice of human blood was prevented  for when the troops marched by , with bayonets fixed , there were not ten persons more than usual in the streets .
This was a great disappointment to those who had got up the precious hand-bill of `` Danger to be apprehended  '' and , because I had the prudence to foresee and to frustrate this brutal and sanguinary scheme of the authorities , I was set down as a most dangerous fellow , and an enemy to the Government .


I might now , in fact , be considered to have fairly entered the field of politics  for I was completely identified with this meeting and dinner , at which we passed several spirited resolutions , approving the conduct of the electors of Westminster , and strongly urging the freemen of Bristol to follow their example .
Votes of thanks were passed to Joseph Clayton Jennings , Esq. , and to the Westminster Committee , and a congratulatory address was voted to Sir Francis Burdett , which I , as chairman of the meeting , was desired to communicate to him .
This I did immediately , which , for the first time , gave me an opportunity of opening a correspondence with the Baronet .
The votes and resolutions , as well as the toasts drank , and the speeches delivered , were published  I forget now whether by Mr. Lee or myself , but I rather think by him , as he had been in the habit of publishing a great deal before on the local politics of Bristol .


I received a very polite answer from Sir Francis Burdett , who professed to be highly flattered with the compliment we had paid him at Bristol .
I likewise received an answer from Mr. Jennings , and the chairman of the Westminster Committee , expressing great pleasure at this mark of the union of sentiment existing between the people of Bristol and Westminster .
On the other hand , I sent copies of our proceedings to Mr. Cobbett , who lived at that time at Botley , expressing a wish , if he approved of them , that he would insert them in his Political Register  he , however , neither inserted them nor gave me any answer , but , as it since appears , he wrote the famous letter to his friend Wright , who was a sort of hanger-on at the Westminster committee , which letter , at the last general election for Westminster , was read upon the hustings by one Cleary , an attorney 's clerk , or rather a pettyfogging writer to an attorney in Dublin , who had left his native country for the same cause that had prompted many others of his countrymen to leave it before him .
This person was hired by the committee of Sir Francis Burdett to do this dirty office , to shew that Mr. Cobbett entertained a different opinion of me in the year 1808 , before he knew me , from that which he entertained of me in the year 1818 , after he had known me and had acted with me for so many years .


What induced Mr. Cobbett to write this letter , or what were his motives , are best known to himself .
But , the contents of the letter were as false , as the stile and language were gross , and the sentiments it contained illiberal and unmanly .
Mr. Cobbett had at that time spoken to me but once  and as I was never in the habit of flattering any one , or disguising my opinions , I can easily conceive that he had , from this first interview , formed personally as unfavourable an opinion of me as I had of him .
But he knew nothing of me or my connections .
All that he could have known of me was , that I was a zealous advocate of that cause which he then professed to espouse .
Therefore , what were his motives for writing this letter must remain with himself .
However , Mr. Jennings , and the gentlemen who then composed the Westminster committee , treated his advice with that contempt which such a malignant and unmanly act deserved  for they opened a communication with me immediately .
As to the letter , however , it was of such a nature , that they thought it advisable to lay it by , to be produced upon some future occasion , and that occasion was the one which I have named .
Now I must intreat the reader to give me credit when I say , that I never suffered the production of this letter to operate upon me , so as to shake the private friendship I had with Mr. Cobbett .
What he wrote of me , or whatever opinion he entertained of me , ten years back , and previously to his knowing any thing of me , however unjust that opinion might have been , however coarsely or illiberally that opinion might have been expressed , and however basely that circumstance might , after a lapse of ten or eleven years , have been used by a contemptible hired agent of Sir Francis Burdett , upon the public hustings at an election , I never suffered it for one moment to have the slightest influence upon my public or private conduct towards Mr. Cobbett .
But what I was grieved and hurt at , was , that Mr. Cobbett should have made me his dupe , by writing home to me from America , to assure me , that the letter read by Cleary upon the hustings at Westminster was a forgery  and not only sending me a copy of the New York paper , wherein he had declared this letter to be a forgery , but authorizing ME , nay , urging ME to pronounce it to be a forgery , which , upon the faith of his word , I did , at a meeting at the Crown and Anchor , where Cleary produced the letter .
At this treatment I was hurt  I had good reason to be offended  but I never complained of it .
The shyness and the dispute which has arisen between Mr. Cobbett and myself has arisen from a very different cause .
But , for my own part , I am happy that this shyness did not happen while Mr. Cobbett was in prison , but while Henry Hunt is incarcerated in his dungeon .
Although I can not accuse myself of having ever done any thing to merit this conduct from Mr. Cobbett , yet I shall never cease to lament it , as an injury to that cause in which we had so long drawn together .
But , as is generally the case in such differences between friends , there may be faults on both sides  and I am not so presumptuous as to believe that I am exempt from error .
It is a lamentable truth , however , that the strongest mind is not always proof against the insinuations of false friends , of go-betweens , and the eternal workings , and worryings , and sly malignant hints , of the low pride and cunning of those who are always at a person 's elbow .
The reader must excuse this digression  it is , in fact , no more than I owed to the subject , and an early explanation which is due to those who honour me by reading these Memoirs .


The infamous conduct of the authorities at Bristol did not deter me from keeping the promise which I made to the people on the day of election .
I immediately formed a society , and arranged a plan of weekly subscriptions , to enable those who were entitled to their freedoms to pay their fee to the chamberlain of the city , without being , as they had always hitherto been , dependent upon the bounty of the candidates when .
the election was about to begin .
Each entitled freeman , who enrolled his name , and paid a subscription of 3d .
per week , had , in his turn , his freedom taken up , and his fees , amounting to about 2l .
8s .
paid out of the fund .


One would have thought this a most legitimate and praiseworthy association .
What could be more proper than a subscription , weekly , amongst the entitled freemen , to raise a sum to take up their freedoms  to accumulate that sum by a weekly subscription which they could not at once command out of their own pockets , and the want of which had heretofore in a great measure placed them in the power of those who would only advance the money for them to obtain a promise of their votes at the election ?
To assist in accomplishing so desirable an object as this , any one who did not understand the principles upon which those elections are carried on by corporations , would have thought a most praiseworthy act .
But in Bristol it was esteemed a great crime  and all sorts of threats and intimidations were offered to those who stood forward as the friends of constitutional liberty , and who attempted to aid the young freemen in procuring their copies to become entitled to exercise their franchises at the elections .
Our society was denounced as seditious , revolutionary , and treasonable , by the corrupt newspapermongers of that city  at the head of whom stood a man of the name of GUTCH , who was the editor of the paper called Felix Farley 's Bristol Journal .
This was as corrupt and time-serving a political knave as ever lived .
This gentleman belonged to the White Lion club  and for hire he weekly vomited forth all sorts of lies and calumnies against those who met weekly at the Lamb and Lark , in Thomas Street , under the pretence , as this loyal Government scribe said , of subscribing to take up freedoms  but whose real object this hireling declared to be , to overturn the Government , by subverting the constitution of the country .
This was the organ , the trumpeter of the White Lion club  the Pitt faction  the thick and thin supporters of the ministers .
Then there was another corrupt political knave , of the name of John Mills , who published a paper , which , if I recollect right , was called the Bristol Gazette .
He was equally a thick and thin supporter of the other faction , the Whigs  he was their time-serving dirty tool  no falsehood , no absurdity , however palpable , so that it served his masters , the Whig faction , was too gross for his depraved appetite .
This gentleman , also , was equally lavish of his abuse against me , for having dared to interfere with a privilege which exclusively belonged to the two factions  any innovation upon which was considered as high treason of the greatest magnitude .


At this time a gentleman of the name of LEE , a surgeon , and a very clever fellow , lashed the cheats of both factions by frequent cheap publications  the severity of which made the rogues twist and writhe as snails and grubs do , when quick lime is sprinkled upon them .
With this Mr. Lee I of course became acquainted , from the time of the Trout Tavern dinner .
For some time we went on very well together but , by-and-bye , we quarrelled and came to an open rupture .
This quarrel was excited and fermented by talebearers and go-betweens  and at length Mr. Lee commenced a paper war , directing all his talent against my views and objects .
I replied : and a most vindictive political warfare raged for a while , in which we were both most magnanimously bespattered with the filth of our own creating .
I was very young at this time , and where I failed in argument , I of course made up for it in abuse .
In reality , there was very little argument on either side  and in default of it , downright abuse was resorted to , to the great amusement of the two contending factions .
He at length retired from politics altogether , and very soon afterwards left Bristol , to reside in London , and kept his terms , I believe , in the Temple , where he now practises as a barrister .
But I , however , stood my ground , and continued to support and cultivate an union , by subscribing to and attending the meetings at the Lamb and Lark .
In fact , I took a lease of that house for the purpose  several publicans having been threatened with the loss of their licences , if they gave us the accommodation of a room , once a week , in the way of their business .
The moral Magistrates of Bristol , some of whom were brewers and distillers , encouraged every species of drunkenness , and connived at every species of debauchery , so that their pockets were filled , and the customs and the excise were benefited  but they were alarmed and shocked at the monstrous crime of the freemen meeting once a week to subscribe their pence , to procure their freedoms , independent of every political faction .


I now resided at Clifton , in lodgings , during the winter , and attended to the collecting together of the scattered remains of my wreck of a brewery .
The reader may easily conceive that , if I had been disposed to carry on the concern ( which , by-the-bye , I was not ) , I should have had very little chance at Bristol , amongst a set of the most illiberal and selfish tradesmen and merchants in the universe .
But , the truth was this , I brewed my beer from malt and hops only  I had fairly tried the experiment , and the result was , that no one could brew with malt and hops for sale , without being a loser  and as I was determined not to use any drugs or substitute , I made up my mind to get out of the concern as soon as possible .
No man could have had a fairer opportunity of trying the experiment than I had  I grew my own barley , which was of the very best sample  I made my own malt , and I bought my hops at the best hand , for ready money .
If any one could have brewed beer from malt and hops , to have made a profit from it , I could have done it .
I brewed excellent beer , but I lost money by every brewing .
I therefore take leave to caution my friends against being poisoned by genuine beer brewers  the worst sort of quacks and impostors .
Mark what I say -- a brewer may brew , and sell genuine beer , made from malt and hops  but , if he does not become a bankrupt in three years , or if he contrives to sell genuine beer , and grows rich , or pretends to grow rich , let me advise you not to drink any of his genuine beer .
No !
no !
my friends , if you must drink beer and porter , drink that brewed by the common brewer , who does not profess to be any honester than his neighbours .
Drink the porter of Messrs. Barclay , or of Messrs. Whitbread , and take your chance with the common herd of beer and porter drinkers .
When I see an advertisement of any gentleman `` Bung '' having made an affidavit before the Lord Mayor , that his beer is brewed only with malt and hops , I look regularly for his name in the Gazette , and if I do not soon find it , there , or hear that he has cut and run , I set him down for a successful impostor .


I now enjoyed the society of a few select friends , who visited in my family , when I was living at Chisenbury House , in Wiltshire , or at Clifton  and I had nearly got rid of all my old pot-companions .
Those who now visited me , did so for the purposes of friendship and rational society  as I had now completely put an end to all drinking carousals in my family , neither did I mix with them in others .
When I was in the country , I used to enjoy the pleasures of the field , both as a fox-hunter and an expert shot .
As a shot , I fancied myself at that time a match for any man in the kingdom , having challenged to shoot with any gentleman sportsman in the united kingdom , five mornings , at game , for fifty guineas a morning  which challenge I sent to the Sporting Magazine , but whether it was published or not , I do not recollect .


One circumstance I forgot to notice , relative to the general election which took place in the beginning of this year  which was , that Major Cartwright offered himself , and stood a contested election , for the borough of Boston , in Lincolnshire .
The Major offered himself upon the pure principles of representation , without spending any money .
The Major only polled eight votes !
-- This shews the state of the representation of Boston at that time .
Mr. Maddox was elected , having polled 196 votes .
But the Major stood upon real constitutional principles , and therefore only polled eight votes .


On the 29th of June , Sir Francis Burdett was chaired through the streets of Westminster , and such a multitude was scarcely ever before seen together .
All the streets through which the procession had to pass were thronged to excess , and every window was full of admiring and applauding spectators .
This certainly was the triumph of Westminster , by purity of election .
At five o'clock the procession arrived at the Crown and Anchor , where it is said nearly two thousand persons gained admittance to dinner .
This must have been a fine harvest for the landlord , and those who had the management of the twelve shilling tickets .
After dinner , the following toasts were drank : --


1 .
The King , the Constitution , the whole Constitution , and nothing but the Constitution .
2 .
The People .
3 .
Purity of Election , and may the Electors of the whole kingdom take a lesson from the Westminster School .
4 .
The Health of that Honest and Incorruptible Representative of the People , Sir Francis Burdett .
5 .
The Electors of Westminster .
6 .
The 5134 Electors who so nobly stood forward to assert their own Rights , and to excite the People of England to assert theirs .
7 .
Those Electors of Bristol who , on the 2nd of June , with MR. H. HUNT at their head , assembled to celebrate the return of Sir Francis Burdett .
8 .
May the ineffective of the Regiment be speedily disbanded , and the Red Book reduced to its proper dimensions .
9 .
Mr. Jennings , our worthy Chairman .
10 .
The Election Committee .


This chairing and dinner-meeting excited the attention not only of the metropolis but the whole kingdom .
It was the real triumph of Westminster , and Sir Francis Burdett was that day in sober earnestness , and in the honest sincerity of their hearts , the pride of the people .
It was no fiction , it was no joke  but , in fact and in truth , Sir Francis Burdett was on that day `` Westminster 's Pride , and England 's Glory . ''
All was peace and good order , every face beamed with good humor , and upon every brow sat a sort of conscious pride , as if each person felt that he had performed a duty , by offering a tribute of devotion to the Honourable Baronet .
This being the case , one would have thought that there was no occasion for the interference of the military  but , as the troops had been called out at Bristol , in consequence of our dinner of one hundred , to celebrate the election of Sir Francis , of course the myrmidons of power in the metropolis did not , or pretended they did not , think themselves safe without the aid of the military .
The different guards about the palace , and also about the offices at Whitehall , were doubled , and supplied with ball cartridges .
The several regiments were drawn out in the morning and kept under arms , and a great body of the horse artillery corps was kept ready harnessed in St. James 's Park , to draw the cannons to the scene of action , if necessary !
-- The volunteer corps were also summoned to muster , and the police were put in motion  in fact , the Government appeared determined to be ready with a military force to act promptly upon an emergency , if one should arise , as some persons , perhaps , hoped would be the case .
All this , however , proved to be totally unnecessary .
The fear of the Ministers arose solely from the sense of their own unworthiness  a conviction in their own breasts that they merited the hatred and the execration of the people .
Every thing passed off quietly , and the dinner party broke up in peace , after having passed the day in the greatest hilarity and unanimity .
Such a dinner-meeting was never before witnessed in the metropolis  hundreds were contented to take a scanty meal standing , and no one grumbled at his fare .


The reader will see that , at this dinner , the only toast drank , unconnected with the election of Westminster , was the seventh , `` The Electors of Bristol with MR. H. HUNT at their head , '' c. Indeed the only names mentioned in the toasts , which had been drawn up with great care by the Committee , were Sir F. Burdett , Mr. H. Hunt , and Mr. Jennings , the chairman  so that , with the exception of the chairman and Sir Francis Burdett , I was the only man in England whose name was honoured by being publicly drank by this the largest dinner-meeting ever assembled in England .
I was not at that time known to Sir Francis Burdett  I was not known to Mr. Jennings , or to any of the Committee , yet my exertions in the cause of Liberty at Bristol had attracted the attention of its real friends in Westminster , and my health was toasted accordingly .


The first time , however , that I came to London after this , I was introduced to Mr. Jennings , and all the Westminster heroes , by my worthy friend Henry Clifford .
They all received me very cordially , and I was invited to a public meeting at the Crown and Anchor , that was held about that time , I forget upon what occasion , Mr. Jennings in the chair , myself having a seat appropriated for me by the Committee next to him , on his left hand , Clifford being seated at his right .
My health was drank with great applause , and I returned thanks in a manner that met the approbation of the whole meeting .


Thus was I , in the year 1807 , fairly drawn into the vortex of politics .
My worthy friend Clifford publicly claimed me as his disciple , and ventured to predict that I would some day become one of the most able champions of the cause of Liberty .
Sir Francis Burdett was not in town , therefore I was not introduced to him , which both Jennings and Clifford were anxious to do .


I do not recollect that Lord Cochrane 's name was ever mentioned at either of these meetings .
His health was not even drank at the great meeting for Westminster , on the 29th of June , to celebrate the purity of election , although he was one of the Members for Westminster , was returned as the colleague of Sir Francis Burdett , and polled above a thousand votes more than Mr. Sheridan .
Nay , I do not think that he even attended this dinner of his constituents .
Indeed , had he attended , his health would have been drank of course , as one of the Members .
Lord Cochrane was a bold , enterprising , and successful officer  but , as to politics , I believe the real state of the case to be , that he was suspected , at that period , not to have made up his mind upon them .


This fact is worthy to be recorded , that , when the electors of Westminster held their great public dinner to celebrate the triumph and purity of election in their city , though Lord Cochrane had been elected one of their representatives , yet so little faith had Sir F. Burdett or his friends in the sincerity of Lord Cochrane 's principles , that they never drank his health , or even mentioned his name .
Let this be marked down as a curious fact .
Lord Cochrane had not been kicked into a thorough patriot by the Government , which , at this time , looked upon him as still being one of their regiment , and they rather rejoiced than otherwise at his being elected for Westminster  it being very clear that , during the election , he received considerable support from the friends of the ministers .


Now I call the circumstance to my recollection , I believe that , immediately after the election , Lord Cochrane went to sea as the commander of the Imperieuse .
At all events it is certain that his health was not drank .
The fact is indisputable , that at a dinner-meeting of the electors of Westminster , one of the Member 's health not drank , and that Member LORD COCHRANE , who had been in the House before , as a Member for Honiton  and let it be recollected , to his honour , that when he was elected for Honiton , he gave a pledge in the face of the nation , that he never would , as long as he lived , accept of any sinecure or emolument , either for himself or any relation or dependent  and that he never would touch the public money in any way , but that of his profession as a naval officer .
He had also made a motion in the House , respecting places , pensions , and emoluments , held or received by Members of the House of Commons , or by his relations .
This motion was of the greatest public importance , and of much more real service to the cause of public liberty , and the purity of the Members of the House of Commons , than any motion that Sir Francis Burdett had ever made in the House  and one would have thought that this alone would have been a sufficient earnest of his future honesty , at any rate would have entitled him to have had his health drank at a public dinner-meeting of his constituents , the electors of Westminster !
-- It is a very curious and remarkable fact that my health was drank at this meeting , and that Lord Cochrane 's health was not  and what makes it the more extraordinary was , that I was a perfect stranger to the electors of Westminster , and Lord Cochrane was one of their representatives .


As for poor Paull , although he was laying wounded , on a bed of sickness , his name was never mentioned .
I always thought , and I always said , though I did not know Mr. Paull , that Sir Francis Burdett would have appeared more amiable in my eyes if he had condescended to notice with marks of kindness his vanquished adversary , or at least his antagonist , who had been defeated upon the hustings , although not in the field .
But , alas !
poor Mr. Paull , who had contributed , largely contributed to rouse a proper spirit of independence amongst the electors of Westminster , and who was a very Idol amongst them at a former election , was now so deserted , neglected , and despised , as at this meeting never to have been noticed in any way whatever , merely because he had quarrelled with Sir Francis Burdett , or rather because Sir Francis had quarrelled with him .
But Sir Francis Burdett was now become the great political Idol , a political God  and I was one of his most enthusiastic worshippers , one who would have risked my life at any moment to have saved his , although I was at the time personally unknown to him .
On the 10th of July , a numerous and respectable meeting of the freemen , freeholders , and inhabitants of the city of Bristol , was held in the large room at the Lamb and Lark , in Thomas Street , for the express purpose of inquiring into the state of the elective franchise , Henry Hunt , Esq. in the chair .
It was unanimously resolved , `` 1st .
That the elective franchise is an object of the highest importance , as it is the basis of our laws and liberties .
That in the free and unbiassed exercise of this great and yet undisputed privilege , depends our best interests and dearest rights as free - born Englishmen .
2nd .
That if any club or party of men whatever , arrogate to themselves the power of returning a representative for this city , whether designated by the title of the White Lion Club , or the Loyal and Constitutional Club  if they threaten , persecute , and oppress a voter , for the free exercise of his judgment in the disposal of his suffrage , they are enemies to their country , by acting in direct opposition to the sound principles of the British Constitution .
3rd .
That we view with painful anxiety the contracted and enthraled state of the elective rights of this city , and we are fully convinced of the existence of such unconstitutional clubs as are mentioned in the foregoing resolution  that their evil effects have reduced this great city to a level with the rottenest of rotten boroughs  therefore we are determined , by every legal exertion in our power , to interpose , and adopt such constitutional and effective measures as may appear most conducive to the recovery and firm establishment of the freedom of election in this city .
4th .
That the following declarations of the Westminster Committee , contain the great constitutional principles on which we ought to act , namely , -- ` That as to our principles , they are those of the constitution of England , and none other  that , it is declared by the Bill of Rights , that one of the crimes of the tyrant James , was that of interfering , by his Ministers , in the election of Members of Parliament  that , by the same great standard of our liberties , it is declared that the election of Members of Parliament ought to be free !
That by the act which transferred the crown of this kingdom from the heads of the House of Stuart , to the heads of the House of Brunswick , it is provided , that , for the better securing of the liberties of the subject , no person holding a place or pension under the Crown , shall be a Member of the House of Commons  that these are constitutional principles  and as we are convinced that all the notorious peculations , that all the prodigal waste of public money , that all the intolerable burdens and vexations therefrom arising  that all the oppression from within , and all the danger from without , proceed from a total abandonment of these great constitutional principles  we hold it to be our bounden duty , to use all the legal means in our power to restore those principles to practice .
That though we are fully convinced , that , as the natural consequences of the measures pursued for the last sixteen years , our country is threatened with imminent danger from the foe which Englishmen once despised , and , though we trust there is not a man of us who would not freely lay down his life , to preserve the independence of his country , and to protect it from a sanguinary and merciless invader  yet we hesitate not to declare , that the danger we should consider of the next importance , the scourge next to be dreaded , would be a packed and corrupt House of Commons , whose votes , not less merciless , and more insulting , than a conqueror 's edicts , would bereave us of all that renders country dear , and life worth preserving , and that too , under the names and forms of Law and Justice  under those very names and those very forms which yielded security to the persons and , property of our forefathers . '
5th .
That , in following the glorious example of the citizens of Westminster , by choosing men of corresponding sentiments and undeviating public virtue , we shall , as far as rests with us , restore the blessings of our Constitution , and the just rights and liberties of the people .
6th .
That the freeholders , freemen , and entitled freemen and inhabitants of this city , who have united themselves , for the laudable purpose of supporting each other in the free and unbiassed exercise of their judgment in the choice of their representatives , merit the approbation and applause of all their fellow-citizens  and that we do now form ourselves into a body , to be called the `` Bristol Patriotic and Constitutional Association , '' to co-operate with them , in counteracting that unwarrantable influence , manoeuvre , and deception , which have reduced the electors of this city to mere political cyphers , to passive spectators of the general wreck , freemen with no other appendage of freedom but the empty name  we therefore pledge ourselves , individually and collectively , to assist and protect them in the recovery of our just and constitutional liberties .
7th .
That a public subscription be immediately opened , to raise a fund for the purpose above mentioned , for defraying the expenses of a room for the association , printing , c. and that a list of the subscribers and subscriptions be regularly kept , and that proper books be provided for that purpose .
8th .
That these resolutions be signed by the chairman , and that they be published .
Signed HENRY HUNT , Chairman . ''


These resolutions were published in the Bristol and London newspapers  and also , in Cobbett 's Political Register , the 8th of August , 1807 , ( page 211 , vol .
11th . )
The reader will see the political ground which I took , and the stand which I made , almost single-handed , in the city of Bristol , against the corrupt and barefaced influence exercised by both the contending factions of Whigs and Tories , over the freemen of Bristol .
I have inserted these resolutions for a twofold purpose  first , that of shewing that I have never shifted my ground , that I have never deviated from the straight path of publicly and boldly advocating the rights and liberties of the people against the corrupt influence of all factions  and second , to prove that Mr. Cobbett was so well pleased with my exertions , and so well satisfied that those exertions were calculated to serve the cause of public liberty , that he voluntarily gave them a place in his Register , and thus early held me up to notice , as worthy of public confidence and public support  and this he did , recollect , although I was not personally known to him , and had never seen him , with the exception of the slight call which I made on him in Duke Street , which I have before mentioned .


Mr. Cobbett had already published in his Register my address , of the 18th of October , 1806 , to the freeholders of Wiltshire  he had published an account of my health being drank , at the largest public dinner ever held in England , on the 29th June , 1807  and on the 8th of August , in the same year , he published the foregoing resolutions , with my name to them , as the chairman , and which resolutions he knew were drawn up by me  therefore , I must seriously ask the reader how I am to account for the scurrilous letter being written by Mr. Cobbett to Wright , cautioning the committee of the electors of Westminster to beware of me ?
If this letter be not a forgery , Mr. Cobbett was openly recommending me to the notice of the public , in his Political Register , while he was privately vilifying me by letter , and recommending the Westminster committee to beware of me , as I was a sad fellow .
For the honour of human nature I should yet hope that this letter was a forgery , either of Wright 's or Cleary 's .


Let it , however , be whichever it may , it had not the desired effect .
These exertions of mine in the city of Bristol , and my boldly avowing the principles acted upon by the Westminster committee , and professed by Sir Francis Burdett , met with the approbation and sanction of both , and a correspondence was kept up between us .
The baronet professed to be greatly delighted with what I had done , and urged me to persevere in so laudable an undertaking as that of putting myself at the head of the independent electors of Bristol , to prepare them for following the example so nobly set by the electors of Westminster .
I have preserved all the Honourable Baronet 's letters , with the exception of three or four , that he ever wrote to me during our political connection , which may now be said to have commenced .
Though as yet we had never had a personal interview , he , nevertheless , corresponded with me with great frankness and confidence  which confidence , I beg him to make himself perfectly satisfied , shall never be basely betrayed by me , even if he should behave to me worse than he already has done  even if he should employ his hopeful paid agent Cleary to read upon the hustings a private letter a day , for the remainder of his life .
I will , at a proper period , state my reason for destroying two or three of his letters , in the spring of 1817 .
But he may rest assured that I will not betray any of his private communications to me  I will not follow his example by basely exposing a private letter  even should he again hire James Mills to propagate a report , which he , Burdett , as well as his agent , knew to be a falsehood totally without foundation  namely , that I had a government protection in my pocket when I attended the great public meeting at Manchester , on the 16th of August , 1819 .
Even if the baronet should hire a fellow to propagate another such a cowardly and infamous fabrication as that , yet I will not publish any of his private letters to me about -- .


But I beg the reader not to misunderstand me  most of the baronet 's letters to me were of a public nature , and those that were private , were not about my business , but his own .
Thank God !
he has no letters from me , about any money transactions  for I hereby most distinctly state , that the only money transaction we ever had , the only money that ever passed between us , was , that I , at his request , once purchased for him a galloway , for twenty-five pounds , which money he paid me  and I bought of him a horse for forty-five guineas , which I paid him for at the time .
The horse turned out not worth forty-five shillings .
I believe the Baronet knew that he was good for nothing when he favoured me with him  but he never offered to make me any allowance , neither did I ever expect it , or apply for it .
I never blamed him for this -- it was not his fault , it was my own  he had the horse to sell , and I purchased it and paid for it , and when I found him out , I disposed of him as well as I could to a horse-dealer  I certainly did not oblige a friend with him .
After all the Baronet may have thought him a very good horse  he may have been deceived , or may have been a bad judge of a horse .
I was the fool for believing that he wished to part with a very good horse .


I mention this circumstance , not as any thing against the Baronet , because it was my business not to have taken any one 's word , not to have bought a `` pig in a poke  '' but I mention it , merely to show the reader that , although I was , for many years , intimately and closely connected with Sir Francis Burdett , this is the only money transaction we ever had , with the exception of his having given me cash for a country banker 's draft on his banker in London , made payable to my order , at seven or fourteen days , I forget which it was .
Although I was comparatively a poor man , and he a most wealthy one , I was never indebted to him a guinea in my life , nor ever solicited the loan of a guinea from him .


I have said that I will never publish any of his private letters , but I hereby authorize him to publish any one or every letter he ever received from me in his life  and if he does not choose to do this , yet wishes it to be done , and will send them to me , I will publish verbatim , in the Memoirs , any or every letter I ever wrote to him .
During the history of the next ten years of my life , I shall have frequently to record circumstances that have occurred between the Baronet and myself  it is , therefore , but justice to myself , as well as to the reader , to make the above declaration , as a prelude to that part of my Memoirs , as it may save the Rump the trouble of circulating a great number of falsehoods , of which they will ultimately , with many other base transactions , stand convicted .
When I say I was never indebted to or solicited any loan from the Baronet , I mean to include all his family and connections , Rump and all .


I have before mentioned , that I was invited to , and attended , a public dinner , held at the Crown and Anchor , Mr. Jennings in the chair .
At this dinner I was introduced to the worthy , the venerable and patriotic Major Cartwright , who invited me to his lodgings , to take some coffee after the meeting was over , whither I accompanied him , either with Clifford , or some other friend .
There the worthy old Major produced for my inspection , the pike which he had invented , and recommended in his `` England 's Aegis , '' to be used for the national defence .
It was of a very curious and ingenious construction , with a sort of double shaft , to protect the hands of him who used it from the blows of a sabre , c..
The Major was in high spirits , and exhibited to us all the various purposes of attack and defence for which it was calculated .
I was highly delighted with the old Major , at this first introduction and interview , and this exhibition added very much to the gratification which I felt in being known to a man of whom I had so often heard and read , as the steady and inflexible friend of reform , and public freedom .
I returned home to my inn exceedingly gratified , the old Major having created a very favourable opinion in my breast of his patriotism and public virtue .


During this year , a considerable sensation was created , by the military inquiry which was going forward .
Many nefarious peculations , and many scandalous abuses , were detected and exposed  but , as is generally the case in these parliamentary inquiries , the expenses of the commissions are ministerial jobs , that cost the country more than the sums which are saved by these detections .


The bill for the abolition of the slave trade was brought into the House of Lords , by Lord Grenville , and after warm debates passed both Houses  this , to the immortal honour of the Whigs , was effected by them , and must be recorded as one good act passed during their administration .
The old saying is , that `` Charity covereth a multitude of sins  '' so , the passing of this act by the Whigs has , with many , covered a multitude of their sins .


In July , General Whitelock was sent to attack Buenos Ayres  but he was disgracefully repulsed , with great loss .
His conduct and defeat became the subject of public investigation , and the General was disgraced in the eyes of the whole world .
The Americans issued a proclamation prohibiting British armed vessels from entering the ports of the United States , which was followed by the English laying an embargo on their ports in return .
In the month of August , of this year , the first introduction of gas lights into the streets took place , in Golden-lane , in the city of London  and in October , the King of France , Louis the Eighteenth , landed at Yarmouth , and , under the title of the Count de Lille , took up his residence at Gosfield Hall , in Essex .
It was also in this month that the philanthropic Sir Richard Phillips , the new Sheriff of London , made a strict inquiry into the prison abuses of the metropolis .
He and his colleague , Mr. Smith , employed themselves with incessant application in visiting and inspecting every part of every prison in the metropolis .
I always admired Sir Richard Phillips , for his humane and persevering endeavours to correct the innumerable abuses that were found to exist in these sinks of filth , misery , and immorality  but I never fully knew the value of his praiseworthy endeavours , till I began to employ myself in a similar undertaking , in this infamous Bastile .
I now know how to appreciate the value of his labours for the benefit of the prisoners and the country .
He rectified innumerable abuses , and caused the whole of the gaols to be cleansed and improved  he also made it his business to investigate the extortions practised in those receptacles of misery and misfortune , the lock-up houses  which places he put under the strictest regulations , to protect the unfortunate persons who are placed in them from the infamous rapacity of those who keep them .
These things come immediately under the cognizance of the Sheriffs , whose peculiar duty it is to protect from extortion and torture those unfortunate persons whom the law has placed in their custody , either as criminals or as debtors .
Sir Richard Phillips performed the duty of Sheriff of London with great honour to himself , and to the great advantage of the whole community .
I have no hesitation in saying , that he performed more good acts , while he held the office of Sheriff of London and Middlesex , than have been performed by all the Sheriffs that have held it ever since .
In fact , his whole life has been devoted to acts of benevolence and kindness towards his fellow-creatures  but the great services which he rendered to the cause of humanity and justice , while he had the power , while he filled the office of Sheriff of London and Middlesex , entitle him to the gratitude of this country  and , at some future day , his merits will be , I trust , recorded on a monument , by the side of the benevolent Howard , in St. Paul 's .
Sir Richard Phillips is a modest , unostentatious man  he makes but little skew and parade  but the hand of oppression seldom bears heavily upon a fellow-citizen , that Sir Richard is not found , in some way or other , endeavoring to alleviate his distress .
I speak feelingly , for my persecutions brought me acquainted with the real character of this worthy citizen of London .
To speak of Sir Richard Phillips , so as to do him justice , requires a more able pen than mine , and it is absolutely necessary to read a very interesting and valuable work , written by him , and printed by T. Gillet , Crown Court , in 1805 .
It is a letter , which he addressed to his constituents , the Livery of London , relative to his views in executing the office of Sheriff of London and Middlesex  and , as I know of no better method to delineate his character for humanity and public spirit , I will give an extract from this work in his own words .
`` I am now , '' says he , `` about to treat of that subject which is not only of the greatest importance in connection with the office of Sheriff , but which is that department of the Sheriff 's duty about which the feelings of my own heart were the most deeply interested when I entered into the office .
I had long viewed these places , particularly the crowded prisons of the metropolis , as mansions of misery , in which were often united in the same person the whole dismal catalogue of human woes .
The deprivation of liberty alone is a heart-rending punishment to every human being , however luxuriously he might be provided for in his prison , and however little may be the effect of that imprisonment upon his dearest connections .
But in the prisons of the metropolis , there are superadded to the overwhelming idea of personal restraint , the loathsomeness of the place , the immediate contact of kindred miseries  want of food and every other necessary  loss of character  dread of future consequences  wives , children , and frequently aged parents involved in one common ruin , and plunged in shame and wretchedness  the prisoner suffering at the same instant the complicated tortures of despair , remorse , and unavailing repentance !
How inglorious and how cowardly , to add to such a load of misery , by unnecessary privations and reproaches !
How interesting the task of lightening it , by attentions , by charities , by administering pity , and by infusing hope !


`` Such were the impressions and the feelings under which I entered into the office of Sheriff , and by which I am still influenced , after twelve months intercourse with the prisons , notwithstanding the cabals and misrepresentations of which I have found myself the object . ''


The reader will perceive by this , that , in the performance of these praiseworthy , honourable , and humane duties , the worthy Sheriff had to contend against cabals and misrepresentations  in fact , every obstruction was thrown in his way by those whose duty it was to have assisted him , and to have rewarded him for his labours  he was opposed and misrepresented by the whole gang of miscreants , who had heretofore made a market of the misfortunes of their fellow creatures , and swelled their infamous hoards by plundering and robbing all those who came within the vortex of their rapacity .
He was also sneered at and thwarted , by those creatures in office , those caitiffs `` dressed in a little brief authority , '' who luxuriate in the misery of the captive , and whose greatest bliss appears to be derived from persecuting and inflicting torture upon those whose misfortune it is to be placed in their power .
But his reward is the approbation of the wise , the virtuous and humane  and , what is still more valuable , the delightful sensations of an approving conscience .


Sir Richard Phillips likewise made many excellent regulations as to the choosing and summoning of Juries , and pointed out those defects , and that unconstitutional management in packing of Juries , that have led to the recent inquiries and alterations in the Jury lists of the city of London , which render it possible that a fair and honest unpacked Jury may now be obtained in that city , in spite of the arts and tricks of those who have made it their business to convert them into every thing that is corrupt and partial .
Without having read the address of Sir Richard Phillips to the Livery of London , which address he published as soon as he was out of office , it is absolutely impossible for any person to be aware of the good done , and the still greater good attempted to be accomplished by Sir Richard during his sheriffalty .
This work should be read by all future Sheriffs , as offering to them an example highly worthy their best attention .
In fact , the office of Sheriff of the city of London and Middlesex is a most important office , it gives a man the power of doing an infinity of good , of rendering the most essential service to the cause of liberty , justice , and humanity , as was clearly demonstrated by Sir Richard Phillips .


Before I have done with this subject of Sheriffs , I will relate an anecdote of one of the late Sheriffs .
I believe I have mentioned , in this work , that the Sheriff of London and Middlesex , Robert Albion Cox , Esq. , was committed to Newgate , by the House of Commons , for partiality to Sir Francis Burdett at the Middlesex election , in 1802 .
This was the present Alderman Cox , who was at that time a zealous friend of reform , and whose great zeal and anxiety to promote that cause was supposed to have made him overstep the bounds of prudence , so far as to prevent him , in his capacity of Sheriff , from being able to conceal his ardent desire to serve his friend , Sir Francis Burdett .
He was accused , by the House of Commons , of having , in the warmth of his friendship , been guilty of partiality to his friend , in the admission of votes at the hustings .
For this the House committed him to Newgate .
I recollect that , at the time , the friends of reform in the country , although they could not justify the proceeding on the part of the worthy Sheriff , yet they felt a great sympathy towards him , and were much more disposed to condemn a corrupt majority of the House of Commons , for dealing harshly with him , than they were to censure the Sheriff  who , if he had committed an error , had done so from the best of intentions -- the desire to serve the cause of reform .
I well remember , that we all in the country said , that the worthy Sheriff 's imprisonment would be a mere nominal punishment  that he would be surrounded by his friends  and we had no doubt but Sir Francis Burdett and his party would take care that his time should pass lightly away , by their gratefully attending to his every wish , while he remained in prison .


But the truth shall now be told .
Alderman Cox paid me a visit here , some time back , and upon my joking him , on his having deserted the cause of reform , and gone over to the enemy , he frankly told me the whole story of his secession from our ranks .
He was , he declared , as sincere a friend of reform and rational liberty as he ever was  but , during the time of his imprisonment , he found those with whom he had acted during his youthful ardour , so treacherous and so ungrateful , that the moment he was at liberty he resolved to have nothing more to do with them  and he , therefore , quitted city politics altogether , and went to reside in Dorsetshire , out of the reach of all their turmoil and unprofitable labour .
`` When , '' said he , `` I was committed to Newgate by the House of Commons , I certainly did expect that I should have received the attention and kindness of those whom I had endeavoured to serve , and of those who professed to be the friends of that party in the city of London , where I was imprisoned  and especially , I expected every attention from Sir Francis Burdett  which attention , indeed , I conceived I was entitled to from him , not merely for my having run such a risk , and got myself imprisoned , by striving to do him a service , but from the double tie of friendship and politics -- a friendship which we had contracted while at school together . ''
Having experienced the nature of the Baronet 's friendship , I anticipated what was coming .
`` Will you believe me , '' said he , `` Mr. Hunt , during the whole time that I was in Newgate he never wrote to me , never called upon me , nor ever once sent to inquire about me .
I was in prison , yet all the city party with whom I had acted , kept away from me , and not one came near me .
At length I sent for Waithman , who came at my request .
I complained to him of the ingratitude of Sir Francis Burdett , and he appeared to concur with me , and to regret that I should be so treated  but he added , that he had no power to compel the Baronet to do his duty .
He was full of professions , and said he would do any thing to serve me  that I had been treated cursedly ill , and that something ought to be done for me .
Upon this I urged him to call a Common Hall , and take the sense of the Livery upon the harsh proceedings of the House of Commons  and if he could get a vote of thanks for me ( which I knew he had only to propose to carry ) , that would be some consolation to me in my imprisonment .
He hemmed and har'd , and at length declined this measure , for fear it might not be carried , for fear he might be outvoted .
Well then , said I , will you get a piece of plate voted to me , by a few of our friends , whom you can easily call together at a private meeting ?
The answer was , that he had no objection to doing so , but that all our friends were so very poor , that he doubted whether he should be able to raise a sum sufficient to purchase a piece of plate worth my acceptance .
I replied , that the value of the piece of plate was of no consequence , as that was not the object  but , to set that question quite at rest , and to make his mind quite easy upon it , I desired him to get the piece of plate voted , and I would take care to send him the money myself to pay for it .
He went away , saying he would see what could be done  and I never heard from him , or saw him afterwards , until I left Newgate : upon which I washed my hands of the whole of the ungrateful set , and I have never had any thing to do with them since . ''
This fact speaks for itself , and is a fair specimen of the conduct of the worthy politicians of that day .


At the latter end of this year , 1807 , our magnanimous ally , the Emperor of Russia , suddenly broke off all communication with Great Britain  and , on the 1st of November , declared war against us .
War was also declared , at the same time , between England and Denmark .
In the mean time , our ally , the King of Portugal , was so alarmed at the hostile movements of Napoleon , that he embarked with all his Court on board a fleet , which was joined by an English squadron , under Sir Sidney Smith , and sailed for the Brazils , immediately afterwards .
The day after this , the French army , commanded by General Junot , entered Lisbon .
At the same time Jerome Buonaparte was proclaimed King of Westphalia , and Napoleon was formally acknowledged King of Naples .


Napoleon having now actually subdued and made peace with all his enemies upon the Continent , he had nothing to do but to turn his attention to the suppression of English trade  which he did by issuing decrees , declaring England in a state of blockade  which were answered by England issuing Orders in Council , for blockading all the ports of France and her allies .
This was the state of England at the end of the year 1807 .
The average price of the quartern loaf had been ten-pence three-farthings through the year .


The year 1808 began with Napoleon making an offer to treat for peace with England .
This offer was , as usual , rejected  upon which he , and the Emperor Alexander , strove with all their united might to embarrass England in all her continental connections .
The secret articles signed between these two Emperors , at Tilsit , plainly indicated their intentions to aggrandise themselves at the expense of England and her allies  Russia in the north , and France in the south .
The throne of Naples was now transferred to Murat , the brother-in-law of Napoleon .
The Papal dominions were completely subjected to France , and the Pope was placed in confinement .


The state of Spain at that time is worthy of notice .
The Spaniards were in a deplorable situation .
They were governed by , or rather had at the head of the government , an imbecile monarch , Charles the Fourth , a profligate Queen , notoriously intriguing with and led by Godoy , Prince of the Peace , prime minister  while , on the other hand , Ferdinand , the heir to the Crown , who was plotting and intriguing against his father , was weak in understanding , destitute of every noble quality , and totally incapable of governing a people who were emerging from the gloom of superstition , and becoming enlightened with the age .
Ferdinand having joined in a conspiracy , headed an insurrection against his father , whom he compelled to abdicate the throne in his favour .
This disgraceful conduct on the part of a son to his parent , speedily met with its due reward  for he was compelled to surrender up his pretension to the throne , and resigned the crown into the hands of his father , who once more resumed the reins of government , while the beloved Ferdinand retired , loaded with ignominy .


Charles the Fourth , however , very soon again abdicated his throne , not to his son Ferdinand , but in favour of his friend and ally , the Emperor of France  and the beloved Ferdinand and his brothers issued a solemn proclamation , renouncing all right and claim to the Spanish throne .
But the Spaniards were not disposed to be transferred thus , like cattle , without being consulted on the subject .
A formidable insurrection broke out , at Madrid , on the second of May .
The inhabitants fought with a bravery and perseverance which did them infinite honour  but , after a desperate and sanguinary struggle , they were overpowered by the numerous French army which was under the command of the governor , General Murat .
Nothing daunted by this failure at Madrid , the people of the Asturias , Andalusia , and other provinces of Spain , hurried to arms , and resolved to expel the invaders , or perish in the attempt .
Juntas were formed , to direct the popular efforts , eloquent and animating proclamations were issued , and every thing that the time and circumstances would permit , was done to prepare for the approaching tremendous contest .


The British Government had appeared to be panic struck by the intelligence that Napoleon had seized on Spain .
It , however , in some measure , recovered its spirits , on the arrival of two Spanish noblemen , with the news that the people of Spain were determined to resist to the last  and it instantly promised the most effectual assistance to those welcome allies .
All the Spanish prisoners of war were released and sent back to Spain in English ships , and a treaty of peace and alliance was made with the Spanish patriots .
The merchants of London gave the Spanish deputies a grand dinner at the London Tavern , and every lover of Liberty wished the cause of the Patriots complete success .


In England , meanwhile , considerable dissatisfaction prevailed .
The Lord Mayor , Aldermen , and Commons of the city of London , petitioned both Houses of Parliament for reform , and the abolition of sinecure places and pensions .
The foreman of the grand jury of the county of Middlesex , in conjunction with Sir Richard Phillips , the Sheriff , petitioned the House of Commons , against the conduct of the officers of the house of correction in Cold Bath Fields , and the treatment of the prisoners confined therein .
In compliance with the petition of the citizens of London , a bill passed the House of Commons to prevent the granting of places in reversion  but it was opposed and thrown out by the Lords .
Petitions for the restoration of peace were likewise presented from numerous towns in the manufacturing districts of the north , which were laid upon the tables of the Houses  but no further notice was taken of them .


The disaffection which distress and misgovernment had already excited in those districts was naturally increased by this contemptuous neglect of their petitions .
At Manchester there were some serious riots .
At Rochdale there had been some disturbances , and some of the rioters were seized and thrown into prison  but the people rose in great force , burned down the prison , and released their associates .
These misguided men had not then been taught to look for redress by obtaining a reform in the representation .
Those who had urged the people on to commit depredations upon the friends of Liberty , during the early part of the French revolution , the aiders and abettors of Church and King mobs , now began to taste the bitter fruits of their dastardly and cowardly conduct .
The time was not yet come , though it was rapidly advancing , when the people were to see their error , and to recover from the dreadful state of political ignorance and delusion in which they had been intentionally kept by the authorities  and the consequence was , that those who had kept them in such ignorance , and trained them to violence , found their own weapons turned against them , and reaped the reward of their own folly and baseness .
The weavers at Manchester and the neighbourhood created great disturbances , on account of their wages  they endeavoured to accomplish that by force , which could only be legally obtained by an alteration of those laws , and that system , which had brought them into the dilemma .
During the period of Church and King mobs , they had been taught to carry into effect the wishes of their employers by force , and they at length thought it time to set up for themselves in that trade which they had been taught by their masters and employers .
Having had no one to instruct them in political economy  or advise them how to obtain , by legal means , their political rights , was it wonderful that they should resort to acts of riot to obtain their domestic rights -- a rise in the price of their wages , in proportion to the rise in the price of provisions , and all the necessaries of life , which had been caused by the excessive increase in taxation ?


Let it be observed here , that the maxim will always hold good , that those who are careless of their political rights will always be sure to suffer and be imposed upon in their domestic rights .
Those who have robbed the people of their political liberty , will not fail to rob them of that proportion of their earnings , to enjoy which , can alone make life worth preserving .
The people who do not endeavour to possess and enforce the power of appointing those who are to make the laws , by which they are to be governed , have but little right to complain , if laws are made to enrich the few at the expense of the many .
They must not be surprised at combination acts , corn laws , and banishment acts .
They must not be surprised , if a select few have the privilege of choosing those who are to make laws  and if the laws that are made by persons so appointed tend to benefit those select few to the injury of the whole community .
The mechanics and artizans , if they have no voice in electing Members of Parliament , must not be surprised if , under the title of combination laws , they see laws made to prevent them from obtaining the fair market price for their labour , while their masters are permitted , nay , encouraged , to combine and conspire together to keep down the price of their wages .
Again let me impress on the mind of the reader , that a people who are careless and negligent of their political rights , are always sure of being plundered of a great portion of what they earn by the sweat of their brows  they imperceptibly become slaves of the basest cast  and , like slaves , when they become infuriated with their oppressions , they commit the most wanton and brutal acts of cruelty , in their fits of desperation .


Britain had , as I have already stated , made peace with the Spanish Patriots , whose devotion to the cause of their country excited the most lively interest in the bosom of every friend of freedom throughout the civilised world  and the people of England , as well as the English Government , felt a sincere desire to render them every assistance in their power .
I am induced to notice the affairs of Spain particularly , because it is delightful to behold a bigotted and enslaved people struggling to free themselves from the galling yoke of religious as well as political slavery .
In pursuance of the resolution of the Government to give vigorous assistance , an army was sent by England , to attack the French in Portugal .
This army was placed under the command of Sir Hugh Dalrymple .
On the 21st of August 1808 , the French troops under General Junot were routed by the English , at the battle of Vimiera .
So complete was this victory that it was expected the French general must have surrendered the remains of his army as prisoners of war  but , while the people of England were looking with anxiety for this event , their hopes were suddenly blasted , with the news of the Convention of Cintra  by which Junot had prevailed upon the English Commander , Sir Arthur Wellesley , who negociated the terms of the Convention , not only to permit the French troops to retire from Portugal with all the honours of war , but actually to engage to provide a passage for them in English ships .
This news caused a universal expression of disapprobation of the conduct of the English Commander , and meetings were held to petition the King , for an inquiry into this disgraceful transaction .


The disgrace of General Whitlocke , which had been inflicted upon him so recently , by the following sentence , it was hoped would have so operated upon British military officers as to have prevented the recurrence of such infamous conduct .
His sentence was delivered on the 18th of March , in the following terms : `` The Court adjudge that the said Lieutenant General Whitlocke be cashiered , and declared totally unfit and unworthy to serve his Majesty in any military capacity whatever . ''
The principle upon which the law inflicts punishments is an example to deter others from committing the same offences .
But it is a melancholy fact , that even capital punishments will not deter the hardened thief .
As it is frequently the case that pickpockets are detected in the act of robbing at the very moment that one of their own fraternity is being launched into eternity , at the Old Bailey  so it appears that the punishment of General Whitlocke had very little effect upon the conduct of these heroes of Cintra .


The Lord Mayor and Common Council met and petitioned the King for an immediate and rigid inquiry into the conduct of those who made what was generally considered a disgraceful treaty  a compromise of the honour and character of the country .
The King returned an equivocal answer .
A public county meeting of the freeholders of Hampshire was also held , at Winchester , called by the High Sheriff , in consequence of a requisition signed by the aristocratical Whigs of that county , to address the King , upon the same subject .
Mr. Cobbett , who had bought an estate and lived at Botley , attended this meeting , and in an address , replete with good sense , sound argument , and correct principles , moved an amendment to the resolutions proposed by Lord Northesk , and seconded by Mr. Portal , of Frifolk , two of the old Whig faction .
The address to the King , which Mr. Cobbett moved , was seconded by the Reverend Mr. Baker , ( quere , is this the Parson Baker of Botley ? )
A Parson Poulter , one of the Winchester `` cormorants , '' moved an adjournment  arguing that the address was not necessary , as the King had given an answer to the Corporation of London .
This amendment was scouted by an immense majority , not above ten hands being held up in its support .
Upon a show of hands upon Mr. Cobbett 's amendment to Lord Northesk 's resolution , the Sheriff declared it to be so equally balanced that he could not decide which had the majority , and a shuffle was resorted to  Mr. Cobbett , being a young hand at these meetings , was not aware of the tricks of the Whigs .
The Sheriff proposed that all parties should proceed into the open Hall for a division  but , as soon as a considerable number of those who had voted for Mr. Cobbett 's amendment had retired into the open Hall , the cunning Sheriff caused another division in the Court , and declared the question to be carried by a majority in favour of Lord Northesk 's address , which was accordingly presented to the King .
This appears to have been the first effort of Mr. Cobbett at a public county meeting , and a very successful effort it was , as far as it consisted in ascertaining the real opinion of the freeholders of the county of Hants .
At this meeting Mr. Cobbett proved that he was not only a good writer , but that he was also a very eloquent speaker  and a great majority of those who listened to him were evidently in favour of his address , which was much more to the purpose than that proposed by Lord Northesk .
I had read the Weekly Political Register from its commencement with great pleasure , but the account of this meeting caused me to feel an increased desire to become better acquainted with the author .
No occasion , however , of that sort offered for some time to come .


Previously to this period I had been living alternately at Bath and Sans Souci Cottage , in Wiltshire .
When I was at the latter place I enjoyed incessantly the sports of the field .
When at Bath , I frequently met and encouraged the young freemen of Bristol , to take up their freedom by means of weekly subscriptions , a considerable number having already procured their copies as certificates , in this way .
The authorities , as they are called , or , in more intelligible terms , the leaders of both factions in the Corporation , the Whigs and the Tories , had their eye constantly upon me .
I was regarded as a very suspicious personage , for meddling at all in their affairs  but I kept quite clear of both sides , and only mixed occasionally with the people  for I had promised the young freemen that , whenever there was a dissolution of Parliament , or a vacancy , I would offer myself as a Candidate for the representation of their city , unless some more eligible person could be found , who would honestly oppose the intrigues of both the juggling parties -- the White Lion and Talbot clubs , the former of which supported the ministerial , and the latter the opposition faction .


Some time in the month of September the Emperors Napoleon and Alexander met at Erfurth , where they jointly offered to treat for peace with England  but these pacific overtures were , as usual , rejected by the British ministers .
The whole force of Great Britain appeared to be directed to assist the Spaniards for the purpose of driving the French troops out of Spain , to accomplish which object a British army , under Generals Moore and Baird , was sent to that country , which now began to be devastated by a war between the partizans of England and France .
On one side , that of the English , were ranged the pride of the old grandees , the arts and prejudices of a cunning and intelligent priesthood , and the intolerable stupid superstition of the most ignorant and priest-ridden part of the people .
On the other side , there was a small party of the more liberal minded , who supported the French , because they had abolished the Inquisition , and all the old monastic humbug with which the country had been cursed for so many ages .
Joseph Buonaparte , who had been made King of Spain , but who had been obliged to retreat from Madrid , was now restored by Napoleon , who entered Spain at the head of the French army , defeated the Spaniards in many engagements , and finally became once more master of the Spanish capital , where he reinstated his brother Joseph as Sovereign , that monarch having transferred to Murat , his brother-in-law , the throne of Naples .
The Parliament of England had voted an army of 200,000 men for the land service , besides 30,000 for the marine  and fifty-four millions were voted out of John Bull 's pocket for the supplies  and a subscription to the amount of 50,0001 .
to assist the Spaniards , was raised in London , in addition to the formidable regular force .
The militia consisted of upwards of 100,000 men .


In the midst of this mad career and profligate expenditure , trade continued to decline , and the manufacturers were in the greatest distress .
To appease the enraged nation , a sham court of inquiry was ordered by the King to assemble at Chelsea , under the pretence of an investigation into the Convention of Cintra  but this was so barefaced a job that it deceived nobody .


I have given a brief outline of the political state of the country , in the year 1808 , before I enter more immediately upon my own domestic history , which , at this period , was become considerably mingled with politics and public affairs .
I had quitted the large farm which I occupied at Chisenbury , and had built myself a sporting cottage upon my own estate at Littlecot , in the parish of Enford , which I called Sans Souci Cottage , from its situation resembling the description given of Sans Souci , the retreat of Frederick the Great , King of Prussia .
Here , as I have already hinted , I devoted the summer and autumn to the sports of the field , particularly shooting , of which I was passionately fond , and which this country afforded in the greatest perfection .
Having a house at Bath , which was occupied , I furnished it from the house which I had quitted at Clifton , and at Bath I spent the winter months .
The liberal principles which I at all times evinced , were by this time too notorious to escape the attention and hatred of the Tory gentlemen of that part of the county of Wilts in which I resided .
There had , in fact , always been amongst them a conspiracy against me , ever since I had quitted the Wiltshire regiment of yeomanry cavalry , and challenged Lord Bruce , the Colonel .
But my calling on the county members to explain their parliamentary conduct  and my doing this publicly , when , on the dissolution of Parliament , they offered themselves for the representation , had greatly added to the antipathy which the Tories had before evinced against me  and it was determined that I should be put down , by the lords of the soil , who surrounded my property at Enford .


My old friend Astley , of Everly , was at the head of this worthy band , and he was the first to commence operations , by bringing an action of trespass against me in the name of one of his tenants .
This was , in truth , his second trick of the kind  he having , soon after I quitted his troop , brought a similar action against me , in the name of one of his tenants , who keeps the Crown Inn at Everly , and who rented a farm of him .
I defended that action , and pleaded in justification a licence  meaning , that I had leave of his tenant to sport over his land  but his attorney , who was a flat , carried this suit into Court , under the idea , that I justified upon the ground of having taken out a game licence .
The fact was , that this was a quibbling plea , suggested by my attorney , and it succeeded  the bait took .
When we came into Court they easily proved the trespass  and when they had gravely done this , I called two witnesses , who proved that the tenant had not only given me leave to go over his land , but had even invited me to do so , as his adjoining neighbour .
Upon this the plaintiff , my worthy neighbour Astley , was nonsuited .
I believe that I employed Mr. Pell , the present Mr. Sergeant Pell , and I believe , too , this was the first single brief he ever had upon the western circuit .


To beat my rich and powerful neighbour Astley , in a court of justice , although he had got a rare packed jury for the occasion , I considered as a great victory .
On the next occasion , however , his attorney took care to be safe  for he brought the action in the name of one of the squire 's mere vassals , a farmer of the name of Simpkins , who at that time was obliged to say or do any thing and every thing that he was ordered .
I suffered judgment to go by default , and a writ of inquiry was executed at Warminster , to assess the damages .
One witness was called , merely to prove the trespass  and he swore that I had been six yards off my own open down land , upon that of his master , Simpkins , which adjoined it .


When the writ of inquiry was executed , I attended at Warminster in person , and this I did in consequence of having discovered , that there was a conspiracy against me amongst the neighbouring aristocrats , who , as I had ascertained , had made a common stock purse , in order to defray whatever expenses might be incurred in carrying on actions or prosecutions against me .
I became acquainted with this fact in a very curious way .
This junto of conspirators against the quiet and fortune of an individual had given a general retainer to Mr. Burrough , the counsel , the present Judge Burrough , who had , over the bottle , to an acquaintance of mine , who had been dining with him , slipped out this curious secret , intimating that his clients were so rich that they were sure to ruin me with expenses , even if I gained two out of three of the causes against me .
My acquaintance having communicated to me this detestable plot , I made a solemn resolution to become my own advocate , let whatever actions might be brought against me .
And now , for the first time in my life , I began to cross-examine a witness .
That witness was Simpkins 's shepherd , the only witness called by Astley 's attorney .
Upon his being asked by me , whether there was any boundary between Simpkins 's down and mine ?
he answered , no  that there might be some old bound-balls at the distance of half a mile apart , bound-balls that might have been thrown up many hundred years back .
He admitted that , at the time when the trespass to which he swore was committed by me , from two to three hundred of his master 's sheep were grazing over the mark upon my down  that this was frequently the case either way between neighbours ' sheep on the open downs in Wiltshire , and that it could not be well avoided .
Upon my asking him what damage I had committed upon his master 's land , the fellow grinned , and replied , `` damage , Sir !
why , none at all , to be sure : '' being still further examined , he said that I had not done sixpenny worth of damage , that I had not done a farthing 's worth , nor the thousandth part of a farthing 's worth of damage , for it was impossible to do any damage if I had walked there for a month .
This the fellow stuck to in his re-examination  and he being the only witness , and that witness called by the plaintiff , it struck me that it would be impossible for honest jurymen to give any damage , they being bound upon their oaths to assess the damages agreeable to the evidence .
It was an intelligent jury , and in my address to them , I appealed to their honour , as men of character , whether they could conscientiously give a verdict of any damage , when the only witness called swore that there was not a thousandth part of a farthing damage done ?
I told them , that I believed a verdict of no damages would bring an additional expense upon me , as the Courts might set it aside  yet I would on no account wish them to violate their oaths to save me an expense  and I called upon them to discharge their duty conscientiously and manfully , let the expense fall on whom it would .
The Under Sheriff , before whom the inquest was held , did every thing that man could do to prevail upon the jury to return a verdict of a farthing damages , contending that they must return a verdict of some damage .
The foreman very sensibly remarked , `` if you have called a witness who has sworn that there was not the smallest particle of damage done , how can we , upon our oath , say there was some damage ? ''
The jury retired for half an hour , and returned a special verdict of `` no damages . ''


This verdict I considered as another victory over the leader of the stock purse subscription .
A motion was , however , made in the Court of King 's Bench , for a rule to shew cause why this verdict should not be set aside , and a new writ of inquiry held to assess the damages .
This rule was instantly granted by Lord Ellenborough .
Upon my receiving notice to shew cause , as it was a mere point of law to be argued , I gave instructions to my attorney to employ my friend Henry Clifford , to oppose the rule .
The motion came on in the Court , and Mr. Clifford argued that unless they had violated their oath , the jurors could not possibly come to any other conclusion .
As they were sworn to assess the damages agreeable to the evidence , and as the only witness called had sworn that there was not the thousandth part of a farthing damage done , how could a conscientious jury give any damage ?
It was merely contended , on the other side , that I had admitted the trespass , by suffering judgment to go by default  and therefore the jury were bound to give some damage .
In this wise and just doctrine Lord Ellenborough , and his brethren upon the bench , fully and unequivocally concurred  and his lordship was quite severe upon Mr. Clifford , and wondered how , as a lawyer , he could have the face to argue to the contrary .
The Court consequently ruled , that a new writ of inquiry should be issued to assess the damages  the plaintiff first paying the costs of the former writ of inquiry , and this application to the Court .


I was now served with a notice , that the writ would be executed at Devizes , at seven o'clock in the evening , on the third day of the sessions , and that counsel would attend .
I merely said to the attorney , who served me with the notice , `` well !
if the Court of King 's Bench has so ruled it , so it must be . ''
The sessions arrived  the third day came  and , as I did not appear in the town , it was generally understood , amongst the barristers and attorneys , that there would be no sport , as I should make no attempt to obtain another verdict , in opposition to the opinion of the Court of King 's Bench .


The magistrates , counsel , and attornies had all taken their dinner and were sitting very snugly enjoying their wine , when the Under-Sheriff , with an attorney of the name of Tinney , of Salisbury , whom he had employed to preside for him , retired to the Court , to hold the inquiry , intimating at the same time to their guzzling companions , whom they left enjoying their good cheer , that they should very soon rejoin them , as they should dispatch the affair in about half an hour .
They sent word to Mr. Casberd , their counsel , that they would send for him as soon as their jury were sworn  Mr. Tinney informing him that his attendance would be required only for a few minutes , as it would be a matter of form , merely to prove the fact , and direct the jury to give a shilling nominal damages .


This was the Michaelmas sessions , 1807 .
I was residing at Bath at that period , and having taken an early dinner I got into my carriage , at half past four o'clock , with my son , then about seven years of age , and desired the post boy to drive to Devizes .
When he came to the turnpike , at the entrance of the town , he inquired if he should drive to the Bear ?
I told him to drive me to the Town Hall .
When I reached that building , I stepped out of the carriage , and , with my son in my hand , I walked into the Court , to the great astonishment of as snug a little band as ever assembled to perform such a little job , to assess damages upon a writ of inquiry .
The Sheriffs deputy 's deputy , Mr. Tinney , had taken his seat upon the bench  the jury were in the box , and the last man of the jury was just about to kiss the book , when I begged the officer to repeat the oath once more , deliberately , before the juryman was sworn .
He did so , as follows -- `` You shall well and truly try , c. c. and a true verdict give according to the evidence . ''
Mr. Casberd , the counsel , had arrived in the interim , and was adjusting his wig .
These , together with the plaintiff 's attorney , and about a score of the inhabitants who lived in the immediate vicinity of the Hall , formed as pretty a select party for such a job , as ever was assembled upon any occasion .


The execution of this new writ of inquiry had created a considerable sensation in the town , and the rehearing of the famous cause , which had produced a discussion in the Court above , had excited a considerable interest amongst the gentry of the profession  but as it was understood that I should not attend , and that it would go off , as a matter of course , undefended , or at least unresisted by me , the interest that it had at first excited had completely subsided , and if I had not come it would have been , as Mr. Tinney had anticipated , over in ten minutes .
But the news of my arrival spread like wildfire , and the bench was instantly crowded with magistrates , the green table with counsel and attorneys , and the whole Court was crammed as full as it could hold .


Instead of the usual course being followed , by the counsel for the plaintiff opening his case , the Jury and the Court were favoured with an address from the chair , by Mr. Tinney , who acted as sheriff .
In the most unfair and unjustifiable manner he informed them , that the same writ of inquiry had been executed once before , and that the defendant had prevailed upon the jury to give a verdict which was not warranted by law  that the Court of King 's Bench had set that verdict aside , and Lord Ellenborough had ruled , that , as the defendant had suffered judgment to go by default , he had admitted the trespass , and therefore the jury were bound to give some damage  and he cautioned them not to listen to any thing I might say to the contrary , and told them that when they had heard Mr. Casberd , they would give nominal damages .


I listened to this pretty prelude with great unconcern , and without offering the least interruption to the speaker .
Mr. Casberd now began to address them , and very properly said , that the sheriff had left him but little to do , as he had explained to them the nature of the duty they had to perform .
He , however , went over the same ground , and strongly urged them not to be warped from their duty , by any thing I might say .
At this period I strongly suspected I should have no defence to make , that they had been advised not to call any witnesses , that they meant to rely upon my having suffered judgment to pass by default , and , on that ground , to call on the jury to give merely nominal damages .
But my suspicions were soon removed by the learned counsel saying , that he should call one witness , merely to prove the fact of the trespass , and that he should then claim a verdict of some damages from their hands , as it had been ruled by the Court above , that the jury must give some damages , the defendant having suffered judgment to go by default , and by so doing admitted the trespass .


My old friend , the shepherd , was now called , and sworn  and having deposed to the fact , that on such a day of the month , he saw me six yards upon the down of his master , Mr. Simpkins , he was told that he might withdraw .
This he was hastily doing , when I hailed him , and desired him to honour us with his company a few minutes longer , as I wished just to ask him a question or two .
The impartial judge , Mr. Tinney , said he should protect the witness from answering any improper questions .
In reply to this very acute remark , I observed , that it would be quite in good time to do that when any improper question was put .
After a great deal of squabbling with the worthy judge upon this occasion , I got the worthy witness , although he had been well drilled , to admit that he had sworn at Warminster , that there was not the thousandth part of a farthing damage done by me in walking six yards over his master 's down .
This , he at length admitted to be the fact , and that no damage whatever was done .


In a speech , which took up about an hour , I now addressed the jury , all the individuals of which were perfect strangers to me  and I strongly urged them to give a conscientious verdict , agreeable to the oath they had taken , and to assess the damages according to the evidence which they had heard .
During this address , I was repeatedly interrupted by Mr. Tinney , who presided  but when I concluded , after having made a forcible appeal to their honour as men and as Englishmen , there was , on my sitting down , an universal burst of applause , upon which , Mr. Deputy 's deputy ordered the officers to take all the offenders into custody .
This impotent threat caused an universal laugh , and the enraged and mortified judge proceeded to sum up , as he called it , in a fruitless and weak , though laboured attempt , to refute what I had said in my address In fact , he acted as a zealous advocate for the plaintiff , or rather as a stickler for the absurd rule of court , to make the jury give a verdict of damages , notwithstanding the only witness produced , swore , that there was not the thousandth part of a farthing damage done .


The jury turned round , and were about to consider their verdict , but Mr. Deputy 's deputy peremptorily ordered them to withdraw , to consider their verdict .
I expostulated against this  and while the discussion was going on , the foreman of the jury said , they were unanimous in their verdict , which was that of `` NO DAMAGES . ''
This enraged Mr. Deputy to such a degree , that he exposed himself to the ridicule of the whole Court  he insisted upon their withdrawing to reconsider their verdict , said that he would not accept any such verdict , neither would he record it , and he peremptorily ordered the officer to take them out , that they might reconsider it .
Several of the jury had got out of the door , and all of them were removing but one old gentleman , who sat very firmly upon the front seat , and never offered to rise .
The officer with his white wand tapped him several times upon the shoulder , and desired him to withdraw .
The old man , whose name was DAVID WADWORTH , a baker of the town of Devizes , answered each tap with `` I sha ` nt . ''
Mr. Deputy 's deputy now rose , and with an affected solemnity , ordered the old man to withdraw , and reconsider his verdict .
He replied , `` I sha ` nt reconsider my verdict !
I have given one verdict , and I sha ` nt give any other ! ''
Deputy .
-- `` You have given a verdict of NO DAMAGES , which is contrary to law , and which I will not receive  therefore go and reconsider your verdict , for I insist upon your giving some damage . ''
The reader will easily conceive that I did not hear this in silence  I exclaimed , `` For shame !
what a mockery of justice ! ''
Mr. Deputy threatened  I smiled a look of contempt and defiance .
Mr. Deputy turned round to the officer , and peremptorily ordered him to turn the old man out  and he began to follow his instructions , by taking him by the collar .
The old gentleman , however , was not to be trifled with , for he sent the officer with his elbow to the other end of the jury-box , and exclaimed , `` I wo n't go out  I wo n't reconsider my verdict . ''
Deputy .
-- `` I will have some damage , if it be ever so small . ''
Old man .
-- `` I wo n't give any damage .
Why , did not the shepherd swear there wa 'n' t a mite of grass for a sheep to gnaw ?
Then how could there be any damage ?
T'other 'em may do what they like , but I wo n't stir a peg , nor alter my verdict .
I wo n't break my oath for you , nor Squire Astley  nor all the Squires in the kingdom . ''


This speech caused a burst of laughter and universal approbation .
Mr. Deputy 's deputy now ordered him into custody , and said he would commit him .
Against this I loudly protested , declaring it false and arbitrary imprisonment .
`` False imprisonment '' resounded through the Court , and great confusion arose  the candles were put out by the audience , and such indignation was levelled at the mock judge , this jack-in-office , that Mr. Deputy and his companions took the prudent course of making a precipitate retreat , proving to a demonstration that a light pair of heels , upon such an emergency , is a very valuable appendage even to a deputy 's deputy .
The cry was to chair me to the Inn  I with a stentorian voice exclaimed `` NO ! ''
chair David Wadworth to his home  and taking advantage of the general confusion , I and my son stepped into my carriage , which I had ordered to be in waiting , and we arrived at my own door , in Bath , just as the clock struck twelve .
On the first day of Term , the sixth day of November , Mr. Casberd , after stating a most pitiful case to the Court of King 's Bench , moved for a rule to shew cause why this second verdict of `` no Damages '' should not be set aside , and a new writ executed .
This rule was instantly granted  but the plaintiff was ordered to pay the costs of the inquiry held at Devizes , and of the present motion , as a punishment , I suppose , for not having managed matters better .
As soon as I received the notice , I repaired to London , to consult Mr. Clifford upon opposing the motion  and , as I thought , with additional grounds of success .
But , upon hearing the case , my friend Clifford absolutely refused to shew cause against the rule  declaring that it was useless , and that he would not a second time encounter , upon the same subject , the sarcasms of Lord Ellenborough .
`` Well then ! ''
said I , `` I will myself attend and shew cause against the rule . ''
I shall never forget poor Clifford !
I shall never forget his look of astonishment .
He seemed to be absolutely struck speechless .
After a considerable pause , however , he exclaimed .
What !
will you go into the Court of King 's Bench , to argue a point of law with the four Judges , against their own decision ?
`` Yes , '' said I , `` I will , even should there be four hundred judges  and I will state that I have done so , in consequence of your refusing to do it . ''
`` By G -- d , '' said he , `` if you do so , they will commit you . ''
I smiled , and told him I thought he knew me better than to suppose that I should be deterred from doing what I conceived to be my duty , by the dread of being committed , or of having any other punishment inflicted upon me .
`` Well , '' said he , `` you may do as you please , but , by G -- d , Lord Ellenborough will surely commit you . ''
I replied , that I supposed he would not eat me  and even if I thought he would attempt it , I would go and see if he would not choke himself .
Clifford then asked if I had studied the law upon the subject  upon which I begged him to turn to some act of parliament , to shew that a jury were bound to give a verdict directly in the teeth of the evidence .
Clifford admitted that there was no law upon the point  but argued , in the language of Lord Ellenborough , that it was a rule of court , and that the Judges would not listen to me for a moment .


The day arrived , I attended the Court  at length it carne to Mr. Casberd 's turn , to say , ( in answer to the inquiry of the Chief Justice , whether he had any motion to make , ) `` My Lord , I move for the rule to be made absolute , which I obtained the other day , in the case of Simpkins and Hunt  and I call upon the defendant 's counsel , my learned friend , Mr. Clifford , to shew cause why the second verdict , ` No Damages , '' should not be set aside , and why a fresh writ of inquiry should not be executed before a judge at the assizes for the county of Wilts .


Mr. Clifford now got up , and said , that he had no instructions  but that the defendant himself was in Court , and , as he understood , meant personally to offer something for their Lordships ' consideration .
When he had concluded , I rose immediately  my Lord Ellenborough , and his brothers upon the bench , darted their eyes at me , as if they meant at once to abash and deter me from saying any thing .
I , however , was not to be put down in this manner  and I began , in my homely strain , to address them .
But , before five words were out of my mouth , Lord Ellenborough interrupted me , and in one of his stern tones , demanded , if I came there to argue a point of law , upon which they had already decided ?
I answered firmly , `` I am summoned here to shew cause why a second verdict , given in my favour , in the cause of Simpkins against Hunt , should not be set aside , and why a third writ of inquiry , in the same cause , should not be executed  and if your Lordships choose to hear me I will do so to the best of my ability . ''
`` Well , go on , '' was the answer , in a very rough uncouth voice , and with a frown , and a roll upon the bench , which set all the learned friends in a titter .


I was proceeding to say something , and , I suppose , in rather an awkward and confused manner , when with a sneer on his face , the bear of a judge bellowed out , `` Mr. Casberd told us , that the jury at Devizes were influenced by your persuasive eloquence !
I see nothing of it here ! ''
This insult roused me  I began now to speak as loud as his lordship , and demanded to be heard without interruption .
The amiable judge next inquired , whether I had any affidavits in answer to those filed against me on the part of the plaintiff ?
I answered `` Yes , I had many  but I wished to proceed in my own way . ''
But this was refused to me .
The judge demanded to see the affidavits , and I consequently produced one made by myself , as well as one from nearly every one of the jurors who had sat upon the two former writs of inquiry .
These affidavits , one and all , declared , that the jurymen had given a verdict agreeable to the oath which they had taken , and to the only evidence produced by the plaintiff  and they added , that they could not conscientiously give any other verdict .
The jurors who sat upon both the inquests hearing of the rule that was obtained to set aside the second verdict , had voluntarily sent me up these affidavits in the most handsome manner .
I had , however , no sooner read one of them half through , than Lord Ellenborough , who had been whispering with one of his worthy brothers , endeavoured to stop me , notwithstanding which I proceeded , till he jumped up in a violent passion , and in a stentorian voice declared , that I should not read those affidavits  that they were not admissible , and he would not hear them .
I began coolly to argue the point with him , and contended that they were not only applicable but material to the justice of the case  and without the Court would hear them it would be deciding in the dark .
The affidavits were , I said , couched in respectful and even humble language , and I maintained that the Court was bound in justice to listen to them .
I had by this time overcome the awkward feeling which I first experienced at being placed in such a situation as that of the floor of the King 's Bench , which is , as it were , between a cross fire of gowns and wigs  and I said this in a firm and deliberate manner .


Stung by my coolness and perseverance , Ellenborough jumped up once more , and , with the most furious language and gestures , began to browbeat me , actually foaming with rage , some of his spittle literally falling on Masters Lushington and another , who sat under him .
I own that I could scarcely forbear laughing in his face , to see a Judge , a Chief Justice , in such a ridiculous passion .
In a broad north country accent , he exclaimed , `` Sir , are you come here to teach us our duty ? ''
He was about to proceed , when I stopped him short , and in a tone of voice , a note or two higher than his own , I replied , `` No , my Lord , I am not come here with any such purpose or hope  but , as an Englishman , I come here , into the King 's Court , to claim justice of his Judges  and I demand a hearing  therefore , sit down , my Lord , and shew me that you understand your duty , by giving me your patient attention . ''
I said this in such a determined way , that he instantly sat down , and folding his arms , he threw himself back in his seat , where , for a considerable time , he sat sulkily listening to what I had to say  in fact , till I had almost finished .


I now went on to argue that there was no law to compel a jury to give a verdict contrary to evidence , and I dared them to find twelve honest men in the county of Wilts who would do so .
`` Nay , '' said I , `` if there be but one honest man upon the jury , I will pledge my life that that jury will give a similar verdict -- your lordships may decide what the verdict shall be , and what damages I ought to pay  but you will never get a jury , if there be but only one honest man upon it , who will give any damages .
If you have hampered yourselves by a ridiculous rule of your own Court , the sooner you do away with such a rule the better for the character of the Court .
I will abide by any decision that you will please to give  but , for God 's sake , never grant a rule , never make a rule absolute , expressly for the purpose of trying the experiment , whether you can not compel twelve honest men to perjure themselves , merely to comply with an absurd rule of Court . ''


The Chief Justice had been biting his lips during the whole of my address  but this was too much , it was the truth in plain language  and accordingly he rose up once more , and having recovered himself , he , in rather a more dignified tone , called upon me to forbear , and not insult the Court , or he should be obliged to stop me , which he was unwilling to do , he being anxious to promote the ends of justice , and hear what I had to say .
Thus , after having , for nearly an hour , done every thing in his power to browbeat me , to put me down , and to prevent my being heard at all , now , forsooth , now that he found I was not to be intimidated , he was anxious to promote the cause of justice , and to hear what I had to say !
After going over the tender ground again and again , I declared , in conclusion , that if they did make the rule absolute and send it before a judge and another jury , that I should feel it incumbent on me to attend , and exhort that jury to do their duty , and not to perjure themselves .
They might , I told them , send it down to the assizes , but , as they could not have a special jury , I would pledge my life that they could not pick out twelve common jurymen in the whole county , who would give a verdict which would in effect say that the twenty-four of their countrymen , who composed the two former juries , had been guilty of perjury .
I implored the judges to settle the verdict themselves , in which case I would abide by it  but not to try the experiment upon another jury , who would be sure to give a similar verdict of `` No Damages . ''


Lord Ellenborough made a long palavering speech , urging the necessity of not departing from their former practice , and he expressed his opinion that the rule ought to be made absolute , in which , as a matter of course , his three brethren upon the bench agreed .
The rule was therefore made absolute , and a new writ of inquiry ordered to be executed , before the judge of assize for the county of Wilts  the plaintiff first paying the expense of the former writ of inquiry , and of this application to the Court .


My argument and the decision were published in all the newspapers , and created a considerable sensation throughout the country , amongst the practitioners of the law  and although there were a variety of opinions held as to the legality of the verdict , it was the universal opinion in the county of Wilts , that if I attended , and took the same ground as I did upon the two former occasions , any other jury would give the same verdict .
As I did not disguise my intention of attending for that purpose , a question arose amongst the attorneys , the friends of the plaintiff , whether it was not possible to prevent my being present when the writ was executed  but , as I was determined , this was considered to be impracticable  and I own , whenever I heard such a proposition discussed , I treated it with contempt , being convinced that such a plan could never be executed .
I knew , indeed , that all sorts of schemes were openly canvassed at the time , but I paid no attention to them , little dreaming of any plot being formed for carrying them into effect .
It will , however , be seen hereafter , that I was much too confident , and that I was ultimately defeated , by means of a most infamous conspiracy .
Relying upon my own straight-forward and upright conduct , I was totally neglectful of the machinations against me of the stock purse conspirators , who , I have since learned , never let an opportunity slip to draw me into a scrape  and , as they spared no pains or expense , and as they employed a host of emissaries , it was not at all surprising if they succeeded in some of their attempts , as I was a sanguine sportsman , and devoted to the pleasures of the chace , and was likewise an excellent shot  and it was in my zeal in following these field sports that they placed their greatest reliance of catching me upon the hop , they being ever on the watch to take the meanest advantage of the slightest trespass or other occurrence , upon which they could find an action , regardless whether it was tenable or not .


I was riding out one morning , shooting with a friend , and as we were passing along a lane , a public high road , I suddenly felt a smart blow on the side , and at the same moment some one seized me by the flap of my shooting jacket , and nearly pulled me off my horse .
When I recovered myself , and turned round , my friend , the late Mr. John Oakes , of Bath , who had seen the attack made upon me , was demanding of a ruffian the reason for such outrageous conduct .
This ruffian was a fellow of the name of Stone , a game-keeper to Mr. John Benett , of Pyt-House , of Corn-Bill notoriety , one of the present members for the county of Wilts .
Stone stood grinning defiance , with a double-barrelled gun , cocked , in his hand .
Indignant at the atrocity of the assault which , without the slightest provocation , had been committed upon me , I sprung from my horse , and laid down my own gun on the bank , and walking deliberately up to the scoundrel , I first seized his gun with one hand , and with the other I struck him three or four blows  upon which he let go the gun and fell .
This fellow was a notorious fighter , and , as he has since confessed , was hired to commit this assault upon me , with the expectation that I should resent it , which would afford him an opportunity to give me a severe drubbing .
His goodly scheme was , however , frustrated  for my first blow , after I came in contact with him , was planted so effectually , and followed up so rapidly , that the hireling bruiser was defeated , before he could make any successful attempt to retaliate .


Having discharged his gun , I returned it to him , and the gentleman walked off , or rather sneaked away , not only having himself received a sound hiding , such as he had intended and undertaken to give to me , but apparently perfectly ashamed and sensible of his folly .
It appears , however , that after he had gone home , about a quarter of a mile , and washed himself and taken his dinner , he , on the same afternoon , walked to Pyt-House , a distance of thirty miles , to inform his master of the awkward and unexpected result of the experiment which he had been making .
After due deliberation , he was advised to return , and to prefer at the sessions a bill of indictment against me for the assault .
If he could procure any witness to confirm his story , so much the better  but , as no other person was present but myself and my friend , this was no easy matter to be accomplished .
The bill was , however , found at the quarter sessions , and the indictment was removed by certiorari into the Court of King 's Bench , to be tried at the assizes .


This was considered as a great point gained by my enemies  and the members of the stockpurse association were greatly rejoiced , that they had got me into what was considered by some of them as being a serious scrape .
Others openly expressed themselves in this way , `` That they would much rather have paid their money to Stone , if he had given me a good thrashing , than to have me punished by legal proceedings . ''
And one of them , a parson prig , had the insolence and the folly to tell me , that they would get a better man for me next time , for that they were determined to bring down one of the prize-fighters to give me a drubbing .
This fellow was then , and still is , an insufferable cockscomb , and I remember very well my answer to him .
I told him , that I knew all the prize-fighters of any note , and they knew me  and that , with the exception of GULLEY and CRIBB , who I was certain would not undertake any such office , I was sure that if any one of them made the attempt , I should serve him in the same way that I had served Stone .


Another of the stock-purse gang , MICHAEL HICKS BEACH , of Netheravon , one of the M. P. 's for Cirencester , had brought an action of trespass against me , which was also to be tried at the same assizes  so that , with this , and the writ of inquiry in the case of Simpkins and Hunt , which was for the third time to be executed before one of the judges , my hands were pretty full of law business .
This circumstance , however , did not deter me from doing my duty to the public , when occasion offered .
I was very well aware that I had drawn down the indignation and the hatred of the aristocratical upholders of a corrupt system of government , by the open and avowed hostility that I had always expressed , in public and in private , against the supporters and abettors of the system  and I will now proceed to shew the reader , which , perhaps , I ought to have done before , the main cause of this inveterate hostility against me , and of the stock-purse conspiracy being formed , for the declared purpose of putting me down , and , if possible , driving me out of the county .


It will be recollected that I stood forward publicly at the county meeting , that was held relative to Lord Melville 's peculations , and that I had afterwards called the county members to account for their conduct , in not opposing the two shillings a bushel additional duty that was imposed upon malt .
These were mighty offences , not easily to be forgiven  but the grand offence , that which was so unpardonable , that it was never to be expiated , was , that I had caused a requisition to be signed , and procured a county meeting , in order to censure the Duke of York , and to send up a vote of thanks to Colonel Wardle , for his having detected and exposed the infamous transactions practised by the famous Mrs. Mary Anne Clarke , and the Commander in Chief , with regard to promotions and exchanges in the army .


The Parliament of Great Britain assembled on the 19th January this year , 1809 .
The King 's speech , which was delivered by commission , announced the offer of peace made by the Emperors of France and Russia , and the reason for rejecting it , which was , that his Majesty had entered into a treaty of friendship with the Spanish government .
In this speech he relies on his faithful Commons to grant him the supplies for pursuing the war with vigour , congratulates them upon the complete success of the plan for establishing a local militia , and urges them to take steps for maintaining the war in Spain , by increasing the regular army as much as possible , without weakening the means of defence at home .
The ministers carried every measure with a high hand , and the faithful Commons , by very large majorities , granted the supplies for 120,000 seamen and 400,000 soldiers .
Thus the ministers , aided by the faithful representatives of the people , were plucking John Gull , and emptying his pockets , by almost turning them inside outwards , while they were tickling John 's brains with promises of glory , and a number of other fine things .


Charges were now made , and supported by authentic reports , as to the misconduct and peculation of the commissioners of Dutch property .
These charges were brought forward by the regular marshalled opposition , the Whigs , as well as various other charges , as to the abuses existing in the military and naval departments  but , as these were mere regular opposition sham fights , the ministers put them down , by a negative to all their motions , and they even caused a bill to pass , to allow the army to recruit from the militia .


While , however , they were going on in this way ding dong , a real opponent to their measures started up in the House , a man who was not one of the regular gang of the Whig opposition .
On the 27th January , Colonel WARDLE , in pursuance of a notice which he had given , rose up in the House , and , after having in a clear and straight-forward speech , detailed a series of the most nefarious and disgraceful practices , between the Duke of York , the Commander in Chief , and his mistress , Mrs. Mary Anne Clarke , as to the disposal of patronage in the army , by Mrs. Clarke , for large pecuniary douceurs , which she received while living with his Royal Highness , c. c. he concluded by moving for the appointment of a Committee , to inquire into the conduct of the Commander in Chief , with regard to promotions and exchanges in the army , and other points .
Sir Francis Burdett seconded the motion .
The Ministers , as well as the regular old stagers of the opposition , appeared to be in the greatest consternation  yet they all professed to be rejoiced that his Royal Highness would now have an opportunity of clearing away these insinuations , which had been so basely levelled at him , for some time past , by the jacobinical part of the public press  which attacks Mr. York , Mr. Canning , and Lord Castlereagh asserted to be the effect of a conspiracy against the Royal Family .


The Ministers argued strenuously for the appointment of a parliamentary commission , in which they were joined by the artful and cunning suggestions and canting palaver of Mr. Wilberforce .
The cry of a jacobinical conspiracy was loudly raised , and Colonel Wardle was reviled , taunted , and menacingly reminded of the great responsibility which he incurred , by making such charges against the illustrious Commander in Chief .
The cunning , hypocritical Whigs all joined in this cry , and disclaimed any connection with the brave and manly Colonel Wardle .
Mr. Sheridan went so far as to declare in the House , that , as soon as Colonel Wardle had given notice of this motion , he had sent to him , and urged him not to persevere in so dangerous a course !
-- The famous Mr. Charles Yorke , after threatening the honourable mover with the heavy responsibility that he had brought upon himself , congratulated the House that they had at last got some charges made against his Royal Highness , the Commander in Chief , in a tangible form  and he hoped the House would do its duty to itself , the country , and the Royal House of Brunswick .
Mr. Yorke declared that he believed there existed a conspiracy , of the most atrocious and diabolical kind against his Royal Highness , ( loud cries of hear !
hear !
hear ! )
founded on the jacobinical spirit which appeared at the commencement of the French revolution .
Mr. Canning , in a flaming speech , declared , that infamy must attach either upon the accuser or the accused .
The whole of the ministerial side of the House attacked the brave Colonel , and most of the sly Whigs joined in the clamour .
Little Perceval , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , and Sir Vicary Gibbs , the Attorney General , flew at the honourable member like two terriers at a badger  but Colonel Wardle never shifted his ground .
Nothing daunted in a good and honest cause , he relied upon his own courage and integrity , and coolly set all their threats at defiance .
Sir Francis Burdett certainly seconded his motion , but he said but little , very , very little , upon the occasion .
The only one who , in the first instance , appeared at all to stand honestly and boldly by the honourable member , was Lord Folkestone .
In answer to Mr. Perceval 's threats and insinuations , the Colonel very deliberately made fresh charges , instead of retracting any of those that he had preferred  in addition to these charges against the Duke , he stated , that there was a regular office in the city , held under the firm of Pollman and Heylock , in Threadneedle-street , for effecting transactions of a similar nature , and these were effected by Mrs. Carey , the present favourite mistress of the Duke of York  and that two of the members of the cabinet , the Lord Chancellor Eldon , and the Duke of Portland , were implicated in such negociations .


This motion created in the public mind such a sensation as an earthquake would have created  and the country rung with it from one end of the land to the other , from north to south , and from east to west .
This is an ample demonstration , as we shall by and by see , of what can be done by one member in that House , however corrupt it may be , provided that the member possess courage , industry , and perseverance .
The Honourable House was now fairly fixed , and it was compelled to come to a vote , that the whole inquiry should be had in public , and the witnesses should be examined at the bar , before the whole House .
Bravo , Honourable House !
Bravo , Colonel Wardle !
Mrs. Clarke was called to give her testimony at the bar of the Honourable House , and her evidence , which exhibited such a scene as was never before brought before the public , was inserted in every newspaper in the two islands  it was published and read in every village , in every pot-house , and , in fact , in every house in the united kingdom , from the palace to the shepherd 's hut .
And yet Sir Francis Burdett is constantly asking , `` what can one man do in the Honourable House . ''
I ask , `` What is there that one honest , courageous , and persevering man could not do in the House of Commons ? ''
Colonel Wardle , it is true , had at the outset the support of but very few members of the Honourable House , perhaps , honestly and fairly , of not one , except Lord Folkestone  for , very soon after this inquiry began , Sir Francis Burdett was laid up with the gout .
Whether it was a political gout or not , the honourable Baronet is alone able to say  nor is it here worth my while to inquire .
Colonel Wardle , however , found that he could do without even his support , upon which he certainly calculated when he commenced the inquiry .
But if Sir Francis Burdett had the gout , the whole nation had not  Colonel Wardle found himself supported and backed by the whole nation , and this support carried him through with his task , as it always will any man and every man who takes the same honest , upright , straight-forward cause that he did .


It came out in evidence that this said Mrs. Mary Anne Clarke lived in the most luxurious and extravagant manner , during the time that she was what is called `` kept '' by the Duke  she said that she had never received more than a thousand a year from his Royal Highness , which was barely sufficient to pay servants ' wages and liveries , but that the Duke told her , -- `` if she was clever , she need never want money . ''
Twenty thousand a year was not more than enough to defray all the expenses of this extravagant lady , and of the Gloucester-place establishment where she lived .


The whole of this sum must have been obtained in the way described by the evidence produced  that is to say , must have been got by her from persons who procured promotion in the army , through her influence over the Commander in Chief .
As an instance of her extravagance , it was proved , that her wine glasses , out of which she and the Duke drank , cost a guinea a piece !


After all , as might have been expected , a majority of the House of Commons acquitted the Duke of York , upon the following motion of Colonel Wardle , for an address to the King , which address expressed the opinion of the House , `` That the Duke of York knew of the abuses , which had been proved to have existed , and that he ought to be deprived of the command of the army . ''
A hundred and twenty-five members voted for this motion , and three hundred and sixty-three against it  Colonel Wardle and Lord Folkestone were the tellers .
Sir Francis Burdett , being ill in the gout , was not present , and therefore did not vote at all .
Upon Mr. Bankes 's motion , which stated that the Duke of York must at least have had a suspicion of the existence of the corrupt practices , and a doubt whether the chief command of the army could with propriety , or ought with prudence to remain in his hands  upon this motion there were a hundred and ninety-nine for , and two hundred and ninety-four against it .
On the 17th March , Mr. Perceval , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , brought forward a motion , `` That it was the opinion of the House , that there was no ground to charge his Royal Highness with personal corruption , or with any connivance at the corrupt and infamous practices disclosed in the evidence . ''
For this , the minister 's motion , there were two hundred and seventy-eight ayes , and a hundred and ninety-six noes  giving to the King 's servants a majority of eighty-two , out of nearly five hundred members who were present .


With this decision the country was not at all satisfied , and public meetings were called all over the kingdom , for the purpose of voting thanks to Colonel Wardle , and expressing their opinion upon the foregoing proceedings of the honourable and faithful representatives of the people .
Such was the unequivocal and unanimous manifestation of public feeling upon this extraordinary decision of the Honourable House , and such was its effect , that , on the 20th of March , the said Mr. Perceval informed the House , -- `` That the Duke of York had that morning waited on his Majesty , and resigned the office of Commander in Chief . ''


Thus did the united voice of the nation produce the dismissal , or , in other words , cause the resignation of the Duke of York from the situation of Commander in Chief , in spite of a corrupt ministerial majority in the House of Commons .
The Ministers advised this measure , in the hope of silencing the public clamour against their barefaced corrupt proceedings in the House  but this rather confirmed the public in the opinion as to the necessity of the people 's meeting to express their opinions .
I sincerely believe that Mr. Cobbett , by his able and luminous weekly publication , the Political Register , which was now very generally read , did more than all the public writers in the kingdom to keep this feeling alive , and to draw the attention of the public to just and proper conclusions , as to the evidence , as well as to the views and objects of those who cut a prominent figure in conducting the proceedings in the House  and he most successfully and most triumphantly defended Colonel Wardle , Lord Folkestone , and Sir Francis Burdett , from all the malignant attacks that were made upon them by the venal and hireling press of the metropolis  his ability , industry , and zeal in this affair , were above all praise  and , next to Colonel Wardle , he merited the thanks of his countrymen .
By these irresistible productions of his pen , however , he drew down upon himself the implacable hatred and mortal enmity of the Ministers and the Government  and I have no doubt that Sir Vicary Gibbs , the Attorney-General , received instructions to keep a most vigilant look-out after him , as the Ministers had marked him for the victim of their vengeance .


It is worthy of notice that Lord Stanley and Samuel Horrocks , Esq. , the members for Preston , voted for the motion of Colonel Wardle , and they were the only members from the county of Lancaster who voted on that side of the question .
There were only two or three lawyers who voted in the minority , namely , Sir Samuel Romilly , Mr. C. W. Wynne , and Mr. Horner  one military officer , General Fergusson  and one naval officer , Admiral Markham .


I have been thus particular in describing this transaction , because many of my young readers must have but a very faint recollection of the circumstance  a circumstance that created full as powerful a sensation in the country , at that day , in 1809 , as did the persecutions of Queen Caroline , in 1820 .
Every friend of justice , every lover of freedom , and every man and woman of spirit in the country , wished to render a tribute of praise to Colonel Wardle , for his manly and patriotic exertions in the House .
It was not to be expected that the House of Commons , which was composed of such faithful representatives of the people , who voted , by a considerable majority , against Colonel Wardle 's motion , would agree to a vote of thanks to him , although it was talked of by some of the honourable members .
Mr. Canning , as the organ of the ministers , put a negative upon such a measure , by saying that , if it were proposed , he should feel it his duty to resist it  in which opposition Mr. Whitbread , the organ of the Whigs , concurred .
But the people were actuated by a more honest and more generous feeling , and the brave men of GLASGOW and its vicinity set the noble example .
The authorities there refused to comply with an application to call a public meeting  the friends of liberty then proposed an address to be signed  but the venal editors of the newspapers refused to advertise it .
This , nevertheless , did not deter those who wished to promote so praiseworthy a measure  they printed hand-bills , and posted them , announcing `` a just tribute to Colonel Wardle , '' and calling upon the inhabitants to come forward and sign an address to the honourable member , as follows :


`` That Colonel Wardle , by first stepping forward , and by his conduct throughout the whole of the investigation now pending in the honourable the House of Commons , relative to his Royal Highness the Duke of York , has proved himself to the world , to be one of the most magnanimous , patriotic , firm , and candid men in his Majesty 's dominions . ''


These placards were posted on the 14th of March , and at the end of four days the address was forwarded to Colonel Wardle , with four thousand signatures .
The city of Canterbury followed the example by a public meeting , at which they passed a vote of thanks , and presented him with the freedom of their city .
London , Westminster , and ten or fifteen other cities did the same  Middlesex and ten other counties also met , and unanimously passed the highest tributes of praise to Col. Wardle .
A requisition was signed and sent to the sheriff of the county of Hants , at the head of which was the name of Mr. Cobbett , who addressed a letter to the independent people of that county , calling upon them to attend the meeting , and emulate the example set them by the people of Middlesex and other counties .


The meeting was held at Winchester , by the appointment of the High Sheriff , on the 25th of April  John Blackburn , Esq. sheriff , in the chair .
Before the meeting commenced , Mr. Cobbett made an unsuccessful effort to unite with the Whigs , that their proceedings might be carried unanimously .
But Lord Northesk and Mr. Poulett would not agree to support his resolutions .
The publicity which , in Mr. Cobbett 's Register , as well as in the London and country papers , was given to the holding of this meeting at Winchester , excited a considerable sensation and great interest all over that part of the kingdom .
As I had made up my mind to get a requisition signed in the county of Wilts , I made a point of attending the meeting at Winchester  first , because it was the adjoining county  second , because I wished to make myself well acquainted with the form of proceedings for holding a county meeting  and , third , because I was anxious to become better acquainted with the celebrated Mr. Cobbett , who I expected would be the hero of the day .
I was then residing at Bath  but I took my horse on the evening before , and went to Sans Souci Cottage , a distance of thirty miles  and the next morning I rode on to Winchester , thirty miles further , and got there in time to attend the opening of the meeting .
As , at that period , I had no property in the county of Hants , I did not go upon the hustings , or rather into the grand-jury-room , out of the windows of which the speakers addressed the multitude , who stood in the large area below  amongst whom I took a convenient position , to hear what passed .


A soon as the sheriff had opened the meeting , Mr. Poulett Poulett addressed the assembly , and proposed a string of resolutions , which were seconded by the Honourable William Herbert , brother of Lord Carnarvon .
These two gentlemen were known to be supporters of the regular Whig faction , and , although their resolutions breathed a more liberal spirit than usual , yet the cloven foot of the party peeped out , as they contained more of an attack upon the ministers than an abhorrence of the system .
Mr. Cobbett then came forward , and , in a speech at once clear , argumentative , and eloquent , which was received with raptures of applause , and appeared to carry conviction to the breast of every one present , with the exception of two or three parsons , who were in the crowd , and who sometimes expressed a sort of disapprobation , by talking and endeavoring to interrupt the business of the day  moved a series of resolutions , as an amendment to those proposed by Mr. Poulett .
These resolutions were seconded by Mr. Chamberlayne , of Weston , and supported by Mr. Jones , of Sway .
Such speaking as this I had never before heard , and I sincerely believe that the speech of Mr. Chamberlayne was never surpassed by Pitt , Fox , Sheridan , or Burke  it was truly beautiful , and was received from beginning to end with the most unbounded applause .


While these speeches were making it was very evident which side would have the majority .
During the whole of the time the three parson prigs continued their interruptions at intervals  although they had been repeatedly admonished to conduct themselves in a more decent manner , one of them a little short squat fellow , in boots and leather breeches , made himself particularly obnoxious by his noise .
At length I made my way through the dense crowd , and got alongside of them , and by a very determined remonstrance I kept the others quiet , while , by dint of placing my elbow in the little reverend 's side , when he began to open his mouth , the pressure of which made his ribs bend again  I at the same time exclaiming , `` for shame , Sir , be quiet , '' he was ultimately reduced to silence , and made to conduct himself something like a rational being  although I could see that he gnashed his teeth with rage every time of the application of my elbow to his ribs  a discipline which , in spite of his remonstrance , I never failed to inflict upon him , whenever he offered any interruption to the proceedings .
I had the repeated thanks of those around me for thus keeping this little buck in order  but whenever he had an opportunity he was disposed to be scurrilous .


A division being called for , in which those who were in favour of Mr. Cobbett 's amendment were to hold up their hats , the three black-coated gentry were the only persons who kept their hats on in that part of the meeting where we were standing .
The thought now struck me , that I would punish the little chattering hero  and having my own hat in my left hand , I whipped his off with my right , and continued to hold it so high , that with all his efforts he could not reach it to pull it down .
He was in a most outrageous passion , which he exhibited to the great amusement of all those who surrounded him .
Mr. Cobbett 's amendment was carried almost unanimously , at least two thousand hats being held up for it , and not twenty against it .


This was a great victory obtained over the Whigs of that county , who retired to their inn in great dudgeon , while the successful party , the friends of Mr. Cobbett , flocked in great multitudes to his inn , where a dinner had been provided , and I should think about a hundred and fifty persons sat down to one table in the great room .
This party I joined , and once more came in contact with Mr. Cobbett .
Though it was a public meeting , yet I contrived to have some private conversation with him  during which I informed him , that I intended to get a requisition signed for a public meeting , in the county of Wilts , and I requested him to attend it , to assist me in arranging the proceedings .
Of my procuring the meeting , he very much approved , but he declined to give his attendance , or to interfere  his reason was , that he was neither a freeholder nor a resident in the county .
He concluded by saying , `` I will publish your proceedings , and if I were a freeholder I would cheerfully come forward  but , as I am not , you must not expect me . ''


The day was passed with great conviviality , and the bottle went so freely round , that I was mortified and shocked to hear some of those who , in the morning , had delivered the most eloquent , the most brilliant speeches , now , in attempting to speak , utter such trash and balderdash , as would almost have disgraced an idiot : it made such an impression upon me as will never be eradicated .
I had formerly been in the habit of taking my glass occasionally ( although not to excess ) , but this specimen which I had before my eyes , sunk so deep into my heart , that from that time forward I resolved within myself to refrain from taking any intoxicating , deleterious liquors .
I can not , even at this distant moment , banish the recollection of the scene from my mind .
To behold and to contemplate the dreadful ravages that wine had made upon the most brilliant and enlightened human intellect , was sickening to the very soul .
I had then a relation living at Winchester , and I remained there till the next day .
In the morning I became acquainted with one of the most staunch and steady friends of Liberty that I ever knew -- Mr. Budd , of Newbury , an attorney , and , I believe , clerk of the peace for the county of Berks .
He is a freeholder of the county of Hants , and in consequence attended the meeting at Winchester .
I returned to Salisbury that evening , drew up a requisition to the sheriff of the county of Wilts , and , having signed it myself , I got it signed , before I went to-bed , by upwards of twenty freeholders  at the head of whom was that excellent , honest , and public-spirited gentleman , William Collins , Esq. .
I started the next morning , and took Warminster in my road , and , ere I reached Bath , I had got a hundred signatures to the requisition .
From Bath I wrote to Sir Charles Ware Malet , the sheriff of the county , who lived at Wilbury-House , near Amesbury  stating that such a requisition was signed , and requesting that he would appoint a day on which he would be at home , that I might wait upon him with it , to know his pleasure as to when and where he would call the meeting .
By return of post I received a public answer , which fixed an early day  and on that day , accompanied by a friend , I attended with the requisition at Wilbury-House .


Sir Charles Malet had lived for many years in India , and had returned with a princely fortune  he lived like a nabob , in a beautiful place at Wilbury , and he received us in the most polite manner possible .
Having briefly premised the object of our visit , I handed him the requisition , which he read over  and then , casting his eye over the number of signatures , he said , `` Really , Mr. Hunt , I know of no other course to pursue but to comply with the request of yourself and your brother freeholders , who have signed the requisition .
Without pledging myself to any opinion upon the subject , I consider it my duty to attend to the legitimate request , made by such a respectable number of freeholders of the county of which I am the sheriff .
But , '' added he , `` before we consult together where will be the most convenient place , and what will be the most convenient time , to hold the meeting , both for you and me , I have one request to make to you  which is , that after your ride you and your friend will take some refreshment , which I have ordered to be laid for you in the next room .
If you will follow me , I shall be happy to partake of it with you , and we will then talk the matter over . ''
He now led us into a magnificent saloon , where there was a cold collation spread before us , fit for a prince and his suite .
It consisted of every delicacy of the season , and some most beautiful fruit , the production of his extensive hot-houses .
The butler drew the corks of some sparkling Champaigne and fine old hock  but my friend , who was a worthy farmer , requested a draught of ale , in preference to these delicious wines , neither of which did he relish equal to some home-brewed old stingo .
This was instantly produced , and in it the Baronet heartily pledged my companion .
When we had regaled ourselves , he proposed that we should take a walk round his domain and gardens , and return to an early dinner , so that we might get home in good time in the evening .
The first part of the invitation we accepted  but as we had already fared so sumptuously , I declined the invitation to dinner .
After he had shown us round the gardens and park of Wilbury , we agreed that Salisbury would be the most proper place to hold the meeting  and , at my request , he fixed the day for Wednesday , the 17th of May  a distance of time which would allow the notice of the meeting to be advertised twice in the Salisbury Journal .
Thus , to a perfect stranger , did Sir Charles Malet conduct himself  seeking only to do his duty openly , honestly , and conscientiously , without being guided or warped by party feelings , or factious views or motives .
There was no high-sounding title among the requisitionists , but they were men , and they were freeholders  and , as he justly observed , it was not his business to inquire whether they were Lords or Commoners , his only study was to do his duty  which he would endeavour to perform conscientiously .


The next day I sent for my attorney , and instructed him to prepare a conveyance , a deed of gift of a freehold tenement and garden , which I wished to be delivered immediately to Mr. Cobbett  which he promised to do at Salisbury , on the morning of the 17th of May , if Mr. Cobbett would meet him there .
I directed him to write to that gentleman , to request him to meet us there for that purpose , and I also wrote to him to say , that I begged his acceptance of a freehold in the county of Wilts , that he might no longer have the same excuse for not attending our county meeting , which he gave to me when I met him at Winchester , and invited him to meet me on the appointed day .
I received an answer from him , to say , that he would attend  and , in consequence of this , before we went into the Hall in the morning , I met him at the Antelope , where my attorney was waiting with the deeds , which I signed , and made a present of to Mr. Cobbett  thus conferring upon him , for his patriotism , a freehold estate , which , although a small one , made him , nevertheless , a freeholder of the county , and entitled him not only to be present as such at our meetings , but also to a vote for the members of the county .


I had prepared the resolutions , which were similar in effect to those which were passed at the Hampshire meeting  but Mr. Madocks having , in the intermediate time , on the 11th of May , made his famous motion in the House of Commons , distinctly charging Mr. Perceval and Lord Castlereagh with having actually sold a seat in Parliament to Mr. Quinten Dick , and with having endeavoured to prevail upon Mr. Dick to vote against Colonel Wardle 's motion , in the case of the Duke of York  and the Honourable House having declined to inquire into it , Mr. Cobbett proposed to notice this circumstance in the resolutions .
This was immediately done , and we proceeded to the Council-House , where Sir Charles Malet opened the business , in the most crowded assembly that was ever witnessed in that city .
As soon as he had done this , I addressed the meeting , which address was received in the most flattering manner , and I closed it by proposing the following resolutions .
They were seconded , in an able speech , by the late William Collins , Esq. of Salisbury , and supported by Mr. Bleek , of Warminster , and were carried by an immense majority , many thousand hats being held up for them , and not above a dozen against them .
They were inserted in the 15th volume of Cobbett 's Register , page 855  but it may be necessary , perhaps , to insert them here , as all my readers may not have access to that work .


`` COUNTY OF WILTS .


`` At a meeting of the Freeholders , Landholders , and other Inhabitants of the County of Wilts , convened by the High Sheriff , and holden in the Council-Chamber in the City of New Sarum , on Wednesday , the 17th of May , 1809 , Sir Charles Warre Malet , in the chair 


`` It was Resolved ,


`` That the thanks of this meeting be given to Gwillim Lloyd Wardle , Esq. for having instituted the recent inquiry in the House of Commons , relative to the conduct of His Royal Highness the Duke of York , as Commander in Chief : for having , unconnected with , and unsupported by , any party or faction , prosecuted that laudable undertaking with unexampled magnanimity , talent , zeal , temper , and perseverance  and especially for having had the resolution to discharge his duty , in defiance of threats and prejudices excited against him by the King 's Ministers , and many of the leaders of the opposite party .


`` That the thanks of this meeting be given to Sir F. Burdett , Bart .
who seconded Mr. Wardle 's motion  and also to Lord Viscount Folkestone , for the active and able assistance he afforded to Mr. Wardle during the whole of the inquiry .


`` That the thanks of this meeting be given to Lords Viscount Milton and Althorpe , Lord Stanley , the Hon. T. Brand , Sir Samuel Romilly , Knight , Major-General Fergusson , S. Whitbread , T. Curwen , T. W. Coke , H. Martin , T. Calcraft , and C. W. Wynne , Esqrs .
who , during such inquiry , stood forward the advocates of impartial justice  and also to the whole of the minority of 125 , who divided in favour of Mr. Wardle 's motion  amongst whom , we , as Wiltshire men , observe with pleasure the name of that venerable and truly independent senator , William Hussey , Esq. who , for nine successive Parliaments , has represented the city of New Sarum with ability and perseverance , and with undeviating integrity and independence : of Thomas Goddard , Esq. .
Member for Cricklade  and of Benjamin Walsh , Esq. .
Member for Wootton Basset , in this county : while we observe with indignation and regret , that the name of neither of the Members for this county does appear in that honourable list : and we also lament that , with the exception of Lord Folkestone , William Hussey , Thomas Goddard , and Benjamin Walsh , Esquires , we do not recognise in that list the names of any of the THIRTY-FOUR Members who are sent to Parliament by the various boroughs in this county .


`` That , in reverting to the cause of the disgraceful acts revealed and demonstrated during this inquiry , this meeting can not help observing , that in the Act of Parliament , commonly called the Act of Settlement , in virtue of which Act only His Majesty 's family were raised to the throne of this kingdom , it is declared , ` That no person who has an office or place of profit under the King , or receives a pension from the Crown , shall be capable of serving as a Member of the Commons ' House of Parliament : but that , notwithstanding the wise precautions of this Act , which is one of our great constitutional laws , and which , as its preamble expresses , was made for the further limitation of the Crown , and better securing the rights and liberties of the subject , it appears from a report laid before the House of Commons , in the month of June last  in consequence of a motion made by Lord Cochrane , that there are in that House EIGHTEEN placemen and pensioners , who , though part of what they receive was not stated , are in the said report stated to receive 178,994 l. a year , out of the taxes paid by the people , and out of that money , to watch over the expenditure of which they themselves are appointed .


`` That we observe the names of all those Placemen and Pensioners voting against Mr. Wardle 's motion .


`` That , in the Act called the Bill of Rights , it is declared , ` That the election of Members of Parliament ought to be free : ' and in the same Act it is declared , ` That the violating the freedom of election of Members to serve in Parliament , was one of the crimes of King James the Second , and one of the grounds upon which he was driven from the throne of this kingdom  ' but that , notwithstanding that law , this meeting have observed , that on the 14th instant , Mr. Madocks did distinctly charge Mr. Perceval and Lord Castlereagh with having sold a seat in Parliament to Mr. Dick , and with having endeavoured to prevail upon the said Mr. Dick to vote against Mr. Wardle on the case of the Duke of York  and that Mr. Madocks having made a motion for an inquiry into the said transactions , the House , by a very large majority , decided that there should be no such inquiry .
`` That , from these facts , as well as numerous others , notorious to us and the whole nation , this meeting have a firm conviction , that in the House of Commons , as at present constituted , exists the great and efficient cause of all such scandalous abuses , in various departments of the state , as have in other countries alienated the subject from the sovereign , and ultimately proved the downfall of the state .


`` That , therefore , this meeting , anxious alike for the preservation of His Majesty 's throne and legitimate authority  for the restoration of the rights and liberties bequeathed them by the wisdom , the fortitude , and the valour of their forefathers , hold it a duty which they owe to their sovereign and his successors , to themselves and to their children , and to the safety , happiness , and renown of their country , to declare their decided opinion and conviction , that no change for the better can be reasonably expected without such a Reform in the Commons ' House of Parliament , as shall make that house in reality , as well as in name , the representative of the people , and not an instrument in the hands of a minister .
And we further declare , that , from the proof we have always had of His Majesty 's love for his people , we have full confidence in his Royal support and protection in our constitutional efforts against a faction , not less hostile to the true dignity and just prerogatives of His Majesty 's throne , than they are to the interest and feelings of his faithful , suffering , and insulted people .


`` That Henry Penruddock Wyndham and Richard Long , Esquires , the representatives of this county , have , by their late conduct in Parliament , proved themselves undeserving the confidence of their constituents , and of the future support of this county .


`` Resolved unanimously , That the thanks of this meeting be given to the High Sheriff , for calling the same , and for his impartial conduct in the chair . ''


This being the first public meeting which , within the memory of man , was ever held in this county for any other purpose but that of an election  and this meeting being called by a requisition of the yeomanry of the county , without the names or influence of either of the factions of Whigs or Tories  and these resolutions being also proposed by me , and carried most triumphantly , by an immense majority , I have thought proper to record them , at full length , in the pages of my Memoirs .
Mr. Cobbett , who attended the meeting , expressed himself in language of very high approbation , as to the manner in which the proceedings were conducted .
This might truly be called the triumph of the people over faction , and we celebrated it by dining together at the Three Swans Inn .
An excellent short-hand writer , of the name of Willett , attended our meeting , and he also had attended all the county meetings held at that time , upon this very important question , an account of which proceedings was given exclusively in the Statesman newspaper , of which he was the proprietor , and by whose means that paper was established .


From this period I may date the commencement of my political intimacy with Mr. Cobbett , who , in his next Register , spoke in very exulting terms of the respectability and good order of our meeting , and the great unanimity with which the Resolutions were passed .
This was on the 17th May , 1809 -- eleven years after , on the 17th May , 1820 , I passed by Salisbury on my road to this Bastile .
I had long been a staunch advocate for a Reform in the representation of the Commons ' House of Parliament  but the infamous practices which had been developed by Mr. Madocks , and the rejection , by a large majority , of his motion for an inquiry into those disgraceful practices , so thoroughly rooted in me a conviction of the absolute necessity of such a Reform , that I came to a determination within myself , never to cease from my endeavours to obtain it  being perfectly satisfied that , without an effectual and Radical Reform in the House of Commons , the boasted Constitution of England would soon become a mere mockery , and the scoff instead of the envy and admiration of surrounding States .


For the same reason that I insert the foregoing Resolutions , passed at the County Meeting for Wiltshire , I will now insert the charge made by Mr. Madocks , in the Honourable House , on the 11th of May , 1809 .
Mr. Cobbett observed , in his Register of the 20th of May following , that `` It ought to be printed `` in all shapes and sizes  and be perpetuated in all the ways in which any act can be perpetuated .
A concise statement of the charge and the decision should have a place in all the Almanacks  all the printed Memorandum Books  in Court Calendars  Books of Roads  and I see no harm in its having a place upon a spare leaf in the Books of Common Prayer .
It should be framed and glazed  and hung up in Inns , Town Halls , Courts of Justice , Market Places , and , in short , the eye of every human creature should be , if possible , constantly fixed upon it . ''
I will , therefore , as far as I have the means , hand down the charge and the decision , by recording it in my Memoirs , for the benefit of my young readers , who are not old enough to remember the sensation which it excited at the time , as well as for the information of those who shall come hereafter .
The charge , in Mr. Madocks 's own words , was this : `` I affirm that Mr. Dick purchased a seat in the House of Commons , for the Borough of Cashel , through the agency of the Honourable Henry Wellesley , who acted for and on behalf of the Treasury  that , upon a recent question , of the last importance , when Mr. Dick had determined to vote according to his conscience , the Noble `` LORD CASTLEREAGH did intimate to that Gentleman , the necessity of his either voting with the Government , or resigning his seat in that House  and that Mr. Dick , sooner than vote against principle , did make choice of the latter alternative , and vacate his seat accordingly .
To this transaction I charge the Right Honourable Gentleman , MR. PERCEVAL , as being privy , and having connived at it .
THIS I WILL ENGAGE TO PROVE BY WITNESSES AT YOUR BAR , if the House will give me leave to call them . ''
The Honourable Member , after making an eloquent and forcible appeal to the House , moved for an inquiry .
The Chancellor of the Exchequer , ( Mr. Perceval ) addressed the House , and humbly declared that , `` whether at such a time , it would be well to warrant such a species of charges , as merely introductory to the agitation of the great question of Reform , he left to the House to determine : '' he then made his bow and retired .
Lord Castlereagh did the same .
Mr. Madocks then explicitly moved , that the said charge against the Right Honourable Spencer Perceval , and Lord Viscount Castlereagh , should be heard at the bar on Monday next .
LORD MILTON said , `` he would oppose the motion , if he thought it would tend to promote the question of Parliamentary Reform .
But , although he would vote for the motion in part , still in whatever way it was decided , he would not think one jot the worse of either of the Right Honourable Gentlemen accused , or that they were in any degree more criminal than all former Governments . ''
Sir FRANCIS BURDETT , in supporting the motion , said , `` if the House refused to inquire into the transaction , or if any Gentleman within its walls contended these practices formed part of the Constitution , then he must say that Buonaparte had a `` better ally within their walls than he had any where else . ''
MR. TIERNEY opposed the motion , and said , `` it would be great injustice to render a few individuals the victims of a system which did not commence with them . ''
MR. WHITBREAD manfully supported the motion , and said , `` if such a case as this were overlooked , the House might as well , in his opinion , expunge its Journals , burn its Statutes , and blot out the Constitution . ''
MR. PONSONBY , in opposing the motion , said , `` he would appeal to all who heard him , whether many seats were not sold , and that being NOTORIOUS , he never could persuade himself to take advantage of such a circumstance in a political adversary , for the purpose of running him down . ''
LORD FOLKESTONE warmly supported the motion , and said , `` that resisting inquiry only served to strengthen the influence and extend the limits of suspicion , by comprehending all those who connected themselves with such resistance . ''
MR. WINDHAM Opposed the motion , and in the following words impudently justified the practice .
He affirmed that `` these things were , in fact , so interwoven with the Constitution , and that Constitution itself was such a complicated system , that no wise statesman would venture to tear them out , lest he should take out something very valuable along with them . ''
MR. CANNING called upon the House `` to make a stand THAT NIGHT , against the encroachments of the factious .
To-night it was summoned to make an immolation of TWO upon his side of the House , and perhaps , if successful now , it would on the morrow be summoned to sacrifice two stately victims from the other side . ''
Sing Tantararara , Rogues all !!!
The House divided , and the question was taken upon Mr. Madocks 's motion FOR AN INQUIRY into the matter , when EIGHTY-FIVE members voted for the motion , and THREE HUNDRED AND TEN members voted against all inquiry -- Majority against inquiry , TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIVE .
Such was the charge , and such was the result .


After having read the above , will any honest man say , that a Reform in the House of Commons is not necessary ?
It was this memorable transaction to which I alluded , in the resolutions that I proposed , and which were unanimously adopted at the County Meeting at Salisbury  and , by being the principal , or , I may say , the sole cause of such meeting being called , I rendered myself so completely obnoxious to the Government , that every means were put in practice by their agents and underlings , to annoy , perplex , and harrass me  amongst which number the stock purse combination took the most prominent part .


At the Michaelmas Sessions 1809 , as I have before stated , a Bill of Indictment was found against me , for an assault upon Stone , the ruffian gamekeeper of John Benett , Esq. of Pyt House , which indictment was moved by a writ of Certiorari , into the Court of King 's Bench .
Michael Hicks Beach had also commenced an action against me , in the name of Mr. Jenner , one of his tenants , for a trespass , in following Colonel Thornton 's stag hounds over a portion of his property , after I had received a notice , warning me off .
Both the indictment and the action were to be tried at the ensuing Spring Assizes , to be holden at Salisbury , in March , 1810 .


The Attorney-General had , in the mean time , moved for , and obtained a Criminal Information against Mr. Cobbett , for an article which he inserted in his Register , on the 1st of July , 1809 , upon the subject of flogging the Local Militia in the Isle of Ely .
The account of this flogging was published in the Courier newspaper , on the 24th of June , which account , as follows , was taken by Mr. Cobbett as his motto : `` The mutiny amongst the LOCAL MILITIA , which broke out at Ely , was fortunately suppressed on Wednesday , by the arrival of four squadrons of the GERMAN LEGION CAVALRY from Bury , under the command of General Auckland .
Five of the ring-leaders were tried by a Court Martial , and sentenced to receive five hundred lashes each  part of which punishment they received on Wednesday , and a part was remitted .
A stoppage for their knapsacks was the ground of complaint which excited the mutinous spirit , which occasioned the men to surround their officers and demand what they deem their arrears .
The first division of the German Legion halted yesterday at Newmarket , on their return to Bury . ''
This transaction of German soldiers superintending the flogging of English Local Militia-men , who were scarcely to be called soldiers , and who were , indeed , only one remove from the volunteers , caused a considerable sensation throughout the country , and Mr. Cobbett wrote a spirited article in his Register , in which he indignantly expressed the natural feeling of an Englishman , upon hearing that German troops were employed for such a purpose .
This publication was seized with avidity by the Attorney-General , Sir Vicary Gibbs , who not only moved for a Criminal Information against Mr. Cobbett , the author , but also against his printer and publisher .


To make the young reader completely acquainted with the subject , it is necessary here to observe , that some time previous to this , a large body of German troops , called the German Legion , had been introduced into the country , by a vote of the faithful guardians of the people 's rights and liberties , contrary to the letter and spirit of the Constitution , and in direct violation of the Act of Settlement .
The admitting of these German troops excited strong suspicions in the breast of every friend to freedom , and every lover of the Constitution  and their being employed in such a service as that of superintending the flogging of Englishmen , was a most disgusting and revolting sight , which was contemplated with feelings of the utmost abhorrence by every man who had the least regard for the honour of his country or the character of his countrymen .


The fact was , that the Government had placed arms in the hands of so many volunteers and local militia-men , that they became alarmed at the power which they had themselves created  and these whiskered German troops were , therefore , called in for the purpose of keeping them in subjection .
So that the Ministers took care to have plenty of German troops , who , in conjunction with the Irish regiments of militia , were to watch over the movements of the English , particularly those newly raised volunteers and local militia , who , in many instances , manifested rather a turbulent disposition , and an impatience of being bilked in the same manner as some of the regulars were , by their officers .
An instance of this I witnessed in Bath , where the Somerset local militia were quartered .
Great dissatisfaction had for a day or two been strongly expressed by the men , in consequence of a stoppage of some portion of their pay having been made for gaiters .
What was the sum stopped , I forget  but I recollect that as I was walking of which the prison stood .
I hastened to the spot with a friend , and we got there just in time to see the soldiers come out of the prison with their comrade , whom they had rescued , mounted upon their shoulders  and in this manner they bore him in triumph to his quarters .
Some of the officers arrived , and one of them drew his sword  but he was instantly disarmed , and pelted with mud , so that , while he escaped with some difficulty , he looked more like a person just released from the pillory than like an officer who had the command of troops .
During the whole evening the streets swarmed with crowds of people , and the injustice of the extortion for the men 's gaiters was the universal topic of converse amongst them .
As almost every one was expressing his indignation at the conduct of the officers , and swearing that the men should not be punished , affairs bore such an alarming appearance , that dispatches were sent off , in all directions , for more troops to come to the assistance of the officers .
Very prudently , there was no attempt made that night to take into custody the man who had been rescued , or those who had rescued him .
As all the men concerned in the transaction were known , it was reported that they would be brought to a drum-head court-martial ear up the street , I heard some of the men inquiring at a shop the price of a pair of gaiters , which they were told by the tradesman was about half as much as had been stopped out of each man 's pay .
The men had complained loudly to the non - commissioned officers , without obtaining any redress .
The next day they made a stand upon parade , which was called a mutiny .
The ring-leader was seized , and conveyed immediately , under a military escort , to the town prison .
This circumstance ran like wildfire all over the city , and when the troops were dismissed from the parade , which was incautiously done soon after , the militia-men proceeded in a body to the gaol , and demanded their comrade  and compliance with the demand being refused , they seized a long piece of timber that lay in the street , near the prison , and this they used as a battering-ram against the door of the gaol , which they soon forced off its hinges .
I was sitting in the back dining-room at my house , No. 1 , Lady Mead , and I witnessed the transaction myself .
About the third effort with the battering-ram , each of which was cheered by the populace , I saw the prison doors fly open , and the soldiers enter .
By this time an immense multitude , consisting of many thousand persons , had assembled in Grove-street , at the bottom , early the next morning , and punished .
Orders were given for their being upon the parade the next morning at four o'clock  and all attended , together with about four or five thousand of the Bath populace , resolutely swearing that the man should not be punished .
There was no German Legion at Bath , or blood would have been spilt .
Happily the whole passed off without any bad consequences .
After the offenders had been admonished , one of the officers informed the populace that they were forgiven , upon which they peaceably departed to their homes .
I believe that a proper abatement was made in the price of the gaiters , and thus this affair was settled before the arrival of any other troops , many of which ( Somersetshire Yeomanry ) came galloping into the city in the course of the day .
This year , the arms of Great Britain were , to say the least of it , very unsuccessful .
The army in Spain , under Sir John Moore , made a very inglorious retreat , or rather flight , before the French troops , which , after being continued for two hundred and fifty miles , ended in the battle of Corunna .
In that battle the English Commander fell , and the remains of the army , after having sustained immense loss , were compelled to embark on board their fleet  not less than six thousand troops having been sacrificed upon the occasion .
On the 27th of January , the French entered Ferrol , and took seven sail of the line  Saragossa also surrendered to their arms .
In May there was a revolution in Sweden , and Gustavus the Fourth , one of the legitimate race of old kings , was deposed .
War was again declared by Austria against France .
In April , the English fleet , under Lord Cochrane , destroyed four sail of the line in Basque Roads .
On the 13th of May , the French entered Vienna .
Russia also declared war against Austria .
Buonaparte beat the Austrians in various battles , and effected the passage of the Danube in July , and finished the campaign by a total defeat of the Austrian army at the battle of Wagram  upon which the Emperor Francis was obliged to sue for an armistice .
It was granted by Napoleon , although the prostrate legitimate was , with his whole dominions , completely in the power of the French Emperor .
Thus did Napoleon show him that mercy which the deadly Austrian had not the magnanimity or the honour to return when Napoleon had fallen into misfortune .
This was one of Napoleon 's greatest faults  he appeared to delight in conquering and subduing tyrants , and then reinstating them on their thrones , that he might conquer them again .
This is one of the greatest stains upon his character .
He had it in his power to exterminate the tyrants of Austria , Russia , and Prussia , and by that means to bring the English Government to a sense of its duty to the people of England .
This he failed to do , and his reward was perpetual imprisonment , lingering torture , and a premature death , inflicted upon him by the very same sovereigns that he had spared from annihilation .
The old proverb , of `` Save a thief from the gallows and he will cut your throat , '' was never more truly verified than in this instance .


On the 27th of July , the Battle of Talavera was fought between the English and the French , in which Sir Arthur Wellesley pompously claimed a victory , although he and his whole army retreated before day-break the next morning , leaving the whole of the sick and wounded behind them .
Such was the rapidity of this retreat , that they scarcely ever stopped to refresh themselves , till they had passed the boundaries of the Spanish dominions , and entered into Portugal .
-- Notwithstanding all this , it was trumpeted forth in all the ministerial papers that Sir Arthur Wellesley had gained a GREAT VICTORY  and , to complete the humbug , the Ministers carried the hoax so far as to create the said Sir Arthur Wellesley either Baron or Viscount TALAVERA !
This was the way in which the English Ministry gulled John Bull  and as John swallowed this title so readily , from that time I have designated , and I shall always designate him , by the title of JOHN GULL , instead of John Bull  GULL being a most appropriate title , with a very significant and truly characteristic meaning .


Blake 's army from Valentia was also at this period completely dispersed .
The English Ministry likewise sent out two expeditions this year , both of which ended in defeat and disgrace .
One was dispatched from Sicily to the South of Italy , and the other was the memorable and fatal expedition to Walcheren , commanded by the renowned Lord Chatham , the elder brother of Pitt , who , from his fondness for lying in bed , had obtained the nick name of the late Lord Chatham .
This was a most calamitous undertaking , and reflected the highest disgrace upon the characters of those who planned it , as well as of those who were selected to carry it into execution .
I recollect that at the time it was confidently asserted that the redoubtable Commander , Lord Chatham , spent three parts of his time in bed  at all events , he proved to be a most unsuccessful , if not a sleepy commander .
The famous city-gormandizer , Sir William Curtis , accompanied this expedition , thus making one , as it were , of a party of pleasure , while , from exhaustion and disease , the troops were perishing in the pestilential swamps of the country .
In fact , this proved a mere wanton sacrifice of British treasure and British blood .


In consequence of these disasters , there arose such great dissentions and heart-burnings in the British Cabinet , that at length it produced a duel between two of its most conspicuous members , Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Canning , in which Mr. Canning was badly wounded .
In better times , the dispute possibly would perhaps have been settled much more conformably with the principles of justice , by both of them being impeached for their mal-administration , and their wanton and lavish waste of the best blood and treasure of their country .


In September the new theatre at Covent-Garden was opened  and , in consequence of the managers having increased the prices , a riot commenced , which continued night after night for nearly three months .
It was universally known by the name of `` the O. P. row  '' that was , a contention for old prices , by the audience , and a determined struggle on the part of the managers , to enforce and continue the new and increased prices .
I may be asked by some , `` what has this to do with your Memoirs , or with the political history of the times '' ?
I answer , it has nothing to do with my Memoirs , as I was not in London during the whole of the row  but I shall by and by show , that it had a great deal more to do with political matters , or rather with a political party , than was at the time imagined , or than is even now suspected .
I believe that , in the first instance , the spontaneous expression of public opinion was the cause of the row which took place  but I know that it was afterwards taken under the special protection of that August body , the WESTMINSTER RUMP , by whom the regular , well-organised plan for the interruption of the performance , was framed and constantly kept up .
It will be remembered that my worthy friend , Henry Clifford , took an active and conspicuous part in these proceedings .
Mr. Clifford was a warm partizan of Sir Francis Burdett , and , although he possessed too noble a soul to belong regularly to such an illiberal faction as that of the Rump , yet , as they had not then discovered the cloven-foot so unblushingly as they have since done , he was one of the number who frequently joined in their deliberations .
This may , in some measure , account for their endeavoring to keep up the semblance of impartiality and fair-play , while he had any thing to do with them .
Those who can recollect the circumstances , will also recollect , that Mr. Cowlam took a very prominent part in the row  and poor Sam Miller , the shoemaker , in Skinner-street , was another staunch attend ant at all the O. P. deliberations .
Cowlam was the man who seconded the nomination of Sir Francis Burdett , when the baronet was first proposed for Westminster  at the time that Currier Adams , of Drury-lane , slunk from the office of seconder , after having previously pledged himself to undertake it .
Like Falstaff , however , in this point , though not in wit , Adams has , ever since poor Cowlam 's death , had the meanness to claim the honour which belongs to another .
Cowlam also rode the white horse , as the 11 emblem of purity , '' at the epoch of the first chairing  which unlucky animal Mister Cleary has since mounted !
These , together with others of the Rump , held their meetings regularly every day , as well as every night after the performance was over .
At length , when their resources were nearly exhausted ( which , by the bye , I understood were furnished by a certain Baronet ) , and they were upon the point of retiring from the contest , poor Miller hit upon the expedient of the O.P. dinner , which was held at the Crown and Anchor  at which dinner Mr. John Kemble attended , and an arrangement and compromise was made between him and Henry Clifford  the one on the part of the theatre , and the other on the part of the public .
Thus ended this mighty struggle , which , at times , bore a very alarming appearance , and was the subject of universal interest throughout the country .
I have no doubt but that , under the rose , the managers of the theatre encouraged the proceeding , as it filled their coffers , there being a bumper , that is to say , a full house , almost every night .
The cockneys enjoyed the fun , and every stranger who came to London must go to Covent-Garden , one night at least , to `` see the row , '' and to carry an account of it into the country .


On the 25th of October a Jubilee was held , to celebrate His Majesty 's entering the fiftieth year of his reign .
Upon this occasion a pardon was issued to all deserters , and a great number of Crown debtors were discharged from prison .


The year 1810 commenced , by the Citizens of London , in Common-Hall assembled , having voted a petition to be presented to the King .
The Sheriffs and City Remembrancer had waited upon the Secretary of State ( Marquis Wellesley ) , to ascertain when it would be His Majesty 's pleasure to receive it .
Upon which the Noble Secretary informed them , that he would take His Majesty 's pleasure upon the subject  and at the following levee he let them know , that it was His Majesty 's pleasure that it should be presented through the Secretary of State .


Since the BRUNSWICKS came to the throne of England , this was the first instance of a petition agreed to at a Common-Hall being refused to be received in person by the King .


Alderman Wood , who was one of the Sheriffs , requested that he might be admitted to a private audience of the King .
This was refused  and the Sheriffs having called another Common-Hall , they laid the report of the affair before the assembled livery , who passed a series of spirited resolutions , asserting their right to deliver their petitions to the King on the throne , and instructing their representatives to move an address in Parliament , to be presented to the King , to inquire into the violation of the right of petitioning .
Mr. Sheriff Wood received an unanimous vote of thanks from the Common-Hall  while the conduct of his colleague , Atkins , evinced his character , and was a pretty faithful index of his future subserviency to the `` powers that be . ''
Petitions were now presented to the King , not only from the city of London , but from Berkshire , and other parts , calling for an inquiry into the disgraceful Walcheren expedition .
When Parliament met , the war in Spain and the expedition to Flushing were warmly canvassed  but , of course , the Ministers carried every question with a high hand and large majorities , and the business ended in a vote approving of the conduct of Ministers , in planning and executing that disgraceful and costly expedition .


Mr. Perceval , an insignificant lawyer , now suddenly became First Lord of the Treasury , and Chancellor of the Exchequer , to the astonishment of the whole nation .
During the Walcheren inquiry the debates ran very high in the House of Commons , and a member , Mr. Charles Yorke , cleared the gallery of the strangers .
This act being discussed in a debating society , Mr. John Gale Jones , who was acting as the president , was committed to Newgate , by a Speaker 's warrant , for having been guilty of a breach of privilege .
This proceeding drew from Sir Francis Burdett an address to his constituents , which was a very able and spirited composition .
It was also voted to be a breach of privilege , and a libel upon the House , and the Speaker 's warrant was issued for the apprehension and committal of the Honourable Baronet to the Tower .
Great riots took place in London , which lasted two days , in consequence of Sir Francis Burdett resisting the execution of this warrant , and barricading the doors and windows of his house in Piccadilly .
At length , however , he was taken to the Tower under military escort : on their return from the Tower the military were hissed and pelted , upon which they fired on the people , and three men were killed .
The coroner 's inquest sat upon the bodies , and in two of the cases brought in a verdict of wilful murder , and in the third , a verdict of justifiable homicide .
As in a late instance , however , the murderers were allowed to remain not only unpunished but untried .


Sir Francis Burdett was at this time the most popular man in England , and he was idolized by every lover of freedom in the united kingdom .
In his resistance to the illegal warrant , he had barricadoed his house , into which the Serjeant at Arms had made several unsuccessful attempts to gain admission  and it was expected that the latter would attempt a forcible entry , as he had received positive orders from the House to execute his warrant by force .
I shall here relate an anecdote on the subject , which came to my knowledge soon afterwards .
A Noble Lord , a gallant naval officer , and M.P. called upon the Baronet one morning , attended by a friend , in a coach , out of which a cask was handed into the Baronet 's house  and , as a friend , he was admitted of course by old John , the porter .
Upon his Lordship 's entering the Baronet 's room , he communicated his plan for the defence of the castle , in case any attempt should be made to effect a violent entry .
He very deliberately proposed to undermine the foundation of the front wall , and deposit there a cask of gun-powder , which he had brought with him for the purpose , so that he might blow the invaders to the devil , in case they should attempt anything like a forcible entry .
At this proposal , which was made with every appearance of sincerity , Sir Francis Burdett started , and answered that he had not any intention of resistance any farther than trying the question , to see whether they would break open the house or not .
The gallant tar then retired , apparently very much disconcerted , and he was particularly requested to take away with him the cask of gun-powder , which he did immediately .
The next morning the Serjeant at Arms and his attendants broke open a window-shutter in the front area , entered without the least resistance , and conveyed their prisoner to the Tower .
While these things were going on in London , I had been busily engaged in the country , defending myself in the Courts of Law at the assizes for the county of Wilts , which were held at Salisbury .
As the indictment preferred against me by John Benett , Esq. on the part of his gamekeeper , Stone , was intended to be made a serious charge against me , I was prevailed upon to confide the conducting of my defence to counsel .
Much against my own inclination and judgment , did I give up this point , to oblige my friends , who were most earnest in their solicitations upon the subject .
Mr. Burroughs ( the present Judge ) and Mr. Casberd , were employed for the prosecution  and I at length suffered my attorney to give a brief to Mr. Sergeant Pell .
The cause was called on , and Stone positively swore to the assault , which he declared had deprived him of his senses , and that he had not been well since .
Another person , who never saw one atom of the transaction , and who was never near the place till it was all over , swore to the same facts , and confirmed Stone 's evidence  and although I knew this fellow was swearing falsely , and though I pointed the fact out to Sergeant Pell , that the witness was not near the place , yet he was so alarmed , or pretended to be so alarmed at the case , that I could not prevail upon him to cross-examine the witness .
The next witness who was called swore that he was a surgeon , that he lived at Amesbury , the adjoining town  that he had attended Stone , whose life had been in danger  that Stone had been greatly and seriously injured in his health  and that , in his opinion , he would never recover it .
This appeared to stagger and confound my counsel more than ever , and I could not get him to ask the man a single question  although it struck me that this witness was grossly perjured .
Well !
Mr. Sergeant Pell made what he called a speech , which , in my opinion , admitted a great deal more than was necessary .
My friend , Mr. John Oaks , was then called , who positively swore that the ruffian , Stone , had assaulted me first , by striking me and nearly pulling me off my horse , without any provocation whatever .
My friend , however , who had never given evidence in a court of justice before , was a very awkward , hesitating witness , and he received a very severe cross-examination from Mr. Burroughs .
Baron Graham summed up , and charged the Jury that I had , by my own showing , been guilty of an assault .
He had , he said , no doubt but the man Stone had struck me first , as sworn by Mr. Oaks  but he thought that I had given the man more than a sufficient quantum of beating in retaliation , as I had struck him three times : if it had been proved that I had only struck him once , in return for the blow he gave me , he should have charged the Jury to acquit me  but , as it was , they must find me guilty of the assault .
He , however , totally acquitted me of that with which I was charged by the counsel against me , namely , of having acted with inhumanity and cruelty .
The Jury , of course , gave a verdict of guilty  and the Baron took my word that I would attend in the Court of King 's Bench , in the next term , to receive judgment .


The next day was fixed for trying the action which Michael Hicks Beach had commenced against me , for a trespass .
A similar attempt was made , by my attorney and my friends , to induce me to leave the conducting of any cause to counsel .
Little Frederick Williams , the barrister , was employed , or he volunteered his services , to prevail upon my family to persuade me to leave my defence to Mr. Sergeant Pell .
I heard all that they had to say , but I resolutely resisted all their intreaties  and declared that I would not only defend myself , but that , as long as I lived , I would never employ a counsel .
I would , I told them , endeavour to manage my own affairs in the Courts , let what would happen .
To this resolution I have ever since most inflexibly adhered  and I am sure that I shall continue to do so as long as I have strength and power of utterance .
I believe that Mr. Erskine once observed , that `` a man who pleaded his own cause , had a fool for an advocate . ''
This was reported to me  and my answer was , `` that it might be very true , but I had a great consolation in knowing that I had not a rogue for a counsel . ''


The cause was at length called on  and as it was known that I intended to plead my own cause , it excited great interest , and the Court was crowded to excess .
Mr. Burroughs opened the case against me , in a very vindictive speech , in which he travelled widely out of the course to find matter to attack me .
The Judge ought , in strictness , to have stopped him  but I believe the worthy Baron ( Graham ) who presided , gave me credit for being quite a match for Mr. Counsellor Burroughs , and therefore it was that he suffered him to proceed .
After having proved that notice not to go upon the lands of the said Hicks Beach had been served upon me , Burroughs called as his first witness a fox-hunting parson , of the name of Williams , who was the Curate of Netheravon , and dubbed chaplain to the squire .
The clerical witness proved the trespass , that I had , in following Colonel Thornton 's fox-hounds , in company with the rest of the sportsmen who were out , ridden over a part of the land belonging to Beach , and in the occupation of Farmer Jenner  which land I had received notice not to trespass upon .
This toad-eating parson I knew well , and I was well acquainted with his occupation  which was literally that of whipper-in to the squire 's hounds .
He was as much at the squire 's beck and command as one of his menial servants in fact , I had often seen him obey such orders as no servant would have obeyed .
I have heard Mr. Beach , when a hound skirted , halloo out , `` d -- my blood , Williams , do n't you see that bound !
flog him in , or cut his liver out , '' c. c..
Then his reverence would ride like the very devil  and this was such a common thing , that I have heard the huntsman order him about in the same way .
I have heard the latter say , `` d -- it , Sir , why do you not ride and head the hounds ? ''
and he has frequently observed to me , and other sportsmen , `` By G-d , that d -- d Parson stuffs himself so at master 's table , that he is got as lazy as a cur . ''
I therefore did not fail to give this reverend sporting witness a pretty severe cross - examination , although the Baron tried hard to protect him .
I made him confess , upon oath , that he was the time-serving tool which I have above described  and all that I wanted I drew out of him , in order to save myself the inconvenience of calling any witness of my own  by which means I prevented any rejoinder to my reply to the famous speech of Counsellor Burroughs .
He , the witness , admitted , that the hind that was named `` Mrs. Clark , '' was turned out several miles from the land of Mr. Beach , and that she accidentally ran that way  that Mr. Beach himself was one of the horsemen who joined in the chace  that he never complained of my riding over his tenant 's farm  and that , during the chace , the said Squire Beach had actually rode nearly a mile over one of my farms , without any interruption from me .


Upon these facts I grounded my defence , and in a speech which occupied about an hour , to which great attention was paid by the Judge , I urged the Jury to consider their oath , and acquit me of any wilful trespass .
In the course of this speech I replied to the observations which fell from the learned counsel , and took occasion to retort upon him with some severity , with respect to those points which he had so unfairly introduced in his speech .
He rose and claimed the protection of the Court , and trusted that his Lordship would not sit there and hear him attacked in such a way .
Baron Graham smiled , and very coolly replied , `` Brother Burroughs , I am very sorry that you travelled so much out of the record  although I was loath to interrupt you , yet I assure you it was very painful for me to hear it  but , as you did so , I should ill perform my duty if I were to attempt to prevent the gentleman who is the defendant from repelling those assertions which you made , of which you offered no proof , and for which , by the shewing of your own witness , there was no foundation  therefore , Brother Burroughs , I must beg that you will not interrupt Mr. Hunt , but suffer him to proceed -- Go on , Mr. Hunt . ''
Mr. Burroughs jumped up in a passion , and said , in a peevish , angry tone , `` Well , my Lord , if you do not choose to protect me , you will not , at any rate , compel me to stay in Court to hear myself abused  '' and then , tucking his gown under his arm , he made a hasty retreat out of the Court , foaming and muttering all the way to his lodgings .


The worthy Baron summed up strongly for a verdict for the defendant , broadly stating that there was no pretension to say that it was a wilful trespass  and adding , after having recapitulated most of the arguments which I had urged in my speech , that he was much more inclined to believe it to be a malicious and frivolous action , than he was to say that it was a wilful trespass .
I gave the said Michael Hicks Beach a pretty sound dressing , which the Baron not only recapitulated and concurred in , but he also gave him some very wholesome advice , and a very severe admonition .


It was an `` especial jury '' of brother magistrates and brother game - preservers  and it is , therefore , not wonderful that they returned a verdict for the plaintiff , with a shilling damages  which , in a wilful trespass , was always held to carry costs , provided the Judge would certify .
Mr. Sergeant Lens now rose , and informed the Judge , that his Brother Burroughs , before he left the Court , had requested him to apply to his Lordship to `` certify . ''
The Baron pretended not to hear him  the Sergeant repeated the application in a louder voice  and Baron Graham then replied , `` it is not necessary for me to certify in Court , I believe , Brother Lens ? ''
`` Yes , my Lord , '' said Lens , `` I never knew a Judge refuse to do so , upon a verdict of trespass after notice . ''
`` Brother Lens !
Brother Lens ! ''
retorted the Baron , `` I do not feel justified in my own mind to certify , upon my oath , that this was a wilful trespass , although the Jury have returned a verdict , upon their oath , that it is so  at all events I shall not certify in Court  I shall take time to consider of it . ''


Baron Graham never certified to this hour , and my vindictive opponent had to pay his own costs , which , I understand , amounted to upwards of eighty pounds .
This is an instance of the upright inflexible honesty of Baron Graham  and this is the Judge , I understand , who , together with Baron Wood , are about to be laid upon the shelf -- and a precious pair of tools we shall have in their place , I 'll warrant you !


On the next day , I enclosed a shilling in a letter to Squire Beach , admonishing him , in the language of the worthy Judge , and advising him to prepare for war , for I was determined upon retaliation .
Unfortunately for me , my attorney was a most artful , plausible , cunning fellow  and at the same time that he openly professed to advise me not to go to law , he insidiously held out the most luring baits to draw me into the meshes of his net , in which he was too successful .
I was a rare pidgeon , and he never failed to pluck me well .


I kept my word with Mr. Beach , and in a few days I had an information laid against his whipper-in Parson , and one of his tenants , Thomas Horne , for sporting , they not being qualified  and as soon as they were convicted in the penalties , I followed it up by commencing an action against each of them for a similar offence .
I also served in the same way another fellow , who was a friend of Beach 's , one Edmond Stegg , of Chisenbury  in all of which suits I got a verdict  and , to be even with him , I brought his second son , William Beach , before a bench of Magistrates , to make him prove his qualification  which he at length did , with considerable difficulty and expense .
The famous Richard Messiter , an attorney , of Wincanton , came all the way from that place in a chaise as a witness  and John Ward , an attorney , of Marlborough , attended as another witness  so that this chap got out of the scrape at an expense to his father of about fifty pounds .
Messiter , who was called at that time honest Dick Messiter , swore that he had advised his father to make a conveyance of an estate to him , to qualify him , the deed of which was executed only the day before the action was commenced against him .
The Squire was also obliged to qualify his whipper-in Parson , which he did by procuring for him a living  so that it is an ill wind that blows no one any good .
But all this while my cunning attorney was the bird that was feathering his nest charmingly .
He took care to fleece all that came within his grasp .
What voracious sharks are these attorneys !
I was successful in all these actions , yet , every now and then , I had a long bill to pay to my attorney .
I do not say that this limb of the law was any worse than the rest of his profession ( always admitting that there are some most honourable exceptions )  but I must say that this worthy had the address to manage his matters better , and to cast his net with more cunning and adroitness than any one of the fraternity that I ever met with .
I was a thousand times forewarned of him , by some of his old friends  but I was over confident , and I met my reward , as my eyes were not opened till I had suffered to the amount of many thousands of pounds by my credulity .


At the latter end of May , I was called up to the Court of King 's Bench for judgment , for the assault upon Stone the gamekeeper .
I did not employ counsel , but offered in person what I had to urge in mitigation .
I put in affidavits , to prove that the witnesses who gave evidence upon the trial were perjured  and that the doctor , who attended and swore that he lived at Amesbury , was an impostor  that no such person had ever lived there , or had ever been heard of before or since .
The sentence was , that I should be committed to the custody of the Marshal of the King 's Bench for three months .
During the time that Mr. Justice Grose was passing sentence , Ellenborough leant back in his seat , and said to Le Blanc , loud enough for me to hear him , `` He will not go down to Salisbury to attend the writ of inquiry , and get another verdict of no damages this time . ''


I had forgotten to mention , that the writ of inquiry was not executed at the Spring Assizes , it having been put off by the parties , to see whether I should not be caged during the Summer Assizes , when they might have an opportunity of bringing it on in my absence .
As soon as I was sent to the King 's Bench , I received notice , from Astley 's attorney , that the writ of inquiry would be executed before the Judge of the Summer Assizes , to be held at Salisbury .
I immediately employed Henry Clifford to move the Court to delay the inquiry till the following Spring Assizes  as it was necessary to the due administration of justice that I should be present .
This application was refused .
I then got Mr. Clifford to move for a writ of Habeas Corpus , that I might be taken down to Salisbury , at my own expense , to attend the inquiry .
This application the upright Court also refused !
At the Assizes the writ was therefore executed before the Judge .
The witness , the shepherd , the same witness , was called , and proved the fact , that I was upon the plaintiff 's down , and as the case was totally undefended , the Judge directed the Jury to give a shilling damages .
The Jury hesitated  every man amongst them well knew the facts  they retired , and , after an hour 's deliberation , they returned a `` farthing damages . ''
If I had been present to ask the witness one question , the Jury would have inevitably returned a verdict of `` no damages  '' the same as the two former Juries had done .
In fact , one of them told me , that they gave in the verdict of one farthing very reluctantly  and , as they knew the case , they very much regretted that they had not themselves put the question to the witness , as , if he had once sworn that there was no damage done , nothing on earth should have induced them to have given any damage .


Thus ended the struggle for the right of English Juries to give their verdict agreeable to the evidence , as they were bound by their oaths to do , in spite of the equivocal rules of Courts , or the arbitrary dicta of Political Judges .
I have no doubt that the conspiracy against me by the stock-purse gang , in the instance of Stone 's assault and indictment against me , was got up for the sole purpose of getting rid of this question , as to the rights of a British Jury to give a verdict agreeable to the evidence , in spite of a ridiculous and illegal rule of Court , made at the arbitrary will of corrupt Judges .
The truth is , that Stone confessed that he was hired and well paid to assault me , for the purpose of procuring an indictment against me  and by that means I was to be got out of the way , that this dirty job might be executed in a court of justice in my absence .
Stone being discharged from his situation , offered to hire himself as my game-keeper , and to divulge the whole plot , and appear as a witness against his former employers .
I , however , rather chose to put up with the loss which I had already sustained , than to employ such a treacherous villain , and to encounter fresh law expenses , which I now began to feel were most ruinous , notwithstanding I conducted my own business in the courts .
I had , besides , ascertained that the stock-purse gang were always delighted when they found they had entrapped me into a law suit , although my late successes had caused a heavy drain upon the subscribers , some of whom began to grumble at the expense , and to declare off .


As soon as I was conducted to the King 's Bench , I began to look out for apartments  I having made up my mind to remain the three months within the walls , as I did not feel justified in making the indispensable sacrifice ( the usual fee to the Marshal ) for residing without the walls .
Several prisoners , who were in distressed circumstances , offered to give up their rooms at various prices , in proportion to their eligibility  but , as the prison was excessively crowded , none of them struck my fancy or suited my taste .
I therefore applied to Davey , who kept the coffee - house , and immediately agreed with him , at a reasonable price per week , for a bed and the sitting-room over the coffee-room .
This is the very apartment that Colonel Bailey , the uncle of the Marquis of Anglesea , lately inhabited , whose application to the Court of King 's Bench was argued the other day , on his complaint of the conduct of Mr. Jones , the Marshal , and Poole , the coffee-house keeper , and of various interruptions and insults which he received from the prisoners who frequented the coffee-room  by which means , Poole ( who , by the bye , was the person who attended me here ) lost his situation .
Nothing could exceed Poole 's civility to me , and I have always heard that he was a very civil , well-behaved , obliging fellow .
I can only say , that the whole time that I lodged in these apartments , which was six weeks , I never received the slightest interruption from any one , or the slightest incivility or insult from any one of the prisoners .


The Marshal was not at home when I arrived , but as soon as he came to his office in the morning , I received a polite message from him , requesting to see me , and being disengaged , I immediately waited upon him .
When I came to his room he accosted me in a very kind manner , expressing regret for my sentence , but he added , that he should feel great pleasure in rendering my imprisonment as little irksome as possible , and that he should be happy in doing any thing for my accommodation .
I own that I did not , at the first view , give this worthy man the full measure of credit that was due to him  for I could not help feeling a strong suspicion that he had an eye to his usual fee for indulgence .
In consequence I addressed him as follows : -- `` I am much obliged to you , Mr. Jones , for your kind and friendly offers of accommodation  but , to tell you the truth , Sir , this is the case -- When I was last committed to your custody , which is now nearly ten years ago , I had more money than wit  and I paid you very cheerfully for the accommodations that you afforded me , for which I was very grateful  but the case is altered , I have now more wit than money , little as the former may be .
To speak without metaphor , since I was last your prisoner , I have had many a hard tug at any purse in my endeavours to support my independence : prudence , therefore , compels me to remain within the walls , and to forego ( however reluctantly ) your proffered kindness . ''
Mr. Jones took me by the hand , and looking me steadily in the face , he replied , `` Mr. Hunt , you have misunderstood me .
I am fully aware of the truth of your observations .
I am not altogether ignorant of what has occurred , but it would ill become me , in the situation I am placed , to give any opinion upon your case .
This , however , I know , that while you were under my care you conducted yourself like a gentleman , and acted towards me with the strictest honour , and in return I can only say , you are welcome to reside without the walls , but I will not accept a penny of your money , neither will I put you to the slightest expense of giving any security .
Your word , as a man of honour , to be forthcoming when called upon , is perfectly satisfactory to me , and you are at liberty to go out whenever you please .
The only thing I will accept is , ( I know you are a sportsman ) when you return into the country , send me a basket of game , and I shall be perfectly satisfied . ''
I thanked him sincerely for his handsome behaviour , but I told him that I had procured very comfortable lodgings at his old coachman 's , Davey 's , over the coffee-room  and as I did not expect my family in town for a month or six weeks , I would remain where I was till that time , when I would accept his offer .
`` Very well , '' said he , `` please yourself  '' and ringing the bell he called the Deputy Marshal , and said , `` Recollect , Sir , to see that Mr. Hunt is properly accommodated at Davey 's , whilst he remains here , and in the meantime , till his family comes to town , take care that he has the run of the key . ''
That is , to pass out and into the prison whenever I pleased .
The Deputy Marshal left the room , and after some time spent in conversation upon the occurrences of the day , I bid him good morning and took my leave  the door was opened , and I walked into the street , whence I returned into the prison .


This was the treatment which I received from the Marshal of the King 's Bench Prison .
I did not forget to send him a handsome basket of game , not only that season , but many following  and I regret that I ever had the negligence to omit doing so .
However , if this should meet the eye of any of my numerous sporting friends , which I know it will , he that sends in my name a basket of game directed to William Jones , Esq. .
Marshal of the King 's Bench Prison , London , will confer a lasting obligation upon , and afford great pleasure to , the `` Captive of Ilchester , '' particularly if he will drop me a line to say that he has done so .


Sir Francis Burdett was now a prisoner in the Tower , and I was a prisoner in the custody of the Marshal  but as I had the run of the key , and as the Baronet had not , a very few mornings elapsed before I paid him a visit , entering my name at the lodge of the Tower , as Mr. Hunt of the King 's Bench -- this might be said to be impudent enough .
When I was committed to the King 's Bench in 1800 , I paid a visit to poor Despard in the Tower  while I was there in 1810 , I frequently visited Sir Francis Burdett in the same place .


At this time there were a great many young men of fashion within the walls of the King 's Bench for debt , with some of whom I frequently associated , and joined in the game of fives .
The Hon. Tom Coventry was an expert player , as he had been an inmate several years .
Young Goulbourn , the brother of the Under Secretary of State , was also there .
I was invited , and frequently made one of their parties .
Goulbourn and I were generally pitted as opponents , both in politics and at rackets  he was a clever young man , and the author of the Bluviad , a satirical poem , which he had written upon his brother officers of the regiment of Blues , for which he was either indicted or had an action brought against him for a libel , I forget which .
This young buck , of whom I recollect many an anecdote , the last time I was in London I saw stuck up upon the benches of the Court of King 's Bench , with a large wig upon his head , amongst the junior counsel behind the bar .
I do not recollect ever seeing his name mentioned , as being employed in any cause  neither do I remember ever seeing him with a brief while I was in the Court .
As , however , his brother is now appointed Secretary to Marquis Wellesley , the new Lord Lieutenant of Ireland , I dare say that this Gentleman will have some employment found for him , better , or at least where he can earn his money more easily , than drudging at the bar .


The feeling excited all over the kingdom , by the arbitrary proceedings of the House of Commons , in committing Sir Francis Burdett to the Tower , had , instead of diminishing , increased in a ten-fold degree , and might be said to be now at its height .
The City of London , or at least the Livery , went in grand procession , preceded by Mr. Sheriff Wood , to present an address to Sir Francis Burdett in the Tower .
Resolutions , petitions , and remonstrances , were also passed at many other places  for instance , at Southwark , Coventry , Liverpool , Nottingham , Sheffield , c..


While this was going on in London , Napoleon divorced the Empress Josephine , and married the young Archduchess Maria Louisa , and the nuptials were celebrated in Paris with a degree of splendour and magnificence surpassing any thing of the sort ever before witnessed .
Many of Napoleon 's best friends and warm admirers highly blamed him for this match with the House of Austria , the deadly enemy to every thing that bore the slightest resemblance to liberty .
Others blamed him for divorcing the Empress Josephine -- but to those it maybe replied , he openly avowed his purpose to be that he might have a family , and leave a heir to the throne of France .
Instead of following the example of other Monarchs , who had gone before him , and who , when they had wished to gratify their caprices or their lusts , did not hesitate to rid themselves of their wives by accusing them of some crime , and procuring perjured villains to swear against them , by which means the unfortunate females were divorced or had their heads taken off .
Napoleon boldly avowed his love for Josephine , and acquitted her of all suspicion of blame  instead of becoming the dastardly assassin of her character , that he might aim a blow at her life , he continued to cherish and to protect her to the last .


Mr. Cobbett was tried and found guilty of a libel in the Court of King 's Bench , and was ordered up for judgment on the 5th of July  when , after a hearing of the Attorney-General , Sir Vicary Gibbs , he was remanded to the King 's Bench , to be brought up again on the 9th , and he was unexpectedly brought down thither while I was sitting writing a letter .
I heard that he was in the Marshal 's house , endeavoring to make some arrangement for his accommodation .
I instantly hastened to my friend , and desired him to make himself quite easy upon that subject , as I had possession of the best apartments with-in the walls , which I would give up immediately for the accommodation of himself and family , and I would shift for myself in the best way that I could .
This he accepted without ceremony , and what was very satisfactory to me , was , that he made no annoying apology for the inconvenience which , in the mean time , I might be put to , in finding a situation for myself .
There was one great pleasure in obliging such a friend , as he never put me to the blush by making any scruples about accepting one 's offer , or by using any unmeaning palaver , about being afraid of his friend 's putting himself to an inconvenience on his account .
I must give Mr. Cobbett the credit for being totally free from any squeamish fears or apprehensions of this sort  and I beg to declare that , on this very account , I always felt a great additional pleasure in obliging him .
Some persons may be ill - natured enough to miscall this selfishness , and I know those that have been illiberal enough to do so  but , as for myself , I could never be induced to view it in that light , as I always thought him a man of superior mind and great talent  it was not at all surprising that he felt his own superiority  and , to accommodate such a man , his friends never thought any sacrifice too great  at least I never did .
At all events , I felt great pleasure that I had it in my power to contribute to the convenience of himself and his family  and I was perfectly satisfied to put up with a very small bed-room , in which I could scarcely stand upright , for the four days that he remained there .


While Mr. Cobbett was in the King 's Bench , he was violently attacked by some of the writers belonging to the public press , and accused of having offered to compromise with the Government , by giving up his Register , and undertaking to write no more upon politics .
Amongst this number was Mr. Leigh Hunt , of the Examiner .
No man felt more indignant at this attack upon my friend than I did  and as I was made to believe that there was not the slightest foundation for the calumny , I lost no opportunity to condemn , in the most unqualified terms , all those who had been guilty of such base conduct as that of falsely accusing a man , at such a moment , of that which I held to be a political crime of the deepest die .
`` Love me , love my dog , '' was a maxim that was firmly implanted in my breast .
He , therefore , that injured my friend , made me his enemy  nay , I was much more ready to resent an insult offered to my friend , than I was to resent injury done to myself .
It seems I was yet very young in the ways of the world  so , instead of leaving Mr. Cobbett ( who was so very capable ) to defend himself , I became his champion , and assailed all those who had attacked him .
I considered the conduct of Mr. Leigh Hunt as most unworthy , he being a writer in the cause of Liberty , and espousing those principles of good government for which Mr. Cobbett , as well as myself , had been so earnestly contending .
I charged him with wishing to raise his fame and his fortune upon my friend 's downfall  and this was so strongly impressed upon my mind , that I believed it to be the sole cause of his propagating what I considered the foulest and most wanton calumny .
I consequently spared him not , and so far was my friend from checking my imprudent zeal , that he encouraged it  and what made me the more earnest was , that he held it to be more dignified that he himself should treat such preposterous slander with silent contempt .
I laid on most unmercifully also upon the editor of the Times , on the same account , both publicly and privately  by which indiscreet warmth for my friend , I rendered two of the most powerful public writers of the day , and who had the most extensive means of disseminating their opinions , my most implacable enemies .
For many years the columns of the Examiner poured forth , upon every occasion , the most bitter sarcasms , and the most unjust and wanton attacks upon my character , both private and public , and this , too , at a time when I had not the slightest means of defence , as I had not the least possible power or influence over the smallest portion of the public press .
To be sure , I have no one to blame but myself , as , at the time , many good friends warned me of my folly .
Their argument was , `` what have you to do with Cobbett 's quarrels -- is he not capable of defending himself ? ''
But although I daily suffered the most severe attacks from the public papers , I still had the hardihood to persevere in his behalf  and I never for a moment doubted the correctness of my assertions till one day , that , as I was passing under Temple-Bar , I chanced to meet Mr. Peter Finnerty .
At some public meeting , on the preceding day , I had been attacking some of the editors of the public press , for their cowardly falsehoods and calumnies against my friend Cobbett .
Drawing me aside , and taking hold of the button of my coat , Mr. Finnerty began to reason with me in the most friendly and convincing language .
He pointed out the folly of my attacking the editors of the Examiner , the Morning Chronicle , and the Times , in defence of Mr. Cobbett 's conduct , when I had no means of repelling the attacks of those writers upon my own character .
`` Even , '' said he , `` had you proof of the truth of your assertions , that Cobbett never offered to compromise with the Government , even then it would be great folly in you to take up the cudgels for him  you who have not , in any portion of the press , the slightest means of vindicating your own intentions .
You have drawn down a nest of hornets upon your own head  it is quite a different thing with Cobbett , he has all the means of defence , he has a great command of the press  and , besides , it sells his Register into the bargain .
Follow the advice which I give you as a friend , take care of yourself  you will have quite enough to do to answer for yourself , and do leave Cobbett to do the same . ''


This exhortation was delivered in so earnest a manner , that I sometimes began to think that I might by possibility have been wrong .
I was certainly more guarded in future , but all the mischief was done  I had excited the most inveterate hatred of the Examiner and the Times , neither of which papers ever let slip an opportunity to abuse , vilify , and misrepresent me .
They certainly have had more than ample revenge upon me for my folly and credulity .
They have both occasionally made the amende honorable  and I believe that the editor of the Examiner has been long since convinced , that I was actuated by the most honourable feeling in resenting his attack upon Mr. Cobbett .
It is , however , an acknowledgment due from me to him , to say , that I was never wholly convinced of my error till the trial of `` Wright versus Cobbett , '' which took place in the Court of King 's Bench , since I have been here .
Notwithstanding all the violent abuse and unjust assertions that have been published in the Examiner against me , I am bound in common honesty to acknowledge my error , and to apologise to the editor of that paper , for having been the first aggressor  and at the same time to assure him , that I was impelled to commit this error from a firm conviction , and the most unqualified assurance , that the assertions made in the Examiner were not only false in the main , but were even without the slightest foundation in fact .
As for the editor of the Times , it is not necessary for me to offer any apology to him .
That paper has so often , when edited by Dr. Slop , alias Stoddart , and even up to this very time , given insertions to the most wanton and barefaced lies about me , which the editor himself knew to be false when he wrote or admitted them , that I hold the principles of its conductor in the greatest contempt .
Money is his god , and he would abuse the most perfect character in the universe , or praise the most abandoned , if he thought it would sell his paper .
The study of the editor is to follow public opinion , whatever it may be , he never attempts to lead it .
I have a gentleman now sitting with me , who assures me that he has heard one of the persons most intimately connected with that paper say , that the proprietors and managers of the Times were well disposed towards Mr. Hunt , and that they had the highest opinion of his talent and integrity  but that they abused him for the purpose of pleasing some of their readers , and selling their paper .


On the ninth of July , 1810 , Mr. Cobbett was brought up for judgment , for the libel of which he had been convicted by a special jury .
The sentence was , two years imprisonment in Newgate , and a fine of 1000l .
to the King , and to find security for his good behaviour for seven years .
The boroughmongers had now got myself in the King 's Bench , and Mr. Cobbett in Newgate .
Almost at the same time Sir Francis Burdett was liberated from the Tower .
His release took place on the 21st of June , and , previous to it , the electors of Westminster resolved to meet him at the Tower Gate , and to bring him in grand procession to his house in Piccadilly .
A splendid car was provided for the occasion , and arrangements were made on a magnificent scale .
I myself had opportunities of communicating to him the progress of these preparations , for many days previous to the day of his liberation , as I visited the Baronet often while he was in the Tower .
I was a prisoner in the King 's Bench , when Despard was in the Tower , and , as I have already stated , I visited him with Henry Clifford  I was also a prisoner in the custody of the Marshal , while Sir F. Burdett was a prisoner in the Tower , and I frequently visited him  and I also very frequently visited Mr. Cobbett in Newgate .
I mention this to show what sort of imprisonment it is , being in the King 's Bench .
In fact , it is no imprisonment at all .
I was in the custody of the Marshal , and he knew that I should not attempt an escape , and , therefore , I went where I pleased .


When the day arrived on which Sir Francis Burdett was to quit the Tower , immense multitudes flocked to Tower-Hill , and various parties of citizens of London and Westminster attended to join the procession .
Major Cartwright and Alderman Wood attended , to head separate parties .
Mr. Place , of Charing-Cross , the political tailor , had undertaken to head the horsemen  Mr. Samuel Miller , the shoemaker , of Skinner-street , Snow-hill , also headed a large party of the citizens of London .
Innumerable parties came from all parts of the country , and , as it was a fine day , the spectacle was expected to be very brilliant .
I certainly meant to witness it , although , being a prisoner , I did not intend to take any conspicuous part in the procession .


I slept within the walls , and when I got up in the morning , the doors of the King 's Bench were closed for the day , and no one , except the officers , was allowed to pass out or in  and , in consequence of the strong public feeling that was created , the prison was surrounded by a regiment of soldiers .
Though I could not obtain egress , I raised a subscription amongst some of my acquaintance in the prison , and we had a butt of porter hoisted out of the cellar , and gave it away amongst the poorer prisoners , to drink the health of Sir Francis Burdett .
Towards the evening we were told , by some of the officers of the prison , that Sir Francis had disappointed his friends and the people , and had escaped over the water in a boat , and fled privately to Wimbledon .
This we would not believe  and we , of course , set it down as a hoax of the officers , particularly as all other means of information were cut off for that day in the prison .
So far were we , who were friends to the Baronet , from giving credit to this story , that we actually caused the whole of the interior of the prison to be illuminated  and such was the universal feeling , that every window was lighted up .


The next morning , when the doors were opened , we learned that it was a fact , that the hero of the day had actually sneaked out at the back - door , or rather out of a trap-door , and escaped unobserved over the water , without giving any one of his friends the slightest hint of his intention .
At last , after waiting till their patience became nearly exhausted , the parties were informed of the trick that he had played them  upon which they retraced their steps in the procession , with the empty car , amidst the jeers and scoffs of all those who were inimical to the politics professed by Sir Francis Burdett , who was by them universally designated `` Sir Francis Sly-go . ''


The Westminster Electors were not only disappointed , but they were very indignant at the slight which they had received at the hands of their Representative  and some of them went so far as openly to brand the Baronet with the charge of cowardice .
Amongst the latter was Francis Place , the Charing-Cross tailor , who , in the most coarse and offensive manner , accused the Baronet of being a d -- d coward and a paltroon .
Hearing of Mr. Place 's violence , I endeavoured to ascertain the cause of his vindictive expressions , and my astonishment was very great , when Mr. Miller informed me , that the said Francis Place had undertaken to head one part of the procession , but that , when the day came , the said tailor neither kept his appointment nor sent any excuse for his absence .


The reader will not fail to draw his own conclusions with respect to this conduct of the political Westminster tailor , this leading cock of the Rump , particularly when they couple this transaction with that of the said tailor having been selected to act as foreman upon the famous inquest which was held upon the body of Sellis , the late valet of the Duke of Cumberland , who had been found in his bed with his throat cut , in the apartments of the Duke of Cumberland , at a time when the said Duke was understood to have had his hand and other parts of his body wounded with some sharp instrument .
If Francis Place abused the Baronet , the Baronet , on his side , did not fail to return the compliment , and to describe the said tailor as a suspicious character .
At all events , it was a very extraordinary occurrence , that the most violent , professed Republican , should have been selected to act as foreman to an inquest which sat upon the body of a person found dead , under the most suspicious circumstances , in a Royal Palace .
It is said that , since that period , Mr. Place has been a very rich man  but that , before that time , he was a poor , very poor Democrat .
The way in which I have heard Sir Francis and the present associates of this man speak of him , is enough to excite the surprise of any one who is acquainted with their present intimacy .
Colonel Wardle always entertained the same opinion of this man that Sir Francis Burdett did , and he always advised me to avoid him .
I did not fail to follow his advice .
The fact is , that I was never upon intimate terms with any of this Rump , and only knew them enough to be able to keep an eye upon their motions .


A few days after this , my family came to town , and we resided in lodgings which I had taken in the London-road .
To these lodgings Sir Francis Burdett one day came unexpectedly to take a family dinner with me .
He informed me that it was the first visit which he had paid to any one since he left the Tower  and he appeared very anxious to know what I thought of his manner of leaving the Tower , and also to ascertain what were the sentiments of the public upon the subject  as he had not , he said , had an opportunity of hearing any honest opinion upon it , he having read only the comments of the newspapers .
I told him my opinion very honestly , that I very much disapproved of the step which he had taken , and so did all the persons with whom I had conversed upon it  but I added , I was too warm a partizan of his to say this to others , or suffer them to say so , without expressing my belief that he had some good and substantial reason for following such a course , and I pressed him hard to tell me that reason .
All , however , that I could get out of him was , that Lord Moira , the Governor of the Tower , had persuaded him to do so .
From that moment Sir Francis Burdett lost the confidence of the people  he had deceived them , and they never placed implicit faith in him again .
No man but Sir Francis Burdett could have served the people such a scurvy trick , and have preserved even the smallest portion of popularity afterwards  but he had gained great hold of their affections by his public exertions , although those exertions were much more of a general than a specific nature .


While I remained in London , I constantly visited Mr. Cobbett in Newgate  and , after I returned into the country , I occasionally went to London for the purpose of passing a few days with him in his prison  and this I continually repeated till the time that he left Newgate altogether .


When I returned to Sans Souci Cottage , I enjoyed the sports of the field with quite as much glee as ever , and with a zest not in the slightest degree abated by my sentence of three months ' imprisonment .
At the end of the season I made the hares ' scuts which I had preserved , amounting to two hundred and fifty , into a handsome pillow , which I had covered with satin , and sent it to my opponent , Michael Hicks Beach , as a mark of the contempt in which I held him , and as a trophy of the sport which I had enjoyed during the season .
This was taken , as I meant it should be , in great dudgeon , and he complained of it very bitterly to some of my friends .
My sporting was now confined to my gun .
I had , in a great measure , given up hunting , for two reasons  first , because I had gone into Leicestershire , and resided at Melton Mowbray one season , for the purpose of enjoying fox-hunting in the highest perfection , by alternately joining the Duke of Rutland 's and the Quarndon pack of fox - hounds .
Those hounds were hunted in such a masterly style , and the whole business was conducted in such a superior manner , that I never afterwards could bring myself to relish fox-hunting in Hampshire or Wiltshire .
In truth , it was not like the same sort of sport , fox-hunting in Leicestershire being so very superior .
I really saw more fine runs in one week , with the Duke of Rutland 's pack , and the Quarndon pack , which latter pack was then kept by Lord Foley , than I ever saw with a West - country pack in one year .
The next reason for my giving up hunting was , that , in consequence of my weight , it was become too expensive , as it required a horse of from two to three hundred pounds value to carry me up to the head of the hounds , where I always rode as long as I followed hunting .


I still resided in Bath in the winter , and at Sans Souci Cottage , in Wiltshire , in the summer and autumn .
One evening , Mr. Fisher , who had the management of the White Lion Inn , at Bath , which he conducted for Mr. George Arnold , called at my house , and sent in a message , to say that he wished to speak to me in private .
I desired him to walk in , as I did not wish to be entrusted with any secrets but what might be known to my family , who were sitting with me .
At length he informed me , that the French General , Lefebvre , who had been a prisoner in England , had been staying some days at the White Lion , waiting for a remittance from London , to take him thither on his road to France , to which country he was returning , either by an exchange of prisoners , or on account of some arrangement between the two Governments  that he had been disappointed of his expected remittance , and that he had not enough cash to pay his bill and his coach hire to London , whither he was most anxious to go  and , therefore , he had proposed to leave a beautiful miniature of Napoleon , for which that distinguished character had sat , and of which he had made a present to the General , after some battle in which he had fought bravely under the eye of the Emperor .
Fisher had declined to take the miniature in lieu of , or at least in pawn for , the bill  and the General , in the greatest distress , and anxious to return to France , in obedience to the call of the Emperor , urged him to try and raise a sum upon it .
Mr. Fisher told him that he did not know any one in Bath who would give any thing for it , unless Mr. Hunt would , who was an avowed admirer of Napoleon , although he believed him to be no connoisseur in paintings .
At the pressing request of the General , Mr. Fisher said he had brought the miniature to shew me , and out he pulled it from his pocket .
It was contained in a small morocco case , about four inches by three  but when it was opened it presented to the eye one of the most beautiful specimens of miniature painting 1 ever saw .
I asked Fisher what was the amount of the bill ?
He replied , some shillings under ten pounds .
I desired him to return , and say , that if the General would part with the miniature for that sum , I would advance the money  but that I would purchase it if I had any thing to do with it , and not make an advance upon it as a loan to be repaid .
Mr. Fisher soon returned to say , that , although the General lamented very much to part with the miniature , which was the gift of his sovereign , yet , that necessity had no law , and that I might have it by paying the bill  which I immediately did , and received the miniature .


Some months afterwards , Madame Lucien Buonaparte arrived at Bath , in her road to the residence of Lucien Buonaparte , at Ludlow , in Shropshire , and she stopped at the White Lion for the night .
In making her inquiries of Mr. Fisher about General Lefebvre , when he was in Bath , the circumstance of his having been obliged to part with the miniature of Napoleon was mentioned .
She instantly said , that she recollected the circumstance of her brother having sat for the miniature , and presenting it to Lefebvre , with a lock of his hair  and , mentioning the name of the artist , expressed a great desire to obtain a sight of the picture , if the gentleman was in Bath .
A polite note was accordingly written to the lady to whom , at the time when I purchased the miniature , Mr. Fisher had seen me present it  and she was requested to permit Madame Buonaparte to see it .
The lady immediately sent it to the inn by her maid , who was introduced into the room to Madame Lucien , who instantly exclaimed , that it was one of the very best likenesses of Napoleon that was ever painted , and that it recalled him to her recollection more than any thing she had ever seen since she had left Paris .
This likeness was taken immediately after he was made First Consul , and it is admitted by all the Frenchmen that it was ever shewn to , to be a very beautiful and correct likeness of him , as he was at that time .
She wished the servant to ascertain whether the lady would put a price upon it , but she was promptly answered , that her mistress had instructed her to say , that no price should purchase it .
After having caressed and shed tears over it , Madame Lucien returned it to the servant , begging the lady to accept her grateful thanks for having allowed her to see it .
I shall have hereafter to relate what passed at an interview which I had with the General , who came to England at the time of the peace , to endeavour to reclaim the picture .


About this time a fire broke out at Auxonne , in France , in which town twenty-one English prisoners of war were confined , who exerted themselves vigorously to extinguish the flames .
On this coming to the ear of Napoleon , he instantly ordered them to be paid six months pay , and gave them passports to return home to England .
I mention this circumstance as a proof of the liberal and noble mind of the brave and persecuted Napoleon  particularly when contrasted with the mean and dastardly conduct of those in power in this country .
On a similar occasion , when the fire took place in this gaol , the other day , [ Footnote : Alluding to the partial conflagration of Ilchester Gaol , Thursday , November 15th , 1821 . ]
twenty-five of the prisoners , with myself , exerted ourselves , as was represented by the keeper to the Magistrates , in the most exemplary and praiseworthy manner  but our rulers do not know how to perform a generous and liberal act , they do not possess a particle of that noble and magnanimous character , which animated the gallant Napoleon .


The latter end of the year 1810 was remarkable for the greatest failures in commercial speculation .
Many Gazettes contained the names of fifty bankrupts , and for many weeks following no Gazette appeared with less than thirty , which was four times the average of former periods .
The cause of so much misery , mischief , and distress , was very fairly and justly attributed to the impediments which the laws presented to arrangements between debtors and creditors , impediments evidently intended to benefit the harpies of the law .
It is a remarkable fact that there were just TWO THOUSAND bankrupts this year  supposing the Lord Chancellor 's fees to amount only to the moderate average of twenty pounds upon each bankruptcy , he must have cleared that year FORTY THOUSAND POUNDS from bankrupts  which money must have come out of the pockets of the poor creditors .
A further blow was given to commerce by an order , which , on the 27th of October , was promulgated in France , for burning all British goods found in that country  which was rigidly carried into effect .


On account of the King 's illness , the Lord Mayor of London was requested to continue in office another year .
The coffin of the bloody-minded villain , Judge Jeffries , was discovered in a vault , in the church of St. Mary , Aldermanbury .
On the 27th of November nineteen journeymen printers of the Times newspaper were sentenced to be imprisoned for a conspiracy to raise their wages .


The average price of wheat this year was ninety-five shillings per quarter , and the price of the quartern loaf averaged at ONE SHILLING and FIVEPENCE .


I now became tired of living an inactive life out of business , and therefore took a large estate at Rowfont , near East Grinstead , in Sussex , consisting of a good mansion , a thousand acres of land , and the manorial rights of the whole parish of Worth , extending over upwards of twenty thousand acres  upon which I was to enter at Lady-day , 1811 .
This year , when the Parliament met , the Regency question was discussed with great warmth in both Houses .
In hopes of the King 's recovery several adjournments took place  but all these expectations proved futile , and , at length , Mr. Perceval brought in a bill , by which the Prince had the same restrictions imposed upon him as in 1789  and the person of the King was to be entrusted to the Queen , with a council .


These proposals were accepted by the Prince and by the Queen .
As soon as the act passed , the Prince acted as Regent , and the Parliament was formally opened by a commission under the Great Seal .
To the surprise and astonishment of every body , and to the great mortification and disappointment of the Whigs , the same ministers remained in office .
The fact was , that when the Whigs were last in office they fell into complete disrepute with the people , and the public feeling was so much against them , that the Prince Regent found that he should not be backed by the people in making any change in favour of the junto faction .
He , therefore , had the prudence and the policy to continue the old set , notwithstanding that set had always treated him with great suspicion , and never let slip an opportunity of offering him the greatest indignities and insults .


The city of London now petitioned the House of Commons for Reform .
I was frequently in London to visit my friend Mr. Cobbett , in Newgate  and the party which I used to meet there was Sir Francis Burdett , Col. Wardle , Major Cartwright , and Mr. Worthington  we used to spend the evening and remain in the prison , or rather in Mr. Newman 's , the keeper 's house , till ten o'clock .
The great question of Parliamentary Reform was , on these occasions , fully and freely discussed  and it was lamented by Sir Francis Burdett that there were not some county meetings called , for the purpose of petitioning the House for Reform .
I suggested that it was in vain to petition the corrupt knaves in the House to reform themselves , but that , as the Prince Regent was entering upon his regal office , I thought it would be a good opportunity to address him on that subject , and to call upon him for the abolition of all useless sinecures and unmerited pensions .
Sir Francis very much approved of the idea , and asked if it were not possible to get a county meeting in Somersetshire , where I was then residing , and where I had an estate , as had also his brother , Jones Burdett .
I replied , that if it were set about in earnest , there was not a doubt but a meeting might be procured  and I agreed to get this done immediately upon my return to Bath  Sir Francis at the same time promising that his brother should attend the meeting , if I could get the Sheriff to call one .


As soon as I got back to Bath , I put an advertisement into one of the papers , requesting the freeholders to attend a preliminary meeting , to sign a requisition to the Sheriff , for the purpose of calling a county meeting , to address the Prince Regent , upon his accepting that office .
A considerable number of freeholders who were in Bath attended , and signed the requisition that I had drawn up , and at the head of which I had set my name .
About twenty or thirty names were subscribed , and the next morning I waited upon Mr. Gore Langton , one of the then Members for the county , to ask his opinion , and to give him an opportunity of signing his name , if he chose  I candidly and explicitly informed him , that the purpose was to take , as the ground-work of the address , a Reform in Parliament , and the abolition of useless sinecures and unmerited pensions .
He politely thanked me for the call , said that it would be indiscreet in him , as the Member for the county , to sign his name to the requisition , but added , that he perfectly approved of the object of the meeting , and in case the Sheriff should call it , he would make a point of attending it , and of supporting the address to the Regent , which it was my intention to propose  the heads of which I read to him , and which he highly approved .
I told him that I designed to drive round to the principal towns of the county , to procure signatures from all parts , that the Sheriff might not have any opportunity of refusing to call the meeting .
Of this plan he also very much approved .


I took a friend with me in my tandem , and drove to Bristol , where we procured only one name .
From thence we went to Wells , Glastonbury , Bridgwater , Taunton , Wellington , and returned by Chard , Yeovil , Ilchester , Shepton Mallet , and Frome , to Bath .
We were out , I think , five days , and obtained the signatures of upwards of four hundred freeholders , men of all parties , as the requisition was drawn in very general terms , to take the sense of a county meeting upon the propriety of presenting a dutiful and loyal address to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales , upon his accepting the high office of Regent of the United Kingdom , c. On my arriving at Ilchester , I called first upon Mr. Tuson , the attorney , as the most respectable person in the town  and upon reading over the requisition , he immediately signed it , and requested that , if I went to Yeovil , I would call on Mr. Goodford , which I promised to do .
I obtained a number of names amongst the freeholders of Ilchester , many of whom , I found , were clients of the worthy attorney .
My having obtained such a name as his , was a sure passport to success amongst his neighbours .
The fact was , that the attorneys pretty generally took the bait  to promote the presenting a dutiful and loyal address to the new Regent , met with their general concurrence .


We went on to Yeovil , and called on Squire Goodford , as Mr. Tuson had requested .
The Squire was a young man , and upon seeing Mr. Tuson 's name , he gave us his without hesitation  and having got the Squire 's name , of course we got the name of almost every free holder in the town upon whom we called .
At some places we certainly received a rebuff  but , generally speaking , we were received with great politeness , attention , and civility .
At Taunton we met with a very hearty welcome , and got a great number of signatures .
Dr. Blake , Mr. Buncomb , and Mr. Dummet , will not fail to recollect it , and that they promised to attend the county meeting and support an address for Reform .


Whether the word Reform was in the requisition , I forget  but I well know that , to all those who inquired or wished to be informed of the object of the meeting , I never disguised my intention of making that a leading feature of the address .
Indeed , it spoke for itself .
It was a requisition to the Sheriff to call a meeting of the freeholders and inhabitants of the county , to take into consideration the propriety of addressing his Royal Highness the Prince Regent .
Nothing could be clearer or fairer .
First , it was to call a meeting  second , when the meeting was assembled , it was to take into its consideration the propriety of presenting a dutiful and loyal address to the individual who was just invested with the office of Chief Magistrate  and third , if that proposition should be agreed to , why then to discuss and to settle what should be the nature of that address .
We invited all parties to sign it , without distinction or exception  and , as almost every man in the county was a stranger to us , we met with some very curious adventures , of which the two following may be taken as a specimen .
In the small manufacturing town of Chard , we called first upon an attorney , I think of the name of Clark , who , upon reading over the requisition , signed it , and without making any comment .
He then drew out his purse , and placed a guinea upon the paper , saying that he begged to accompany his name with that subscription towards defraying the unavoidable expense .
I politely declined to take it , declaring that we only solicited signatures , but did not require any subscription .
He , however , would not be denied , adding , that our travelling round the country must be attended with considerable expense , and , as it ought not to fall upon one or two individuals , he should feel hurt if we did not suffer him to pay his share of it .
I was about to expostulate , when my companion gave me a smart twitch by the elbow , and taking up the guinea , he observed that the gentleman was quite right , and he was much obliged to him .
This gentleman , although a perfect stranger , offered us refreshment , c. and pointed out to us where to call upon other freeholders .
As soon as we got into the street , my companion began to expostulate with me , telling me that it was the height of folly not to make every one who signed his name subscribe something , as Mr. Clark had done , towards defraying our expenses .
I replied , that I would not suffer him to ask for any thing from any one  that if any offered to subscribe , well and good  but if it were known or suspected that we were calling for money , we should not only lose many signatures , but should in many instances be considered as very unwelcome visitors , and probably even be treated as downright intruders My companion , who was a narrow-minded politician , and of a penurious disposition , followed me in , grumbling , to the next house that we called at , which was a tradesman 's , who , I recollect , sold salt .
I accosted this tradesman in the usual way , by informing him of our business , requesting him to read the requisition , and desiring to know if he had any objection to sign it .
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I do not wish to read the requisition  I have no objection to sign it , if you are quite sure that it will not cost me any thing .
You are very welcome to my name as a freeholder , to assist in calling a county meeting .
God knows we want something done badly enough  but , if it is ever to cost me a sixpence , I will not touch it . ''
Giving my friend , who was staring with his mouth open , a very significant look , I assured the gentleman that it would never cost him a farthing  upon receiving which assurance be very deliberately took his pen from the desk , and as deliberately dipped it in the ink , and then , having taken the paper in his left hand , and laid it upon the counter , he looked me once more full in the face , and demanded , `` are you quite sure , Sir , if I sign my name , that I shall not be obliged to attend the county meeting , when it is called ? ''
I told him that we should be happy with his company if he chose to come to the meeting , but that it would be left entirely to his own option , whether he would do so or not .
`` Sir , '' said he , `` I do not think you would deceive me , '' and he then signed his name .


To give an account of the various incidents which occurred , in this perambulation of the county of Somerset , would be an interesting and diverting history of itself .
I had , indeed , told my companion , at starting , that , if he kept his eyes and his ears open , our journey would afford him an opportunity of studying human nature , and witnessing its various shades and colours , possibly in much greater perfection than he had ever before experienced , and my prediction was verified .
I suppose that we did not call upon less than five hundred freeholders  in fact , we procured nearly that number of signatures , and to me this was a most interesting and entertaining expedition .
I had no self-interested object in view  I was , or at least I believed I was , performing an important public duty , and my only aim was to procure a county meeting -- and for what , it will be asked ?
My answer is , for the sole purpose of inducing my brother freeholders and fellow-countrymen of Somersetshire to look into their own affairs , instead of trusting to those persons who were duping and plundering them .


In the neighbourhood of Chard we called upon Mr. Dean , a large manufacturer of woollen-cloth , who had been a customer of mine to a very large amount , he having purchased of me at one deal between eight and nine thousand fleeces of valuable South-down wool , at half-a-crown a pound  which , I recollect , averaged about six shillings a fleece  so that the whole sum was about two thousand five hundred pounds .
The wool was to have been paid for , as is usual , upon delivery .
But when Mr. Forsey , who was the partner of Mr. Dean , came to weigh the wool , he unexpectedly requested , on the part of Mr. Dean , with whom I had had previous dealings , that I would give them two or three months ' credit , by taking their bills , at that date , for the amount .
As in former transactions I had found Mr. Dean a very honourable man , I readily consented to grant the favour , though , as a farmer , the custom was always to be paid for every thing in ready money .
The reader must excuse this apparent digression , or rather this descending to minute particulars in this transaction with Mr. Dean , which will be hereafter accounted for .
I find it , indeed , necessary to be very particular in explaining my transactions with Mr. Dean , in consequence of an infamous calumny , which , subsequently to my leaving the country , and going to reside in Sussex , was published in the Taunton Courier , relative to what took place when I was , upon this occasion , at Mr. Dean 's .
I shall prove the editor of this contemptible paper to be an unprincipled , cold - blooded libeller , destitute of every manly and honourable feeling  a wretch , who , from the basest and most mercenary motives , to raise his obscure paper into notice , and to promote its sale , could disgrace the name of man , by propagating the most notorious and unfounded falsehood against the private character of a public man .


When we arrived at Mr. Dean 's , we were received with the most hearty welcome .
He lived in very great stile , and he did every thing to shew his sense of my liberal and generous conduct towards him .
The fact of the case was , that a request was made for more time to pay for the wool  and , as I was not in want of the money , the further time was given  and when , at the end of six months , I did receive the debt , I declined to charge any interest for it .
Mr. Dean and his family appeared to feel great pleasure in paying me every attention , in return for what he openly declared to be most handsome and liberal conduct on any part .
He admitted that mine was the finest and best lot of English wool that he had ever purchased  that it turned out remarkably well , and fully answered the sample .
When I sold off my valuable stock of sheep at Chisenbury farm , Mr. Dean sent up and purchased twenty lambs , that he might possess some of my stock of pure South-downs  and he afterwards much regretted that he had been prevailed upon to cross them with the Spanish Merino breed , which , he said , had entirely defeated his original object .
He took me into his field , to show me the sort which the cross had produced , and said , that he very much wished to dispose of them , as they were more plague than profit to him : in fact , he offered to make me a present of them  which offer I declined to accept  but I told him , as I had now taken a farm in Sussex , if he would send them half way , I would purchase them at their value .
I believe there were about twenty - six ewes and an old Spanish ram  and , as far as I can recollect , I was to give him thirty shillings each for them , which was a fair price , as times went , they being only small two-teeth ewes .


The requisition being signed by upwards of four hundred freeholders , I wrote to the Sheriff , Mr. Horner , of Wells , to know when I should wait upon him with it .
He replied , that , as he was just going out of office , and as the new Sheriff , Mr. Smith Leigh , would be sworn in at Bath , on a day named in his letter , he begged that I would attend there on that day , that it might be presented to the new Sheriff , when I could know his pleasure upon the subject .
At the appointed time I accordingly attended , and the Sheriff , Mr. Leigh , named Monday , the -- day of March , for the county meeting to be held at Wells .


Although I had taken an estate in Sussex , I had not yet given up my house in Bath , where I was then residing .
On the Sunday previous to the day fixed upon for the meeting , Mr. Jones Burdett dined with me at Bath , and while we were at dinner , Mr. Power , an eminent reporter of the Morning Chronicle , came in .
He travelled down , as I understood , at the request of Sir Francis Burdett and Mr. Cobbett , to report the proceedings of the meeting .
After dinner , the resolutions and the address being agreed upon , we started for Wells , where we slept that night , to be in time for the meeting , which was to be held at twelve o'clock on the following day .
We now learned that there had been a very great stir made in the county , by the gentry and magistrates , of both the Whig and Tory faction .
Many of them had canvassed their tenants and the freeholders of their neighbourhood , to attend the meeting , to vote against the proposition of Mr. Hunt , without knowing themselves , or attempting to explain to others , what Mr. Hunt was going to propose .
Sir John Cox Hippisley , an old Whig Member of Parliament , was very active  and he employed one James Mills , who was a sort of a steward or understrapper to Lady Waldegrave , to canvas all their tenants and the surrounding neighbourhood , for the purpose of bringing in farmers and others to hold up their hands against `` HUNT . ''
Many , who inquired what they were to oppose , were told by this worthy , that they were to hiss , hoot , and make a noise , when Hunt spoke , and to hold up their hands against any thing that he brought forward .
I recollect Mr. Power coming , in the morning , to the door of my bed-room , to inform me of the character and disposition of the farmers and yeomanry who were assembled , many of whom he had heard express themselves in a very indignant manner against this Mr. Hunt , who was going to do something which the squires had ordered them to prevent .


There was a fine meeting , of not less than four or five thousand persons  and , as soon as the Sheriff had opened the proceedings , by having the requisition read , signed , as he said , by Henry Hunt , and four or five hundred other persons , I stepped forward and began to address the meeting .
A howl was set up directly , before they heard one word that I had to say , by the said Mills , and a gang of slaves whom he had collected off the Mendip Hills  a set of fellows as ignorant of all political matters as they were illiterate and besotted .
The parsons joined the howl  and of the black cormorants there was a plentiful sprinkling , as a number of them herd together at Wells , in consequence of there being a cathedral , and the residence of a bishop , in that city .
At that time , however , I had a most powerful voice , and in spite of the beastly howling of these mongrel curs , I made myself heard .
I told them , that the time would come , when they would wish that they had patiently listened to my advice , and followed my recommendation .
I told them then , that the only remedy to escape ruin and distress would be , for the landlords to lower their rents , the parsons to reduce their tithes , and then resolutely join the people in demanding a Reform of the Commons ' House of Parliament , which alone would produce a real diminution of taxation .
O , how the brutish farmers , who had come into Wells that day at the command of their landlords , did bellow and roar to put me down , and endeavour to prevent my being heard !
O , how many of them have come to me since I have been in this Bastile , to confess their folly and lament that they had not taken my advice : how many scores of them have been sent to this gaol for debt , since that time , ruined by the very system of taxation that they bellowed for that day !
After I had concluded my address , which was delivered amidst continued contention and uproar , a great majority wishing to hear me , and occasionally the bellowers attempted to listen , and for a moment ceased their senseless clamour : having heard one sentence , they appeared very anxious to hear what was to follow  but the agent of old Sir John Cox Hippisley , James Mills , the steward of Lady Waldegrave , under whom they appeared to act , and whose voice or signal they obeyed as regularly as a pack of well - trained hounds obey the voice of the huntsman  this worthy , backed by some half-score of parsons , kept their curs in constant full cry to the end  when I proposed an address to the Prince Regent , expressive of the state of the country , and calling his Royal Highness 's attention to that devastating system which would ultimately bring the farmer and the tradesman to that ruin and distress which had already fallen upon the industrious labourer and mechanic  praying for an abolition of all useless and expensive sinecure places and unmerited pensions , a reduction of the army , economy in the public expenditure , and a reform in the notorious abuses which were openly practised in the election of the Members of the Commons ' House of Parliament .
This address , which was pretty well heard , was received with applause by a considerable majority of the meeting  and it was seconded by Mr. Jones Burdett , in a very good speech , which he delivered upon the occasion .
Mr. Horner , the late high sheriff , and a staunch ministerialist , came forward to propose an amendment , which , after some little hacking and hammering , he read .
It was a mere time-serving piece of fulsome adulation to the Prince Regent , totally unworthy the character of a meeting of freemen , and such as no sensible Englishman would have offered to the Prince , without expecting to be kicked by his Royal Highness , for its time-serving , barefaced , unmeaning flattery .
Sir John Cox Hippisley , who had not then ratted , a regular Whig , seconded this amendment , in a speech which I am sure many of those who were present will never forget  it was full of sophistry end cant  and the old cunning fox whined and coaxed his hearers in the most supplicating manner , to support the old magistrates of the county , who , he said , had always been the best friends the farmers ever had , or ever would have  and a great deal more of such trash .
He implored them not to listen to the advice of strangers , who wished to withdraw them from that steady loyalty for which the yeomanry of the county of Somerset had so long been remarkable : he assured them , that the good old times would come round again , and that , if they would only wait with patience , all the difficulties and distresses which were partially felt in the country would be removed , and plenty and prosperity would be restored .
He admitted that a Reform in Parliament was necessary , but he contended that that was not a proper time to obtain it , neither was Mr. Hunt a proper person to obtain it for them .
-- Sir John Cox Hippisley , who was a needy briefless lawyer , had married a widow lady of the name of Cox , who was possessed of a good fat dower , consisting of some very fine estates , which were left her by her late husband , a gentleman of character and fortune , one of the old aristocratical families of this county , and who , I believe , had been one of its representatives in Parliament .
Her present lucky husband , Sir John , prospered much better as a country magistrate , and a Member of Parliament for the borough of Sudbury , than he did at the bar .
The worthy baronet will be long remembered in Parliament for the endless speeches which he made there , and the thin benches which , as a natural consequence , he always produced .
I have been told by some of the members , that when Sir John Cox Hippisley rose in the House , it was a signal for the other members to retire to take their dinners , or to converse upon other subjects  for , if they remained in the House , the baronet 's voice was so melodious , that it was sure to send them all to sleep .


At the meeting of which I am now giving an account , the worthy baronet chattered for nearly an hour  and when he had concluded , Sir Thomas Acland came forward with a very confident air .
As Sir Thomas had been taking notes all the time that I was speaking , and had frequently made what he intended for very significant gestures , we all expected that be would attempt something like an answer to my arguments , to show that the address which I had proposed was either improper or unnecessary .
He began with , `` Gentlemen '' -- but Sir Thomas , being a very young man , could never get out that which it appeared he wished to say  and , after repeating `` Gentlemen , '' and hesitating for some time , he , in a most ludicrously affected manner , exclaimed , `` England , with all thy faults , I love thee still ! ''
and with this quotation he was so exceedingly delighted , or was so unable to find any thing else to say , that after having , cuckoo-like , to the great amusement of his audience , repeated it at least half a dozen times , he retired without uttering another sentence .
We have heard since , that Sir Thomas is become an orator , he having made several brilliant speeches in Parliament .
It may be so  but his debut at Wells was most laughable .
Mr. Goodford , one of the Ilchester Bastile Visiting Magistrates , next came forward , to disclaim any participation in calling the meeting : he had , he said , certainly signed the requisition , but he did not know the object of it .
He was succeeded by a Mr. Stephen , a clergyman , a brother to the Master in Chancery , who also supported the amendment , and declaimed against Mr. Waithman and all the Reformers  but particularly , by insinuation , against myself , who had agitated the peaceable county of Somerset .
This gentleman certainly spoke very eloquently , but he proved himself to be a determined supporter of the most profligate system , or ( to use the proper phrase ) a true thick and thin Government man .
Mr. Power , the gentleman who came to report , now stepped forward , and , in a short but animated reply to the parson 's attack upon Mr. Waithman , who was absent , most successfully repelled his insinuations against the reformers .


When I went round the county to get the requisition signed , I met with hundreds of not merely Reformers , but absolute heroes in the cause , who promised to come to the meeting , and to support my address .
But , alas !
when the day of battle came , these blustering blades were all vanished  in fact , I saw but two or three of those who had so strongly pledged themselves to attend , and they looked as shy as possible  and instead of coming upon the hustings to support me , they were afraid of being seen to speak to me -- so subservient and so toad-eating were they to the Magistracy , when they came into contact with them .
Upon the right of the hustings , where I stood , there were only about half a dozen , and five of them came with me .
Mr. Waddington attempted to address the meeting  but , as he was seen coming to the hustings in company with me , the jolterheads would not hear him  and the other person who had attended me round the county being very illiterate , so much so , indeed , as to be incapable of speaking three words of English , or uttering a sentence without betraying his ignorance , we did not think it proper to expose him .
I , therefore , shortly replied to the artful addresses of Sir John Cox Hippisley , and Parson Stephen .
When the Sheriff put it to the vote , by a show of hats , whether the amendment should be adopted or not , it was most evident to me , and I believe to all who were upon the hustings , that the majority was against the amendment .
The Sheriff , however , declared the show of hats to be so equal , that he could not decide which party had the majority  upon which the old fox suggested to the Sheriff , to divide the meeting to the right and to the left .
This was no sooner said than , as if by previous consent , about forty constables made a wide passage down the middle , which they cleared with their staves , while the Magistrates and Parsons , with the most scrutinising eyes , marked all those that passed over from their side to support my address .
This very unfair conduct produced the desired effect  hundreds , who had held up their hats in the crowd for my motion , were so intimidated by this movement , that they did not venture to expose themselves to the rancour of the Magistrates and Parsons  and the majority was now evidently for the amendment , although , in spite of the stratagem which had been used , the majority was so small , that our opponents clearly , by their looks , betrayed their conviction that they had sustained a defeat .


I should be doing a great injustice to my own feelings if I were to omit to mention one gentleman , of the county of Somerset , who came forward in the most manly and independent manner , to give me his support , although he had neither signed the requisition , nor promised to support me  but it was very evident that he acted from principle , and from the purest motives of patriotism and love of country .
This was Mr. JOHN PRANKERD , an attorney , of Langport .
He came manfully upon the hustings , and , without any disguise , he had the courage and the honesty to act like an Englishman and a freeman , by following the conscientious dictates of a noble heart , and speaking his mind , in spite of Magisterial dictation and overbearing tyranny .
To the honour of the county of Somerset be it told , that there was one gentleman in it who , by joining our little party upon the hustings , had the honesty and the courage openly to brave the fury of the tyrannical junto of Magistrates and Parsons , who had assembled upon this occasion  but to its shame be it said , he was the only man who did so .
There were thousands who mixed in the crowd , a majority who held up their hats to support my address , they had sense and honesty enough to think right , but , when a division and a scouting took place , they had not the courage to face the eye of their oppressors .
I never saw Mr. Prankerd but once afterwards ( and then I met him by accident in London ) , till I came to this Bastile .
But I had no sooner become a captive in that county which I had ten years before roused into holding a public county meeting , than Mr. Prankerd hastened to my prison-house , and tendered to me his aid , his friendship , and his generous and patriotic assistance  fortunately , he only lives about ten miles from this place , and he was the second friend who called to cheer and to alleviate the horrors of my captivity , by the kindest assurances that he would do every thing in his power to make me comfortable while I remained here .
It is with the most unqualified gratitude that I now bear witness that he has fulfilled his promise to the very letter .
Nothing could have surpassed his active friendship for me upon all occasions .
It is one of the many obligations which I owe to him , that he introduced to me his amiable relatives at Milbourn Port , Mr. and Mrs. Parsons , and Miss Newton , who have also , by their unremitting kindness , greatly contributed to my comfort and happiness .
In fact , the generous attentions of Mr. Prankerd , and these his worthy kindred , have been unceasing since I came here  and they have eminently contributed to lighten the pressure of that burden with which the Boroughmongers vainly hoped to overwhelm me .


I must also do justice to the conduct of Mr. Jones Burdett at this meeting .
I know that every art was employed , every exertion was made by his neighbours , the magistrates , to seduce him over to join the Whigs against me  and when these artful knaves found they could not succeed in this , they then endeavoured to get him to stand neuter , and at all events not to support my address .
But Mr. Jones Burdett had given his promise , and all their arts could not succeed to make him break that promise .
It would have been very base in him if he had done so  but I have been acquainted with thousands who would have yielded to such entreaties .


When we left the hustings , I returned to my inn , the Swan , where a large party of freeholders was to dine .
The multitude accompanied me thither , testifying their approbation with the loudest shouts  while the gentry , composed of both factions , who had opposed me , sneaked off to their homes ashamed to look at each other .


The next day I wrote the following address to the freeholders , which was published in a county paper , as well as in the nineteenth volume of Cobbett 's Register :


TO THE INDEPENDENT FREEHOLDERS AND INHABITANTS OF SOMERSETSHIRE .


GENTLEMEN -- I can not refrain from offering you my congratulation on the effect of the first public meeting ever called in this county .
Notwithstanding our opponents obtained a small majority against the address which I had the honour to propose to you on that day , yet I am clearly convinced that you gained a more complete victory ( in the full admission of the truth of all the leading parts of that address by every one of those gentlemen who spoke against its adoption ) , than you would have gained by a mere majority of numbers without this unqualified admission of those facts .
The address pointed out , clearly and explicitly , the distressing situation of the country  and it stated that the cause of all these distresses arose from a want of a fair and free representation of the people in Parliament .
These facts were explicitly acknowledged by Sir John Cox Hippisley , who appeared to be the principal orator of both the parties , that united against the people on that day , who said he was sorry to bear witness to the truth of my statement  that `` there was at this time a million and a half of paupers in England , subsisting on parish allowance , which was two pounds of bread per head per week less than the allowance to felons confined in our gaols . ''
His only answer ( if it might be called an answer ) was , that there were 30 millions of paupers in France !
He admitted that the cause of all the afflictions and misfortunes of this once free and happy nation , arose from the state of the representation , and said , that he lead always voted for that Reform which was the object of our address  but that he found this to be an improper time to accomplish it .
On his being asked to name the proper time , he declined to make any answer .
Now , as all the gentlemen who spoke upon this subject completely agreed with Sir John , I contend it was a great victory obtained over the enemies of Reform  for had we produced such an address , and supported it in the same language of truth , three years back , instead of having all our points admitted to be true , only that it was an improper time to enforce them  instead of this , all the facts would have been impudently denied , and the mildest appellations we should have been branded with would have been jacobins and levellers .
These three facts were clearly ascertained and allowed by all parties , on that day  first , that it was proper the freeholders and inhabitants of the county of Somerset should assemble in county meeting , for they all congratulated you upon your meeting  second , that the country was in an awful and distressing situation  third , that it was highly necessary there should be a Parliamentary Reform , only this was not the proper time for it  and that you , the freeholders and inhabitants of the county , were not the proper men to effect it .
Pray , who are the proper men to effect it ?
Are Sir John Cox Hippisley , Sir Thomas Acland , Colonel Horner , the Rev. Mr. Trevillian , and Justice Goodford , likely men to bring about a Parliamentary Reform ?
Do you believe , Gentlemen , that they will ever call you together and tell you now is the time for Reform ?
You saw and heard them all on Monday last  and if , after this , you still believe that they are the sort of men likely to procure you an equal and fair representation in Parliament  if you wait for these leading men , as they have been called , in your county , to bring about a Reform , you deserve not even the chance of ever obtaining it .
What could you discover in these Gentlemen to make you believe that they will ever attempt to tender you any relief from the load of taxes under which you groan ?
Did they promise you any such thing ?
Did they give you any reason to believe that they wish to have your opinion again ?
Although they have been called your leading men , did they ever assemble you in county meeting ?
Will they ever do it ?
No , believe me , never .
They heard too much of your sentiments that day ever to wish to try the experiment again .
That day the united influence of all the leading men , of all the Magistrates , of all the men of large landed property , the coalition of both parties , the Ins and the Outs , and all their mighty influence actively exerted for the last three weeks against you  and what has been the result ?
Why truth , unaccompanied by any influence , prevailed .
Although you divided in a minority , in the proportion of three to two , yet truth prevailed  and be assured there is now a firm foundation laid for establishing the future independence of the county of Somerset .


I am , Gentlemen ,


Your sincere humble servant ,


HENRY HUNT .


Bath. , March 6th , 1811 .


To this letter Mr. Horner replied , which gave Mr. Cobbett an opportunity of criticising the proceedings of the meeting , and of giving Sir John Cox Hippisley a severe and well-merited castigation , for the inconsistent and hypocritical conduct of the Whigs in uniting with the Tories against the people .
These two factions , Whigs and Tories , had been for many years accusing each other of ruining the country  but , as soon as the people began to think and act for themselves , and to take measures for correcting the evil , they both joined , and exclaimed , `` We are a very happy people !
We are very well off !
Look at France !
Look at other countries ! ''
This was the language of Sir John Cox Hippisley .


One unequivocally good effect was produced by this meeting .
The mask was torn from the faces of a hypocritical tribe .
The Whigs had never so openly exposed themselves before .
All county meetings had , indeed , been heretofore called  but they had been called by one or other of the two factions  generally by the faction out of place , who wanted to make use of the people to enable them to get into place , by turning out their opponents .
Therefore , though they were always pitted against each other , yet both factions were equally anxious to impose upon , and keep the people in the darkest ignorance .
I considered it as a great victory to have compelled these two factions to unite , and show themselves in their true colours in the face of the whole country .
From that moment these factions were so well understood that they have not been able to deceive any body .
The Courier said , that the Reformers had received a `` Rebuke '' in Somersetshire  upon which Mr. Cobbett expressed himself as follows : `` Rebuke , indeed !
as if it was a defeat , as if it was not a complete victory to have compelled the two factions to unite , to exert all their influence , of a public as well as of a private nature , and to come barefacedly forward against the people , against Reform , against every thing that menaced Corruption !
As if this was doing nothing !
As if this was a defeat !
All the magistrates , all the hierarchy , all the squirarchy of the county were assembled , with some few exceptions .
There were , perhaps , not less than two hundred constables .
Why all this ?
Was it doing nothing to get all the people together ?
Was it doing nothing to compel them to expose their union to the people ?
Was it doing nothing to make them exhibit themselves thus , and to knock up for ever all the humbug of party in the county ? ''
Mr. Cobbett thought this a victory of sufficient importance to fill eight pages of his Register with these sort of comments upon the good effects likely to be produced by it .


I have been the more diffuse in detailing the particulars of this meeting  because , when the reader shall have perused an account of two subsequent public meetings , which I attended in this county ( at both of which the propositions that I supported were carried by overwhelming majorities )  when he shall have coupled them with the great public meeting that I was instrumental in calling at Bath , in the year 1816 , at which meeting I presided , and at which those resolutions and that petition were adopted , and signed by 20,000 names , which was the cause of Lord Camden resigning his sinecure place of Teller to the Exchequer  when he shall have reflected upon all these things , the reader will , perhaps , discover the reason why the corrupt tools of the Boroughmongers sent me to be imprisoned in the Bastile of this county .
There had never been a public meeting of the inhabitants at Bath in the memory of the oldest person residing in that city  and it is possible there never would have been a public meeting held in it , if it had not been for my exertions .
There had never been a public county meeting in Somersetshire before , at least not any thing worthy to be called a county meeting , till I procured one  and my readers may be well assured that these things were the cause of the Government selecting this Gaol for the place of my incarceration .
Another thing was , that the Judges knew it to be one of the worst , the most confined , and most unwholesome Gaols in the kingdom .
At these public meetings that spirit was engendered , which blazed forth with so much splendour at the late county election for Coroner , at which the little freeholders spurned the arbitrary dictation of the Magistracy of the county , and elected a Coroner of their own choice , in spite of the overbearing threats held out by those who had so long been in the habit of ruling them with a rod of iron .


I have before mentioned that I was a member of , or rather an annual subscriber to , what is called the Bath and West of England Agricultural Society  and , as a farmer , possessing , perhaps , the very best and largest stock of Southdown sheep , having my extensive farms cultivated under my own eye in such a manner , as to be more like a garden than like a large arable farm , that farm , of course , producing its produce in the market at all times of a superior quality  I had been often asked , why I did not exhibit some of my stock , and claim some of the numerous prizes for good husbandry , which were annually given by the society ?
My answer was this , `` I pay my guinea a year , that I may have an opportunity to watch the motions of those gentry who have the management of the concern , and to see how the pegs and wires work . ''
When I first became a member , my father warned me against being made the dupe of the artful and designing knaves , who were the leading parties concerned in it  and he always declared that the society was composed of three classes of persons , namely , `` RAPACIOUS LANDLORDS  CUNNING , GRASPING , LONG-HEADED PARSONS  AND SHALLOW , VAIN , JOLTER-HEADED FARMERS  '' the object of the two former being to suck the brains of the latter , for the purpose of ascertaining the utmost value of their lands and tithes , that they might screw up the rents of both to the highest possible pitch : in fact , he always set them down for a set of unprincipled gamblers and swindlers , whose sole design was to benefit themselves at the expense of a starving community , by increasing the price of the necessaries of life , through the means of every possible chicanery , trick , and delusion .
He used to say , that one half of them ought to be sent to Botany Bay for swindling , and the other half of them deserved to be whipped at the cart 's tail for their folly end vanity .
`` But , '' said he to me , in the most solemn and impressive manner , `` whatever you do , never , on any account , become a candidate for any of their premiums or prizes , because there , ` kissing goes entirely by favour , ' and , therefore , unless you will submit to become one of their unprincipled gang , by assisting them to dupe and plunder others , be you assured that they will dupe and plunder you  and , let your merit be what it will , take my word for it , you will never obtain a prize . ''
I always followed my father 's advice  and , by the most strict and impartial observation , I have satisfied myself beyond the possibility of doubt that he was correct in his conclusions .
They are , however , not only eminent in knavery , but that their folly keeps full pace with their ignorance and stupidity  the following are splendid proofs .
One of their members , Mr. Thomas Crook , of Futherington , actually exhibited a fat sheep , as a pig .
He made a bet with a friend , that he would prove the members of the Bath Agricultural Society to be such a set of contemptible pretenders and impostors , that they did not know a sheep from a pig .
There was to be a premium , as usual , for the best fat pig , with the greatest quantity of fat with the least bone .
Mr. Crook ordered a very fat sheep to be killed  the wool was then burnt off with straw , the inside taken out , and the carcase dressed after the manner of a bacon hog , and as it was a horned sheep , he had the head cut off , as well as the legs .
Mr. Crook was so confident of their want of knowledge , that he actually had his PIG hung up at the entrance of the sapient society 's room  so that every one who passed must of necessity see it as they went in or out .
Mr. Crook 's pig was the admiration of the whole society , and it was declared by the judges far to surpass all the others that were exhibited .
Unbounded encomiums were passed upon Mr. Crook , and his most excellent breed of pigs , every one being anxious to possess some of this valuable sort of swine .
The prize was , of course , awarded to Mr. Crook  but , as he was a plain , honest , strong-headed farmer , who had always held this society in the highest contempt , he , after dinner , treated them with a suitable lecture upon their profound ignorance , and a well-merited satire upon their false pretensions  and then openly declared , that the PIG which they had , one and all ( several hundreds of them ) , so much admired , was nothing more nor less than a SHEEP !
How the jolterheaded ideots could ever look each other in the face again , and have the audacity to prate about their proficiency in agriculture , must surprise all those who are unacquainted with their brazen-faced , hardened impudence .


Another of these worthies , a few years afterwards , played off a similar trick upon these sapient agricultural asses .
He exhibited an ox for the prize .
When it was killed , he and the butcher placed the fat of two oxen in the inside of it .
The beast was wonderfully admired by all who saw it , and the judges awarded the prize and the premium to Mr. Kemp , who was the owner of the ox , thus crammed with the fat of another ox in addition to its own .
Mr. Kemp was , it seems , very well satisfied with playing off this trick upon these tricksters  and it never would have been known , if the butcher had not , some time afterwards , divulged the secret .
Mr. Kemp knew that the whole thing was trick and imposition from beginning to end  and , therefore , he thought them fair game .
While collectively the gang constantly imposes upon the public , its members constantly dupe and impose upon each other  and yet this is the most respectable society of agricultural asses in the kingdom !
As a body they may be described as a set of the greatest impostors I ever met with in my life .
There are , of course , many honourable exceptions , but they are , for the most part , the dupes of their more designing associates .
A great number of them never paid up their subscriptions , and even Vice-presidents were eight or ten years in arrears .
When they were seven years in arrear , there was a mark of degradation placed against their names , which were annually published , and many bore this disgrace with surprising fortitude , though some of them were Members of Parliament , with upwards of ten thousand a year income .


One year , while I resided at Bath , the society were by some means deprived of their show-yard  the place in which they used to exhibit their live stock , c. c..
The late secretary , Mr. Mathews , a very worthy man , applied to me for the loan of my premises in Walcot-street , which , being very roomy and spacious , were deemed peculiarly eligible , particularly as at that time the society could not procure any other place , and consequently Mr. Mathews offered me any price that I chose to name for the use of them .
As some part of these premises was unoccupied at the time , I felt great pleasure in having it in my power to oblige this worthy man  and I told him the society should be very welcome to the use of my premises upon that emergency , but that I should not think of making any charge for the use of them .
The premises were , therefore , occupied with the cattle that were brought from all parts of the country to be shown , and , as this very liberal society always made those persons who wished to see their show-cattle pay for peeping , each person who entered was obliged to pay a shilling , and when I passed in at my own gate-way , their keeper actually demanded my shilling , which I readily paid , although my stables and garden led through the same .
This was allowed by all persons to be much the best place the society ever had wherein to exhibit their cattle , c. and the secretary offered me , I think it was , thirty pounds a year , to continue the show there .
This I declined to accept , as it would have been a bar to the letting of the whole premises , which were worth nearer two hundred a year than thirty .
The next season the society hired some very confined and inconvenient premises , at a rental of twenty-five or thirty-five pounds a year , I forget which  and the secretary informed me that the committee had come to a determination that , as I would not accept any thing for the use of my premises , they would write my subscriptions paid in their books for a number of years , equivalent to the value which they had been saved thereby .
Of course , I expected that they would , at the very least , have written paid for twenty-five years , the amount of what they annually paid for premises which were not one-fifth so convenient as those which they had occupied of mine .
However , I received a formal intimation that the committee had ordered the secretary to write me off five years subscription , which was five guineas .
When the secretary , Mathews , informed me of this , the society had left Bath , or I really believe that I should have thrown the five guineas at the head of the chairman , so indignant did I feel at their meanness .
But Mr. Mathews was a Quaker , and a peace-maker , and to oblige him I took no notice of it  although he admitted that it was very shabby conduct of the committee , as they had offered forty pounds for a place very inferior to that with which they had been accommodated by me .
I should not have mentioned this circumstance here , had it not been for the disgraceful and dastardly conduct of the society to me a few years afterwards  when , without giving me any previous notice , they came to a vote to exclude me from among them , because my subscriptions were THREE YEARS in arrear , while at the time scores of their members were upwards of SEVEN YEARS in arrear  and the only rule about the subject was , that `` no member should be eligible to vote in the society who was three years in arrear . ''
Be it remembered , too , that when they HONOURED me by this vote , the society was fairly indebted to me fifteen or twenty pounds , out of which they have , as I consider it , actually swindled me .
But the very last time I attended their meeting they were guilty of a transaction still more mean and more dastardly than the one I have above described , and which I shall record in its proper place , when that period of my history arrives .
I think , however , that what I have stated above will give my readers a pretty fair specimen of the character of that society , and it will be a warning to the public how they place any reliance upon their proceedings .


In the early part of the spring of 1811 , I went to reside with my family at Rowfant House , in the county of Sussex , near East Grinstead , about thirty miles from London .
This gave me an opportunity of frequently visiting my friend Mr. Cobbett , in Newgate .
While he was in the King 's Bench , and before he was called up for judgment , he expected that he should be sentenced to some distant county gaol , and in case it had been so , I had promised him that , wherever it was , I would come and take lodgings in the town , and visit him for a week or a fortnight at a time , several times during his imprisonment .
This , however , was rendered unnecessary , by his imprisonment being in London .
Nothing could have been more convenient for his business , as a public writer , than his being in London  and I have no hesitation in saying , that the punishment of six months ' imprisonment in this Bastile is a much greater punishment than that of two years in Newgate .
In fact , it was not more than it would have been to have sentenced him to be imprisoned in any house in Ludgate-hill .
All persons had free access to him , from eight o'clock in the morning till ten at night , and he had as good apartments as he could have had in any house in London , and quite as good accommodation as he could have had at any private lodgings .
Still it was imprisonment  but , when compared with my situation , it was no imprisonment at all .
He had his family staying with him night and day , the very same as he would have had at a private lodging .
Indeed , I have paid five guineas a week for lodgings in London which were worse in every respect .
There was nothing about his residence that had the appearance of a prison but the name .
Mr. Newman was a worthy and a benevolent man , quite the reverse of what prison keepers are in general , and every thing was done for Mr. Cobbett 's accommodation and for that of his family and friends .


In February , Mr. Peter Finnerty received the judgment of the Court of King 's Bench , for a libel upon Lord Castlereagh .
There never was a man who stood upon the floor of the Court for judgment who made a more able or a more brave defence than he did  he did not retract one sentence , one syllable of the original publication , but , on the contrary , he produced affidavits to prove the truth of every word that he had published about Lord Castlereagh 's cruelty to the people of Ireland , when he was in power , at the Castle of Dublin .
The Attorney-General , Sir Vicary Gibbs , as well as Lord Ellenborough , were almost frantic with rage at the boldness and the perseverance with which he proclaimed the truth of his statements , as to the conduct of Lord Castlereagh .
He was sentenced , by old Judge Grose , to be imprisoned in his Majesty 's gaol of Lincoln for eighteen calendar months , and to give security for his keeping the peace far five years from that time .
When he first went to Lincoln he was treated very harshly  upon which he caused a petition to be presented to the House of Commons , complaining of the treatment which he received from the Gaoler and some of the Visiting Magistrates .
This brought the High Sheriff to the gaol , and Mr. Finnerty was partially relieved from the privations of which he had complained .
He , however , afterwards caused a petition of one of the debtors to be presented to the House , by Sir Samuel Romilly , which ultimately led to a COMMISSION being sent down , to inquire into the truth of the matters contained in these petitions .
As these proceedings were very similar to those which have recently taken place in this gaol , I will , at the proper time , give a more ample detail of them  particularly as Mr. Drakard , the editor of the Stamford News , was at this time also a prisoner in Lincoln Castle .
He was confined thereby a sentence of the Court of King 's Bench , for a libel upon the army , he having been tried and found guilty at the Spring Assizes at Lincoln , in consequence of an article on the fogging of soldiers , which article appeared in his excellent paper .
On the 25th of May , he was brought up to receive judgment , and was sentenced to be imprisoned in his Majesty 's gaol of Lincoln , and to pay a fine of 200l .
As there were two such men of talent as Mr. Finnerty and Mr. Drakard confined in Lincoln Castle at the time that a commission was sent down to inquire into its abuses , and the misconduct of the Gaoler Merewether , and the Parson Justice Doctor Illingworth , the public of course expected that some important exposures would be made , and that very important benefits would result from the inquiry  but we shall see , by and by , that , from some cause or other , although Mr. Finnerty and Mr. Drakard were much better treated , yet that the commission and the inquiry ended together in mere smoke .


On the nineteenth of March , dollars were made current at five shillings and sixpence each  and on the twentieth of March in this year , 1811 , the Empress Maria Louisa of France was brought to bed of a son , who was immediately created King of Rome .
On the ninth of May , the first stone of Vauxhall Bridge was laid  and on the eleventh of October , the first stone of the Strand bridge was laid : this last is the bridge which is now foolishly called by some silly people , Waterloo bridge .
A similar circumstance occurred when Blackfriars bridge was built  some foolish people wished to change its name to Chatham bridge , as a compliment to Lord Chatham  and it was so called by many silly people for some time : but at length good sense overcame vanity , and it reverted back to its original and proper name of Blackfriars bridge , in spite of Chatham-place , c. c. So , I have no doubt , the good sense of the people will ultimately overcome their folly , and that it will be again universally denominated by its original and proper name , the STRAND BRIDGE .


On the fourth of June , the King 's birth-day , the usual public rejoicings were suspended , in consequence of his severe illness , although our most gracious Regent , soon after he attained that dignity , had given a fete in February , at Carlton-House , where at least two thousand persons were present .
On the ninth of June , Christophe , a man of colour , was proclaimed and crowned King of St. Domingo , or Hayti .
At the time , it was supposed to bring the kingly office into some degree of ridicule , to have a black man solemnly going through the mockery of a coronation  although it is a fact , that it was a very splendid , as well as a very popular coronation .


It was in this year , that Mr. now Sir Charles Wolseley , first publicly declared his sentiments as to political matters  at least , it was the first time I ever noticed them .
In a letter which he addressed to the Freeholders of the county of Stafford , he makes this honest , open , and manly declaration : `` The principles upon which a person ought to be sent to serve in Parliament , are , to keep the prerogatives of the crown unimpaired  to secure the liberties of the people  to oppose in every shape the system of Pitt 's administration  and to obtain a RADICAL REFORM in the representation of the people in Parliament .
These are my principles . ''
These principles has Sir Charles Wolseley honestly acted up to ever since  and to this may be attributed the reason that we have never had the benefit of the worthy Baronet 's patriotic and able exertions in the senate as a Member of Parliament .
He has always been a staunch Radical Reformer , and he never disguised his sentiments  therefore it is , that he has never been taken by the hand and placed in the House by any of the great Borough Lords of either of the two factions of Whigs and Tories  and from principle he has alike declined to become a slave and a tool to the Boroughmongers , or to purchase one of their seats .


In consequence of the failure of a Bank at Salisbury , of the firm of Bowles , Ogden , and Wyndham , immense distress was caused throughout the county of Wilts  almost all the country people having a great portion of their property in the notes of this Bank .
It was on this occasion that Mr. Cobbett wrote those famous letters , which he called `` Paper against Gold , '' addressed to the tradesmen and farmers in and near Salisbury , being an examination of the report of the Bullion Committee .
These celebrated letters formed a clear and comprehensive exposition of the Paper System  they developed the whole juggle of Stock Jobbing , the Sinking Fund , and the National Debt , and the operation of taxes upon the industry and happiness of the people .
These letters , which are now published in a small volume , prove , beyond all doubt , the clear and comprehensive mind of this inimitable writer , and the work will live in after-ages as a monument of his superior talent and knowledge in these heretofore intricate and mysterious matters , which were rendered still more intricate and incomprehensible by the very means which such men as Mr. Horner , the chairman of the Bullion Committee , used to elucidate them .
Had Mr. Cobbett never written another line but what is contained in this work , his name , as an author , in matters of English finance , would have gone down to posterity hand-in-hand with that of our immortal countryman , Mr. Paine .
Perhaps Mr. Cobbett would never have written this valuable work , if he had not been imprisoned in Newgate by the tyrannical proceedings of the Boroughmongers , assisted by a packed special jury , always the best ally of tyranny and tyrants , because it enables them to carry on a most nefarious despotism , and inflict death , loss of liberty , and torture upon its victims , under the assumed forms of law and justice  the very worst species of tyranny , and the most horrible of all despotisms .


Sir Samuel Romilly brought some Bills into the House of Commons , which were passed , respecting the criminal laws .
Lord Holland , in the House of Lords , and Lord Folkestone , in the House of Commons , made motions to restrain ex-officio informations , which were at this time extended to a most alarming pitch by Attorney-General Vicary Gibbs  but ministerial influence prevailed , and the laudable endeavours of the two peers were rendered of no avail , as the motions were lost in both Houses .
These proceedings excited universal interest , and the constant ex-officio informations filed by Sir Vicary Gibbs against almost every liberal writer of the day , drew down upon him almost universal execration .
A Bill was now passed to allow the Ministers to make an interchange of the militia between England and Ireland .
The Prince Regent also restored the Duke of York to the office of Commander in Chief .
This excited general dissatisfaction , and a debate upon the subject arose in the House of Commons  but upon a division the Ministers carried it with a very high hand , and an overwhelming majority , there being only forty-seven of the faithful and disinterested Representatives of the people who voted against the measure .
Motions were likewise made in both Houses , to discountenance the doctrine of assassination which had been lately preached up by various righteous Ministerial Members , aiming at the life of Napoleon  but these motions also were lost , as Ministers declined to give them their support .
Lord Stanhope about this time brought in a Bill to make Bank-notes be received as equal in value with coin , under a penalty  and after a long debate in both Houses , this profound Bill passed .


The Catholics in Ireland manifested symptoms of great discontent and dissatisfaction at their claims being so long neglected .
The fact was , that the wretched peasantry of Ireland were in the most abject state of want , and as they had been kept in the most complete ignorance , and deprived of all the common forms of law and justice , they were gradually sinking into a state of barbarism  the consequence of which was , that we frequently heard of instances of aggravated ferocity , such as seldom disgrace any people but the most uncultivated savages .
Deprive civilized man of the protection of the law -- only once suffer a body of people to be convinced that there is neither law nor justice within their reach , and you drive them to desperation  in which state they throw off all controul over their passions , and they become remorseless , cruel , and vindictive .
I am quite sure that it is this state of feeling amongst the lower Irish that has created White Boys , Peep-of-day Boys , Ribbon Men , and all the various classes of incendiaries and desperadoes of which we hear so much from Ireland .
I do not believe , nor did I ever believe , that Catholic emancipation would restore the people of Ireland either to happiness or prosperity : no , the same malady that reigns in England reigns in a two-fold degree in Ireland -- they are overwhelmed with taxation , oppression , and injustice  these dreadful evils have goaded them into madness , and till they are removed and the people are treated with kindness and humanity , and above all , till justice is fairly administered amongst them , the Government of England will in vain endeavour to subdue the spirit of insubordination either by the bayonet or the halter .
The only remedy there as well as in England consists in giving the people free and equal means of choosing their own representatives , to make wise , just , and liberal laws for them in Parliament .


I lament to find that the poor of England are fast approaching to the same frightful state as the natives of unhappy Ireland .
The poor and the oppressed come to me here from all quarters , within a circle of twenty miles , and when they have told me their pitiable tales , and I advise them to go and repeat it to a `` Magistrate , '' alas !
almost without an exception , they exclaim , `` there is no justice for the poor ! ''
If they could have obtained any redress from a Magistrate , I should not have been consulted .
In fact , most of their complaints arise from their inability to get any justice done them by the Magistrates .
I would hold out a friendly warning to these Magistrates , to beware how they strain that cord too tight  for , if it should once break , if the people should in general , or any great portion of them , should come to the conclusion , that there is not justice for the poor , that they exist at the arbitrary will of their task-masters , that , in short , they are not under the protection of the laws , melancholy would be the consequences  such indeed as can not be contemplated without horror .
Who is there that can say what an awful retribution might be exacted !
When once such a spirit breaks forth , no one can calculate upon the time at which it will be appeased .
I frequently shudder at the terrific consequences which must and would ensue .
It was this absence of justice which drove the French to a revolution .
It was a similar contempt of justice that caused the Americans to revolt , and most happily rescued that fine country from the worst of despotism .
The taxing of the industry , the skill , and the talent of a people , without allowing them to have any share in the election of those who impose those taxes -- in a word , taxation without representation is the very acme of tyranny and despotism .
It was this species of tyranny that produced the glorious revolutions of South America , of Spain , and of Portugal , and which has emancipated the inhabitants of those beautiful countries from slavery both of body and mind .


At Lady-day I quitted my residence at Bath , and went with my family to reside at Rowfant House , in Sussex , which , as I have before said , is situated thirty miles from London , half way between the two roads leading from the metropolis to Lewes and Brighton , and about the same distance from those two places .
It is at the eastern extremity of what is called the Weald of Sussex .
Nothing can be more delightful than this country is in the spring , summer , and autumn  it is then luxuriant and picturesque in the extreme  nothing can then surpass the beauty of the surrounding scenery , and the richness of the foliage which clothe the majestic oak and beech-trees  of the latter there are many , very many , of the largest and finest in the kingdom .
The mansion is situated in the centre of a park , or park-like pastures , and has two fronts , one to the south and the other to the west , each looking over the most beautiful , picturesque , and romantic country that I ever saw , alternately presenting to the eye wood , water , and pasture fields , interspersed with the majestic oak , the lofty beech , the trembling birch , the lime , the ash , and every other species of beautiful forest tree .
There were nearly five hundred acres of woodland upon this estate , and it was well stocked with game and fish of every description  but the whole country was congenial for the breed of pheasants .
On some parts of the manor there was black game , and in the season woodcocks , snipes , and other wild fowl  in fact , all these frequently breed in that part of the country .


This part of Sussex , although it is only thirty miles from London , is as completely out of the world as the most remote mountains of Wales , or the Highlands of Scotland , and the inhabitants were quite as uninformed and in as perfect a state of nature as the natives in the wilds of America .
I had no idea that any portion of the people of England could be so completely buried in ignorance , and display such a total absence of all knowledge , with the exception of hedging , ditching , cutting wood , converting it into charcoal , making and eating hard dumplings , and smuggling brandy , Hollands , tea , tobacco , French manufactures of all sorts and descriptions .


This estate had for ages been in the possession of the family of the Bethunes , and the farmers had also been so long in the occupation of their farms , for little or no rent , that they very justly considered themselves as having a much greater interest in the soil than the proprietor had .
This place had been put up to the hammer , and sold to the trustees of a lunatic .
I had taken it on a lease  the manor , mansion , farms , lands , and the manorial rights .
Mr. James , the land-agent , in Old Boswell-court , bad the letting of it , under the direction of John Foster , Esq. the head of the firm of Foster , Cooke , and Frere , of Lincoln 's Inn , who was the acting trustee for the lunatic .
On application to Mr. James , I soon found that he must have a certain price for the estate , which , if I would consent to give , I might make my own terms .
Of course , I took care to insert such clauses in the lease , as would convey the property entirely to my custody , upon the payment of a certain rent .
I introduced one clause which I was ashamed to carry into execution , when I found that it would injure the property to an enormous extent , without affording to myself a corresponding benefit .
I stipulated to be at liberty to grub up and to cultivate all the hedge-rows , and about three hundred acres of wood and coppice land .
This the parties readily covenanted to allow me to do  but when I came to examine these woods , I found that , in availing myself of my right , I should destroy not less than sixty thousand beautiful and thriving oak trees and saplings .
As the whole of the land on which these trees grew was a light sandy loom on the top , and a deep strata of yellow clay under , which was a soil by no means advantageous to cultivate , but peculiarly congenial to the growth of oak timber , I made my calculations of what I might gain , and what would be the loss to the proprietors of the estate , by grubbing up the woods , and destroying sixty thousand thriving oak trees and saplings .
My gains would have been but small , but the injury to the estate would have been incalculable .
This I candidly laid before the trustees of the property , and at once proposed to forego any advantage that I might have derived , and to suffer the woods to remain , with the timber growing thereon , for the benefit of the proprietor , provided the parties would make me a corresponding deduction in the rent .
My proposition was so reasonable , that I had not the slightest doubt but it would be eagerly accepted .
Mr. Foster , who was a very keen , sensible , clever , intelligent man , I saw at once , perceived the destruction that it would be to the estate  but yet it was evident that the object in granting one such a lease was to make up a certain annual rent , equivalent to the interest of the money which had been expended in the purchase of the estates .
He saw the dilemma in which they were placed , and I plainly perceived that the idea of reducing the rent upon which they had calculated was out of the question , that it was not to be entertained by the trustees for a moment .


This being the case , I returned from London , and proceeded in the cultivation of the farm .
I very early made up my mind not hastily to do such a serious and irretrievable injury as I was authorized to do to the estate , and I therefore directed my attention to other objects .
I had sent off a servant to meet half way the little drove of sheep which I had purchased of Mr. Dean  the whole distance being one hundred and fifty miles .
He had been gone ten days , and I impatiently waited his arrival , but I had as yet heard no tidings of him , although he ought to have been back several days before .
At length , when twelve days had elapsed , information was brought me that he had arrived with the sheep upon Copthorn Common , but that he could not get them any further , in consequence of their being all very lame and unable to walk .
I took my horse and rode to the spot , about the distance of two miles from my house .
When I came there , I found every sheep of them dead lame , with the most confirmed and inveterate FOOT ROT .
The poor fellow , ADAMS , who had been so long delayed upon the road , was completely exhausted with the labour , fatigue , and harassing exertion which he had endured in accomplishing his task .
I think he had actually left three or four of them thirty or forty miles behind , and many of the others he declared that he had carried , one at a time , more than half the way upon his shoulders .
Upon my expostulating with him , as to his having consented to receive them in such a state  he replied , that the drover , who brought them from Mr. Dean , declared that he would not drive them back to have them  that he left them in the care of my servant the moment that they met , and then , without the least ceremony , took French leave , apparently delighted to get quit of his troublesome charge .
When I saw the deplorable state in which they were ( for upon closer examination I found that many of their hoofs were rotted off their feet ) , I demanded with some warmth of my servant , why he had not left them with some farmer upon the road , till they could have been recovered or cured .
`` Lord bless you , Sir , '' replied the man , `` I tried at more than fifty places , but nobody would take them in at any price , as they all said they would not have them at a gift , and that they should not tread a hoof upon any of their lands on any account , as the foot rot was highly infectious . ''


This was another serious evil , for I had purchased two hundred more sheep , and if they went upon the same land , I was sure of infecting my whole flock .
However , on the next day when they could be got home , I placed them in some of my best meadows , and set about attempting a cure .
In the meantime , I wrote to Mr. Dean , to inform him of the deplorable state in which they had arrived .
In his reply he candidly acknowledged that they had suffered from this disease , but he declared he thought they had been quite free from it before he sent them off  adding that , if he had had the slightest idea of the state in which they were at the time his servant left them , they should not , on any account , have been forwarded to me .
He begged that I would not return them , but that I would employ some one to endeavour to cure them  and , if that could not be accomplished , I must , he said , kill them , and give them to the dogs , or do any thing with them I pleased .
In fact , I did employ a person , who pretended he could cure them , to come and dress them , which he did once a week for nearly a twelve-month , and at length he gave them up as incurable .


Instead of my ever making one halfpenny of these sheep , the plague , the trouble , and the loss that I sustained by them was not so little as sixty pounds  besides , their having given the disease to my flock of two hundred , the remainder of which , after losing sixty of them , I sold at seven shillings per head less than I gave for them .
So that by this untoward affair I was , on the whole , at least one hundred pounds out of pocket , to say nothing of all my trouble and anxiety .
If I had been served so by any one but a friend , such as Mr. Dean  I should certainly have commenced an action against him for serious damages .
Far from Mr. Dean ever applying to me to pay him any thing for the sheep , he frequently expressed his sorrow that I should have been so harassed and perplexed with them as I had been .
I had devoted one of my best fields to their use , and at the end of two years , when I left the farm , there were seven of them remaining still in the same state , as they never were or ever could be cured .
At length , some time after the decease of Mr. Dean , I received , from the executors of Mr. Dean , an application for the payment of these sheep .
I replied , that Mr. Dean had long since cancelled that debt , but , on the other hand , there was a very considerable balance due to me , if I chose to persist in it , from the circumstances above stated .


I heard no more of this affair from them  but , after a considerable lapse of time , a statement was made in the Taunton Courier , that , when I had gone round the country to collect names for a requisition to call a county meeting , Mr. Dean had taken me in and treated me with the greatest hospitality , and that I had rewarded him by swindling him out of a flock of fine sheep , for which I had never paid him .
When the reader reflects upon this wanton and atrocious slander , which was malignantly propagated by the venal and corrupt editor of a country paper , I am sure , although the vehicle through which the slander was conveyed , was in itself obscure and contemptible , I shall be excused for giving the particulars of this transaction  however tedious and uninteresting it may appear to those at a distance , where the venom was never propagated , it is , in truth , due to myself and to my friends in this county , who read the calumny , to have the matter clearly explained  although , to every man of common sense , it must have been very evident , when the scandal was first promulgated , that it was a gross and palpable falsehood  because , if I had owed Mr. Dean 's executors , or any other person , a sum of money amounting to forty or fifty pounds , it was the most easy thing upon earth to have compelled me to pay it .
O , it was a wicked , a mean and a malignant falsehood , which would never have been put afloat , or believed by any body , against any other man but myself , who at that time was the universal topic of abuse in the whole of the venal ministerial and opposition press of the country , in consequence of my having resisted oppression and tyranny , and roused the spirit of liberal feeling and patriotic exertion among some of the electors of Bristol , where I had maintained , single-handed , two contested elections for that city , in opposition to all the contending factions .
The newspaper editors of each faction had disseminated the vilest calumnies against me , in revenge for those struggles which I had made to oppose the rotten borough system in that city  and this venal , dirty , contemptible , hireling knave of the Taunton Courier , selected this as a proper time to add his lie to the million of lies that were then circulated against me .


But I shall now speak more fully of the circumstances which led to my being a candidate for Bristol , in June , 1812 .
Ever since the previous general election , when the electors had been humbugged by Sir John Jervis , and had attempted to wreak their vengeance upon Mr. Bragge Bathurst , I had , at various times , publicly declared my intention to offer myself as a candidate for that city .
On that occasion , Mr. Bathurst experienced such an unfavourable reception , that it was generally understood he did not mean to offer himself as a candidate for the city , at the approaching general election  and as Colonel Baillie , the Whig Member , did not relish the idea of standing such a contest as it was generally expected I should create , he also intimated his intention to resign  Mr. Edward Protheroe , therefore , offered himself as a Whig Member , in his place .
The Whigs were very well satisfied with the pretensions of Mr. Protheroe , as being a citizen of Bristol  and he , as the Whig Member , and Mr. Richard Hart Davis , as the Tory Member , would have been returned , without any opposition whatever , by the two factions , had it not been for the threatened interference of myself , who was avowedly a candidate that would excite a great popular feeling .


This consideration induced some of what is called the liberal or Foxite Whigs to think of looking out for a more popular Whig Candidate than Mr. Protheroe , for the purpose of taking away the votes from me .
After several meetings had been held upon the subject , it was determined upon , by a little faction , to invite Sir Samuel Romilly to become a candidate .
I am quite confident , in my own mind , that if it had not been for the opposition which it was certain would be made by me , there would not have been any opposition at all .
Mr. Bragge Bathurst and Colonel Baillie , or Mr. Protheroe , would have been returned without the slightest effort to prevent it .
My avowed intention of being a candidate , however , first made the White Lion Cock , Bragge Bathurst , turn tail and declare off , and next induced Colonel Baillie to decline .
The one of these was the Tory and the other the Whig candidate for the representation of the city of Bristol , which , in consequence of a compromise entered into by the two factions , had always been divided between them  and therefore one Whig and one Tory Member had always been returned  and so it would have continued without any change , had it not been for me .
Mr. Davis and Mr. Protheroe would have been returned as quiet as mice , without a word being said by any body against it .
But , as I had become a candidate , a little gang of intriguers at length made up their minds to put Sir Samuel Romilly forward  not , I believe , with the slightest expectation that they could carry his election , but under the firm conviction that he would very largely divide the popularity with me .


Thus it was that Sir Samuel Romilly was made the cat 's - paw of this faction , for the purpose of destroying all chances of my becoming the Representative of Bristol .
As soon as they had announced their intention to support Sir Samuel Romilly , they , the Whigs , took the greatest pains to circulate the report and create the impression that I was offering myself as a candidate for Bristol merely to oppose the `` amiable Sir Samuel Romilly  '' these corrupt , factious knaves , always taking care to keep out of view , that this gentleman was already a Member of Parliament for the Duke of Norfolk 's rotten-borough of Arundel , which seat he was sure to retain as long as he lived , if he chose to do so .
But it was necessary , for their sinister purposes , to bring upon the scene this gentleman , who bore an excellent character , and who , amongst the Whigs , was considered as a prodigy of perfection .


Notwithstanding that Sir Samuel Romilly was set up against me , instead of my being set up against him , I having constantly , for four years before Sir Samuel 's name was ever mentioned , avowed my intention of becoming a candidate , yet , as soon as a meeting had been called at the Crown and Anchor , in London , and a sum of eight thousand pounds had been subscribed by the Whigs to support him , I publicly offered to resign my pretensions , and to give my whole support to the knight of the gown and wig , if he would only pledge himself to espouse the cause of Reform in the House of Commons .
This offer was , however , declined , or at least treated with silent neglect  but the venal press did not cease railing against me for opposing Sir Samuel Romilly .


A day was appointed for Sir Samuel to make his public entry into Bristol , and a public dinner was got up on the occasion , to which he was invited .
The day fixed on was the second of April , 1812 , which was considered to be a period immediately preceding the expected general election .
Great preparations were made to receive the lawyer in grand stile , and every thing was attempted to create effect .
A number of persons went out to meet him on horseback , and I made a point of being present , to see how the thing went off , and to hear what would be said by Mr. Tierney , who , it was reported , was to introduce Sir Samuel to the citizens of Bristol .
It was given out that he would alight at the Bush Tavern , opposite the Exchange , and that he would address the people from the window of his committee-room , facing which window I placed myself , to see and to hear all that could be heard or seen .
At length , after he had been waited for , for about an hour ( which , by-the-bye , is considered genteel ) , the worthy lawyer arrived , seated in an open barouche , with Mr. Michael Castle on one side , and Alderman Noble on the other !
It was but a sorry cavalcade  and although there was some cheering amongst his partizans , yet he met altogether with a very cold reception .
But when Sir Samuel was led up to the window , and it was discovered that it was Alderman Noble who accompanied him , there was one general burst of disapprobation -- groans , hissing , and hooting , and cries of `` No Noble !
no six and eightpence !
no bloody bridge !
no murderers ! ''
c. c. Poor Sir Samuel was astonished  he had been made to believe that he would be received with the greatest applause and indeed enthusiasm  but these discordant sounds quite disconcerted him , and when he began to speak , instead of his being listened to , the cries and the groans were redoubled .
Alderman Noble put forth his hand to command silence  this was received with the most violent and indignant execrations and hootings , mingled with cries of `` No Noble !
no six and eightpence !
no bloody bridge ! ''
Nothing could have been so unfortunate for Sir Samuel Romilly , as to be accompanied by Alderman Noble , who , a few years before , had rendered himself deservedly detested , by his having ordered the military , the Herefordshire Militia , with Lord Bateman as their Colonel , to fire upon the people , at a riot which took place relative to the tolls of Bristol Bridge  upon which occasion eleven or twelve persons were killed .
So obnoxious was this man , that he had been obliged to quit Bristol for some years , and he took this opportunity to return under the wing of Sir Samuel Romilly  but his appearance roused the most angry feeling amongst the people , and this feeling was so preponderating , that Sir Samuel attempted to address the multitude for about twenty minutes , without one word being distinguishable .


I have already mentioned the report that Sir Samuel would be introduced by Mr. Tierney , the late popular Member for the borough of Southwark , but , subsequently to his holding a place under the Whigs , the Member for the rotten-boroughs of Appleby , in Westmoreland , and Bandon-bridge , in Ireland .
Even this would have done Sir Samuel no service .
Before the Whigs had been in place , and Mr. Tierney , like the rest of them , had been tried and found wanting , it might have answered very well for him to have introduced a popular candidate to the city of Bristol  for at that period he professed himself to be not only the champion , but the child of Liberty .
At the time when he branded with so much spirit and eloquence the income-tax of Pitt , and declared in his place in Parliament that this income-tax was such an odious and such an unconstitutional measure `` that the people of England would be justified in taking up arms to resist the collection of it  '' at that time , when Mr. Tierney so strenuously and brilliantly opposed all the ruinous measures of Pitt  at that time , if he had proposed to go to Bristol , he might have been received with approbation by the people , and his name might have added to the popularity of any man .
But , since Mr. Tierney had been in office with the Whigs , since he had become a splendid pensioned apostate from his former opinions , since he had been kicked out of the borough of Southwark for his apostacy , since he had , while in the Whig Administration , advocated and supported an additional income-tax , and voted for almost all those measures , when in place , which he had opposed when out of place  since these things had occurred , the name of Mr. Tierney was calculated to injure the popularity of any man to whom he linked himself .
This of itself , this announcement that Mr. Tierney was to attend Sir Samuel Romilly , was enough to damn his popularity with every real friend of Liberty in that city .
But , when he appeared side by side with Alderman Noble , all hopes of his ever being popular in Bristol were at an end !
I never in my life , on any public occasion , saw a man received worse by the populace than Sir Samuel Romilly was .


It was asserted , and the assertion has been often repeated , that I was instrumental to this unfavourable reception of Sir Samuel Romilly  but this is totally false  none of my friends knew of my being , or of my intending to be , at Bristol on that day .
I had gone into the city privately , and had walked up to the Exchange from my inn , the Talbot , without exciting the attention of any one  and , to tell the truth , no man was more sorry than I was , that such a man should have been treated so unfairly as he was by his party  that he should , in the first place , have been so ill advised , as to have had his name coupled with that of Mr. Tierney , and then , that he should be accompanied by the most unpopular and most odious man in the whole city , and one who , since he had been driven from the city , had become a placeman under the Government .
These were the sole causes of Sir Samuel Romilly being received with such demonstrations of disgust and disapprobation .
To be sure , all the friends of Liberty in the city of Bristol , who had any pretensions to a knowledge of what was going on , must have very clearly seen that Sir Samuel Romilly had been invited to attend , and to become a candidate for Bristol , mainly for the purpose of dividing the popularity with me  and my friends were , doubtless , prepared to scrutinise his speech with rather a sceptical feeling  but not one of my friends would on this account have interrupted him , or have done any thing to prevent him from being heard  on the contrary , there was a general disposition amongst my friends to support him in conjunction with myself .


Those Whigs who supported Sir Samuel Romilly appeared to be thunderstruck at his reception , and for a long time they did not appear to be aware of the cause of it .
As there was not one of them who had any influence over the minds of the people , there was no attempt made to rescue Sir Samuel from this very unpleasant situation , and at length he retired from the window sadly disconcerted , and his party were dreadfully chagrined .
Sir Samuel had literally been hissed , hooted , and groaned from the window , at a time when I expected every one would have been anxious to hear him , and to listen to him with the greatest attention .
I am sure , for myself , that I was greatly disappointed .
There might have been ten thousand persons present , which was no very great number for such an occasion  .
but I think I may safely say , that there was not one in a hundred that knew or expected that I would be there .


As there was now a pause , and as no one from Sir Samuel Romilly 's room attempted to come forward , I mounted upon one of the copper pedestals which stands in the front of the Exchange , and I was instantly hailed with shouts from all those who knew me , which , at that time , could not have been more than half the persons present .
My name was rapidly communicated from one to the other , and before I could begin to address them , they gave three cheers for Mr. Hunt , which was proposed by some one present .
The moment I began to speak , the most profound silence reigned around  and in a speech of an hour and forty minutes I was interrupted only by the applause of my hearers , and by the anxiety which they expressed that I should put on my hat , as it rained .
This inconvenience was soon obviated , by a gentleman being elevated with an umbrella , which he held over my head till I had concluded .
During this address I avowed myself the warm advocate for Radical Reform , and declared myself the staunch friend of Sir Francis Burdett , and the principles which he professed .
I went through a history of the proceedings of the Whig Administration , and recounted the sinecures , pensions , and unmerited places held by the Grenvilles , and other Boroughmongers of that faction  but when I came to speak of the conduct of the Law Officers of the Crown under that administration , during the continuance of which Sir Samuel Romilly was one of those officers , when I touched on their having drawn up the famous Acts of Parliament passed by the Whig Ministry , during the reign of one year , one month , one week , and one day  when I came to speak of this , the windows of the room in which Sir Samuel Romilly and his friends were , in the Bush Tavern , opposite where I stood , were pettishly shut down by some one .
The moment that the people saw this , they exclaimed , `` Look !
look !
they are ashamed to hear the truth , and they have shut the windows to prevent its coming amongst them . ''
This shutting the windows the populace took as an insult offered to them , and they vociferously demanded that they should be re-opened  and their demand was made in such an unequivocal and peremptory manner , that the gentry , after some slight hesitation , complied with the wishes of the multitude .
I continued to address the people for nearly an hour after this time , although at the outskirts of the crowd in Clarestreet there was a waiter with Sir Samuel Romilly 's colours in his hat , who announced that the dinner was waiting  in consequence of which , several attempts were made in vain by some persons in the Bush , to force their way out of that house through the dense crowd , that not only occupied the whole of the front of the tavern , but extended for a very considerable distance above and below , even up to Broad-street and down to Small-street , so that it was absolutely impossible for any one to pass while I was addressing the people .
This was most galling to Sir Samuel Romilly 's friends , who , from this circumstance , were actually prisoners in the Bush nearly an hour and a half after the dinner had been ready at the Assembly Rooms in King-street , where the party were going to dine  but , if their lives had been at stake not a man of them could have got out till I had finished my speech  for the crowd had considerably increased since I had begun .
After having exhausted my strength , I retired amidst the most deafening shouts of approbation  the whole of the immense populace accompanied me to my inn , and left Sir Samuel and his friends a clear course to proceed to their dinner .


I never said any thing against the gown and wig knight .
On the contrary , I thought him a much better man for a Member of Parliament than Mr. Protheroe , who had declared himself a candidate also in the Whig interest , to represent the city , in the place of Colonel Baillie , who intended to resign at the general election .
I had , ever since the former election , offered myself as a candidate , whenever there should be a vacancy , without any reference to either of the factions  but Mr. Protheroe and Sir Samuel Romilly came forward avowedly to fill the seat of Colonel Baillie  neither of these gentlemen professing any desire to interfere with the White Lion candidate , Mr. Bragge Bathurst , the factions being too civil to each other to interfere with their separate interests .
If I had not offered myself as a candidate , Mr. Bragge Bathurst would have been elected by the White Lion interest , without any opposition .


The Whigs were excessively annoyed by the inauspicious manner in which Sir Samuel was greeted , and not less so by the exposure which I made of their politics and principles .
The editor of the Morning Chronicle , and other papers in London , gave , however , a flaming account of the public entry of Sir Samuel Romilly into Bristol : they said that he was hailed with the greatest enthusiasm , and they published a speech which he had delivered to the people at the Bush Tavern window , and which they unblushingly affirmed to have been received with the greatest applause  but they forgot to say one word about a speech of nearly two hours , which I delivered .
They published the account of a speech of a quarter of an hour , not one word of which was heard , while the speech that was heard and attentively listened to , they never noticed at all !
This was so glaringly unfair and partial , that Mr. Cobbett wrote a very long and able paper upon the subject , exposing and chastising the Whigs for their duplicity and deception , and , at the same time , he did not fail to represent the conduct of Mr. Perry in its true colours .


A dissolution of Parliament had been anticipated for some time  but an occurrence now took place that caused a sudden and unexpected vacancy for the city of Bristol .
Mr. Bragge Bathurst was appointed to the lucrative office of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , one of the most valuable places in the gift of the Sovereign , or rather of his Ministers .
It was announced that he had accepted this office , that he had in consequence vacated his seat , and that a new writ was issued for the election of a Member for the city of Bristol  to which was added , that Mr. Hart Davis , the then Member for Colchester , had accepted the stewardship of the Chiltern Hundreds , for the purpose of becoming a candidate upon the White Lion , or Blue Club , alias the Ministerial interest in Bristol .
This was all promulgated in the same paper , and it stated that the election would be held forthwith , as Mr. Davis would be elected without any opposition , the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly and Mr. Protheroe having no intention to interfere with the election of that gentleman .


The writ for electing a Member for Bristol , in the room of Bragge Bathurst , was moved for in the House of Commons , on Tuesday evening , the 24th of June : and at the same time a writ for electing a Member for Colchester , in the room of Richard Hart Davis , was moved for .
I never heard a word of this till Thursday afternoon at four o'clock , when the postman brought me my Wednesday 's paper , just as I was sitting down to dinner at Rowfant , in Sussex .
After dinner I read the account , and I made up my mind to start for that city the next morning .
I rode to town on Friday , took my place in the Bath mail , and reached Bath at ten o'clock on Saturday morning .
Some of the people of Bristol had arrived in Bath in expectation of meeting me , and one of them immediately returned to Bristol to announce my intention of being in that city the same evening .
At the appointed hour , which was five o'clock , I arrived at Totterdown , where I was met by an immense multitude , who took my horses from the carriage , and drew me into the city and through the principal streets , till they arrived at the front of the Exchange , which they had fixed upon as the theatre of my public orations , in consequence of my having accidentally mounted one of the pedestals on the memorable day of Sir Samuel Romilly 's public entry into Bristol .
I left the carriage , remounted the pedestal , and addressed at least twenty thousand of the inhabitants , who had accompanied me thither with the most deafening shouts .
I never had seen such enthusiasm in my life .
I briefly animadverted upon the trick which was intended to have been played off upon them by the worthy leaders of both the factions in that city , who had united for the purpose of stealing a march upon the electors , a trick which I had no doubt my opportune arrival would frustrate  and pledged myself to be at the Guildhall in due time on Monday morning , on which day the election was fixed to be held .


Mr. Davis , who was a banker , of Bristol , had made his public entry in the morning of the same day , attended by his friends , amidst very evident marks of disapprobation from the assembled multitude .
So sure , however , was this gentleman of his success , and so little had his friends anticipated any opposition , that they had actually got every thing prepared for chairing him , and had ordered the dinner , which was to celebrate the event , to be ready immediately after the election had closed on Monday  as they calculated that the election would be nothing more than a mere matter of form , which would occupy them for only a very few hours .
But my arrival , and the enthusiastic reception which I had received , made some of his partizans begin to fear that the victory would not be so easily gained , or the contest so speedily terminated , as they had at first sanguinely hoped .
Still the old electioneering managers calculated upon carrying their point by one of their old tricks , or by a `` ruse de guerre  '' but in this , as the sequel will shew , they reckoned without their host .
Before I got into the mail in London , I purchased Disney 's Abridgment of Election Law , a part of which I read before it grew dark , and the remainder I finished in the morning before we arrived in Bath .
Although this publication is the least to be relied upon of any , yet it furnished me with sufficient law upon the subject , not only to set completely their intended projects at defiance , but also to enable me to keep open the poll for fifteen days , the whole time that the law allows .


The White Lion Club , in the meanwhile , lost no time in preparing to open the campaign on Monday  and , seeing the disposition of the people , and knowing how deservedly unpopular the Ministerial faction , to which Mr. Davis belonged , had rendered themselves , they resolved to carry the election by force .
Before Monday morning , they had sworn in upwards of four hundred mock constables , or bludgeon-men , every one of whom was supplied with a short bludgeon , painted sky blue , that being the colour of Mr. Davis 's party .
These bludgeons were composed of ash , and were made of prong staves sawn off in lengths , about two feet long .
These were put into the hands of the greatest ruffians that the city of Bristol , and the neighbourhood of Cock-road and Kingswood , could furnish at so short a notice .
The few staunch friends who came round me , most of whom were strangers , anticipated nothing less than that the White Lion gentry would carry their point , and , either by trick or by violence , would close the election on the first day .
I promised them , however , that if they would only stand steadily by me , I would defeat the object of their enemies , and that they might rely upon an election , and a protracted poll .


Monday came , and at an early hour the bludgeon-men of Mr. Davis had got possession of Broad-street , where the Guildhall is situated  which street , by the bye , has no right to the name that it bears , it being among the narrowest streets in Bristol .
I sallied forth from my inn , the Talbot  and having addressed a few words to the multitude upon the Exchange , I proceeded down Broad-street with some of my friends , and reached the Hall door before it was opened .
I immediately placed my back against it , and proclaimed to the surrounding throng , that I would be the first to enter that Hall , and that I would be the last that would leave it , while there was a freeman of the city unpolled .
Notwithstanding I was now in the midst of the enemy , this declaration was received with a burst of applause , which made the old walls of this scene of iniquity ring again .
At length the Sheriffs , Brice and Bickley , arrived , attended by all the paraphernalia of office , in company with Mr. Richard Hart Davis , whom I now eyed for the first time .
All persons were pompously commanded to stand back from the door  but I had a sturdy set of friends now to support me , and they stood as firm as a rock , and almost as immovable .
For some time the Jacks in office attempted in vain to approach the door , till at length I requested that those who were near it would fall back , and make way for the Sheriffs  which request was instantly complied with .
The moment the door was open , I was the first man who entered after the Sheriffs , and the rush was tremendous .
I was also one of the first that reached the hustings in the Guildhall , and , being once there , I had not the least doubt but I should by and by make a due impression upon the persons there assembled .


During this rush to get into the Guildhall , ( a place altogether unfit for the election , and incapable of containing a twentieth part of the electors of Bristol , ) Davis 's four hundred bludgeon ruffians made a desperate and brutal assault upon the people , and most grossly ill used those who appeared to be my friends and supporters , who were at last driven to a successful resistance .
Many of the hired gang were disarmed by the populace , and the rest were either driven from the scene of action , or awed into respectful behaviour by their determined conduct .


Mr. Davis was proposed and seconded by two members of the White Lion Club , who were also members of the Corporation .
I was proposed and seconded by two freemen in the humble walks of life , journeymen , I believe , of the names of Pimm and Lydiard  men who , although they did not move in an elevated sphere , yet for native talent and honourable feelings , as far excelled the proposers of Mr. Davis as the sun excels in splendour the twinkling of the smallest star .
Both the candidates addressed the crowded assemblage .
I avowed myself to be the staunch friend of Radical Reform , and the enemy of oppression , and I tendered an oath to the Mayor , that I would never receive one sixpence of the public money , drawn from the pockets of an impoverished and starving people  and that if elected I would move for the immediate reduction of all extravagant salaries , and the total abolition of all sinecures and unmerited pensions , c. c..
The Sheriff , little Mister Brice , put it to the vote , in the usual way , by a skew of hands , which of us the freemen would have for their member .
The shew of hands was in my favour by an immense majority .
Mr. Davis then demanded a poll , and , after a vote or two had been taken for each party , the Sheriffs adjourned the poll till the next morning at nine o'clock .
This was of course done to give the unpopular candidate time to collect his forces , and to put in motion the whole machinery of corrupt influence  and , where that failed , the stronger means of unconstitutional dictation and arbitrary power .
On our retiring from the hustings , Mr. Davis had to endure every species of popular execration , while I was saluted by the overwhelming applause of the whole multitude , with the exception of the agents of authority and wealth , and the whole of the Corporation and its tools .
If the people of Bristol had possessed the privilege of giving their votes by ballot , I believe that I should have had on my side eight out of every ten of the population of the city .
It was evidently a contest between the rich and the poor  the whole of the former were openly for Davis , the whole of the latter , with the exception of those who were hired by the other party , were every man , woman , and child , for Hunt  and even of those who were hired , there were numbers who could not conceal their good wishes for me , and their abhorrence of the party for whom they were acting .


In the evening great contests and bloody battles took place in the streets .
The bludgeon men of Davis had been increased to eight hundred  each bludgeon being heavy enough to knock down an ox , they being , as I have before stated , six feet prong staves sawn off in three lengths , about two feet each .
In the front of the White Lion , in Broadstreet , the bearers of these weapons attacked the populace , whom they beat and bruised most unmercifully for some time  who , in return , at length , beat and drove them to all quarters , and in their fury they demolished the windows of the White Lion Inn , and gutted the house .
Bleeding and smarting with their wounds , they then hurried to Clifton , to the house of Mr. Davis , whom they considered as the author of all their wrongs , and of the assaults which had been committed upon them by the hireling ruffians of bludgeon-men , who all wore Davis 's colours , and acted under regular disciplined leaders , trained and commanded by the notorious Jemmy Lockley , a boxer and Sheriff 's officer .
While that party of the populace , which had directed its course to Clifton , demolished the whole of the windows of Mr. Davis 's house , and pulled up all the shrubs in his front lawn , another party demolished the doors and windows of the Council House .


When I went to the Hall the next morning , I never witnessed such a scene of devastation as the White Lion exhibited  every window and window frame was destroyed , and there remained only so many holes in the walls .
However , as I mean to give a faithful history of this election , I can not do better than to republish three letters addressed at the time to the Electors of Bristol , by Mr. Cobbett , and also to state the various accounts that were given of these transactions by the Times , the Courier , and the Morning Chronicle papers .
I will begin with the following letter , published in the first page of the 12th volume of Cobbett 's Register , July 4th , 1812 : --


TO THE INDEPENDENT ELECTORS OF BRISTOL .


GENTLEMEN , -- Your city , the third in England in point of population , and for the bravery and public spirit of its inhabitants the first in the world , is now become , with all those who take an interest in the public welfare , an object of anxious attention .
You , as the Electors of Westminster were , have long been the sport of the two artful factions , who have divided between them the profits arising from the obtaining of your votes , One of each faction has always been elected  and as one of them always belonged to the faction out of place , you , whose intentions and views were honest , consoled yourselves with the reflection , that if one of your members was in place , or belonged to the IN party , your other member , who belonged to the OUT party , was always in the House to watch him .
But now , I think , experience must have convinced you that the OUT as well as the IN member was always seeking his own gain at your expense , and that of the nation , and that the two factions , though openly hostile to each other , have always been perfectly well agreed as to the main point , namely , the perpetuating of those sinecure places and all those other means by which the public money is put into the pockets of individuals .


With this conviction in your minds , it is not to be wondered at that you are now beginning to make a stand for the remnant of your liberties  and , as I am firmly persuaded , that your success would be of infinite benefit to the cause of freedom in general , and of course to our country , now groaning under a compilation of calamities , I can not longer withold a public expression of the sentiments which I entertain respecting the struggle in which you are engaged  and especially respecting the election now going on , the proceedings of a recent meeting in London , and the pretensions of Mr. Hunt , compared with those of Sir Samuel Romilly .


As to the first , you will bear in mind , gentlemen , how often we , who wish for a Reform of the Parliament , have contended that no Member of the House of Commons ought to be a placeman or a pensioner .
We have said , and we have shown , that in that Act of Parliament by virtue of which the present family was exalted to the throne of this kingdom  we have shown , that by that Act it was provided that no man having a pension or place of emolument under the Crown , should be capable of being a Member of the House of Commons .
It is indeed true , that this provision has since been repealed  but it having been enacted , and that too on so important an occasion , shows clearly how jealous our ancestors were upon the subject .
When we ask for a revival of this law , we are told that it can not be wanted , because , if a man be a placeman or a pensioner before he be chosen at all , those who choose him know it  and if they like a placeman or a pensioner , who else has any thing to do with the matter ?
And , if a man be made a placeman or pensioner after he be chosen , he must vacate his seat , and return to his constituents to be re-elected before he can sit again  if they reject him he can not sit , and if they re-choose him , who else has any thing to do with the matter ?


To be sure it is pretty impudent for these people to talk to us about choice , and about re-choosing and about rejecting , and the like , when they know that we are all well informed of the nature of choosings and re-choosings at Old Sarum , at Gatton , at Queenborough , at Bodmin , at Penryn , at Honiton , at Oakhampton , and at more than a hundred other places  it is pretty impudent to talk to us about members going back to their constituents at such places as those here mentioned  but what will even the impudence of these people find to say in the case of those members who , upon having grasped places or pensions , do go back to their constituents , and upon being rejected by them , go to some borough where the people have no voice  or who , not relishing the prospect , do not go to face their former constituents , but go at once to some borough , and there take a seat , which , by cogent arguments , no doubt , some one has been prevailed on to go out of to make way for them ?
What will even the impudence of the most prostituted knaves of hired writers find to say in cases like these ?


Of the former , Mr. GEORGE TIERNEY presents a memorable instance .
He was formerly a member for Southwark , chosen on account of his professions in favour of freedom , by a numerous body of independent electors .
But having taken a fancy to a place which put some thousands a year of the public money into his own individual pocket , having had the assurance to go back to his constituents , and having been by them rejected with scorn , be was immediately chosen by some borough where a seat bad been emptied in order to receive him , and now he is representative of the people of a place called Bandon Bridge , in Ireland , a place which , in all probability , he never saw , and the inhabitants of which are , I dare say , wholly unconscious of having the honour to be represented by so famous a person .
Your late representative , Mr. BRAGGE BATHURST , has acted a more modest , or at least a more prudent part .
He has got a fat place  a place , the profits of which would find some hundreds of Englishmen 's families in provisions all the year round  be has been made what is called Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , which will give him immense patronage , and of course afford him ample means of enriching his family , friends , and dependents , besides his having held places of great salary for many years before .
Thus loaded with riches arising from the public means , he does not , I perceive , intend to face you  he can not , it seems , screw himself up to that pitch .
We shall in all likelihood see in a few days what borough opens its chaste arms to receive him  but , as a matter of much greater consequence , I now beg to offer you some remarks upon the measures that have been taken to supply his place .


It was announced to his supporters at Bristol , about three months ago , that he did not mean to offer himself for that city again , and Mr. RICHARD HART DAVIS , of whom you will hear enough , came forward as his successor  openly avowing all his principles , and expressly saying , that he would tread in his steps .
What those steps are , you have seen  and what those principles are , the miserable people of England feel in the effects of war and taxation .
But , I beg your attention to some circumstances connected with the election , which ought to be known and long borne in mind .
The WRIT for electing a member for Bristol , in the room of Bragge Bathurst , was moved for in the House of Commons  on Tuesday evening , June 23 , and at the same moment a writ for electing a member for Colchester , in the room of Richard Hart Davis , was moved for .
So you see they both vacate at the same instant  your man not liking to go down to Bristol , the other vacates a seat for another place , in order to go down to face you in his stead .
Observe too with what quickness the thing is managed .
Nobody knows , or at least none of you know , that Bragge is going to vacate his seat .
Davis apparently knew it , because we see him vacating at the same moment .
The WRIT is sent off the same night  it gets to Bristol on Wednesday morning the 24th  the law requires four days notice on the part of the Sheriffs  they give it  and the election comes on the next Monday .
So you see if Mr. HUNT had been living in Ireland or Scotland , or even in the northern counties of England , or in some parts of Cornwall , the election might have been over before there would have been a POSSIBILITY of his getting to Bristol .
And though his place of residence was within thirty miles of London , he who was at home on his farm , had but just time to reach you soon enough to give you an opportunity of exercising your rights upon this occasion .
Mr. Hunt could not know that the writ was moved for till Wednesday evening , living , as he does , at a distance from a post town  and , as it happened , he did not know of it , I believe , till Thursday night  so that it was next to impossible for him to come to London ( which I suppose was necessary ) and to reach Bristol before Saturday .
While , on the other hand , Mr. Davis had chosen his time , and of course had made all his preparations .


Such , Gentlemen , have been the means used preparatory to the election .
Let us now see what a scene your city exhibits at this moment  first , however , taking a look at the under-plot going on in London , in favour of Sir SAMUEL ROMILLY .


It is stated in the London newspapers , and particularly in The Times of Saturday last , that there was a meeting on Friday at the Crown and Anchor in the Strand , the object of which was `` to raise money '' by subscription for `` supporting the election of Sir Samuel Romilly at Bristol  '' and it is added , that a large sum was accordingly raised .
This meeting appears to me to have for its object the deceiving of the electors of Bristol  an object , however , which I am satisfied will not be accomplished to any great extent .
I do not mean to say that Sir Samuel Romilly would use deceit  but I am quite sure that there are those who would use it upon this occasion .
The truth is , that the raising of these large sums of money ( amounting already , they say , to 8,000 l. ) proves that Sir Samuel Romilly does not put his trust in the FREE VOICE of the people of Bristol .
At this meeting Mr. BARING , one of the persons who makes the loans to the Government , was in the chair .
This alone is a circumstance sufficient to enable you to judge not only of the character of the meeting , but also of what sort of conduct is expected from Sir Samuel Romilly , if he were placed in Parliament by the means of this subscription .
Mr. WHITBREAD was also at the meeting , and spoke in favour of the subscription .
But we must not be carried away by names .
Mr. Whitbread does many good things  but Mr. Whitbread is not always right .
Mr. Whitbread subscribed to bring Mr. Sheridan in for Westminster , and was , indeed , the man who caused him to obtain the appearance of a majority  Mr. Whitbread supported that same Sheridan afterwards against Lord COCHRANE  and though Mr. Whitbread is so ready to subscribe now , he refused to subscribe to the election of Sir Francis Burdett , notwithstanding the election was in a city of which he was an inhabitant and an elector .
These , Gentlemen , are facts , of which you should be apprised  otherwise names might deceive you .


I beg to observe also , that at this meeting there was nothing said about a Parliamentary Reform , without which you must be satisfied no good of any consequence can be done .
There was indeed a Mr. MILLS , who said he came from Bristol , who observed that `` the great majority of the inhabitants of Bristol felt perfectly convinced of the necessity of SOMETHING LIKE Reform . ''
And is this all ?
Does your conviction go no farther than this ?
I remember that , when a little boy , I was crying to my mother for a bit of bread and cheese , and that a journeyman carpenter , who was at work hard by , compassionately offered to chalk me out a big piece upon a board .
I forget the way in which I vented my rage against him  but the offer has never quitted my memory .
Yet really this seems to come up to the notion of Mr. Mills  the carpenter offered me SOMETHING LIKE a big piece of bread and cheese .
Oh !
no , Gentlemen , it is not this something like that you want  you want the thing itself  and if Sir Samuel Romilly meant that you should have it , do you believe that neither he , nor any one for him , would have made any specific promise upon the subject ?
Even after Mr. Mills had said that you wanted something like Reform , there was nobody who ventured to say that Sir Samuel Romilly would endeavour to procure even that for you .
His friends were told , that if he would distinctly pledge himself to Reform , whether in place or out of place , Mr. Hunt , who only wished to see that measure accomplished , would himself assist in his election  but this Sir Samuel Romilly has not done , and therefore he is not the man whom you ought to choose , though he is beyond all comparison better than hundreds of other public men , and though he is , in many respects , a most excellent Member of Parliament .
Gentlemen , these friends of Sir Samuel Romilly call upon you to choose him , because he is , they tell you , a decided enemy of the measures of the present ministers .
Now they must very well know , that all those measures have had the decided support of the parliament .
Well , then , do these friends allow , that the parliament are the real representatives of the people , and that they speak the people 's voice ?
If Sir Samuel 's friends do allow this , then they do , in fact , say , that he is an enemy to all those measures which the people 's voice approves of  and , if they do not allow this , if they say that the parliament do not speak the people 's voice , and are not their real representatives , hove can they hope that any man will do you any good who is not decidedly for a reform of that parliament ?
Let the meeting at the Crown and Anchor answer these questions , or , in the name of decency , I conjure them to hold their tongues , and to put their subscriptions back again into their pockets .


To say the truth ( and this is not a time to disguise it from you ) this subscription is a subscription against , and not for , the freedom of election .
If Sir Samuel Romilly 's friends were willing to put their trust in the free good-will of the people of Bristol , why raise money in such large quantities , and especially why resort to party men and to loan makers for this purpose ?
They will say , perhaps , that the money is intended for the purpose of carrying down the London voters , and for that of fetching voters from elsewhere  but , why are they afraid to put their trust in the resident voters of Bristol ?
The object of this subscription is very far indeed from resembling the object of that which was set on foot in Westminster , which was not to gain votes by dint of money , but merely to pay the expenses of printing , of clerks , and other little matters inseparable from an election at Westminster  and the whole of which did not amount to more than about eight hundred pounds  whereas as many thousands are stated to be already subscribed for procuring the election of Sir Samuel Romilly .
In short , this attempt of the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly is like many others that have been made before .
It is purse against purse .
Mr. PROTHERO has shaken his purse at Sir Samuel  and , as the latter does not choose to engage with his own purse , his friends , with a loan maker at their head , came forward to make up a purse for him  and the free and unbought voice of the electors of Bristol is evidently intended by neither party to have any weight at all in the decision .


Let us now return and take a view of the political picture which Bristol at this moment presents .
And here , the first observation that strikes one is , that neither the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly nor the friends of Mr. Prothero say one word in opposition to Mr. Hart Davis , though he avowedly stands upon the principles of Mr. Bragge and the present Ministers  though he quitted his canvass about ten weeks ago , to come express to London to vote in favour of the Orders in Council  and though he now says , that he will tread in the steps of Mr. Bragge .
Though they have all this before their eyes , not one single syllable does any one of them utter against the pretensions or movements of Mr. Davis  and , though the meeting at the Crown and Anchor took place several days after the Bristol and Colchester writs were moved for , and though the parties at the meeting must necessarily have been well acquainted with all that I have above stated to you upon the subject of those writs , not one word did they utter against the pretensions of Mr. Davis , nor did they ( according to the printed report of their proceedings ) even mention his name , or take the smallest notice of the circumstance , that an election , a little , snug , rotten-borough-like election , was , at that moment , getting up in that very city , for the interest and honour of which they were affecting so much concern !
And can you , then , believe them sincere ?
Can you believe , that they have any other view than merely that of securing a seat for the party in Bristol ?
Can you doubt that the contest , on their part , is not for the principle , but for the seat ?


Having pointed out this circumstance to your attention , it is hardly necessary for me to advert to the conduct of Mr. Hunt , which , in this case in particular , forms a contrast with that of the other parties too striking not to have produced a lasting impression upon your minds .
He does not content himself with talking about defending your liberties .
He acts as well as talks .
He hears that the enemy is at your camp , and he flies to rescue you from his grasp .
He does not waste his time in a tavern in London , drawing up flourishing resolutions about `` public spirit . ''
He hastens among you  he looks your and his adversary in the face : he shows you that you may depend upon him in the hour of trial .
These , Gentlemen , are marks of such a character in a representative as the times demand .
Sir Samuel Romilly is a very worthy gentleman  an honest man  a humane man  a man that could not , in my opinion , be by any means tempted to do a cruel or dishonest act  and he is , too , a man of great talents .
But , I have no scruple to say , that I should prefer , and greatly prefer , Mr. Hunt to Sir Samuel Romilly , as a Member of Parliament  for , while I do not know , and do not believe , that the latter excels the former in honesty or humanity , I am convinced that his talents , though superior , perhaps , in their kind , are not equal , in value to the public , to the talents possessed by Mr. Hunt , who is at this moment giving you a specimen of the effect of those talents .


Gentlemen , the predominance of Lawyers , in this country , has produced amongst us a very erroneous way of thinking with respect to the talents of public men  and , contrary to the notions of the world in general , we are apt to think a man great in mind in proportion to the glibness of his tongue .
With us , to be a great talker is to be a great man  but perhaps a falser rule of judging never was adopted .
It is so far from being true as a general maxim , that it is generally the contrary of the truth  and , if you look back through the list of our own public men , you will find that , in general , they have been shallow and mischievous in proportion to their gift of talking .
We have been brought to our present miserable state by a lawyer-like policy , defended in lawyer-like debates .
Plain good sense has been brow-beaten out of countenance  has been talked down , by the politicians from the bar  haranguing and special pleading and quibbling have usurped the place of frank and explicit statement and unsophisticated reasoning .
In Mr. Hunt you have no lawyer , but you have a man who is not to be brow-beaten into silence .
You have a man not to be intimidated by the frowns or the threats of wealth or of rank  a man not to be induced to abandon his duty towards you from any consideration of danger to himself  and , I venture to foretell ( begging that my words may be remembered ) that , if you elect him , the whole country will soon acknowledge the benefit conferred on it by the city of Bristol .


Gentlemen , this letter will , in all likelihood , find you engaged in the bustle of an election .
With all the advantages on the side of your adversary , you may not , perhaps , upon the present occasion , be able to defeat him .
But you will have a chance  you will have an opportunity of trying  you will have an election  and this you would not have had if it had not been for Mr. Hunt , for the whole affair would have been over before you had scarcely heard of it .
At the very least you will have some days of liberty to speak your minds  to tell Mr. Davis what you think of him and of his predecessor  to declare aloud your grievances and your indignation  and even for this liberty you will be indebted to Mr. Hunt , and solely to Mr. Hunt .
You are told of the zeal of Mr. Prothero and Sir Samuel Romilly in your service  you are told of their desire to promote your interest and your honour  but where are they now ?
Where are they when the enemy is in your city , when you were to have been handed over from Mr. Bragge Bathurst to Hart Davis as quietly as if you had been a cargo of tallow or of corn ?
It is now , it is in this moment of real need , that Mr. Hunt comes to your aid  and , if he fail in defeating , he will , at the least , harass your enemy , make his victory over you cost him dear , and by exposing the sources and means of his success , lay the foundation of his future defeat and disgrace .
-- I am , your friend ,


WM. COBBETT .


State Prison , Nerogate , Monday , 29th June , 1812 .


Such of my readers as are not old enough to remember the events , or to have read Mr. Cobbett 's Register at that time , will acquire from this letter a pretty cleat insight into the state of the case at this period of the proceedings .
It has already been seen , that , on the first morning , I made my way to the hustings , and , under every disadvantage , maintained the right of election in the City of Bristol .
I had no allies but the people  of them , indeed , I had the great mass with me  but , though I had well-wishers in all the richer classes , there was scarcely a single man beyond the rank of a journeyman , who had the courage openly to give me any countenance or support .
The Whigs and Tories united with all their accumulated force against me .
I had , therefore , to contend , single-handed , against all the power , wealth and influence of all parties and factions in the city .
All the corporation , all the merchants , all the tradesmen , all the clergy and priests , whether of the church of England or of the numberless sects of dissenters , all these , and all whom they could array under their banners , were volunteers to uphold the most corrupt and profligate system of election that ever disgraced the rottenest of rotten boroughs .
Then came the hireling legion , consisting of a swarm of more foul and noxious vermin than Moses inflicted upon the land of Egypt .
It was made up of all the attorneys , and pettifoggers , with their clerks , scamps , and runners  every man , or rather every reptile , of them , being profusely fed to bark , to snarl , to cavil , and to bully  and all of them more ravenous and ferocious than sharks or wolves .
It is , indeed , almost a libel upon the sharks and wolves to compare them with such creatures .
I can not , perhaps , give a better idea of them than in the forcible , though rather coarse language of a mechanic , who declared that , `` if hell were raked with a small tooth-comb , it would not be possible to collect another such a gang . ''
In the evening , I requested my Committee to procure me a list of these worthy limbs of the law  and , if I recollect right , the number was forty-one .
I know that it was one under or one over forty , but I do not know which .
There they were , Whigs and Tories , bitter haters of each other on all other occasions , but now jumbled together like pigs in a stye , or like hungry curs of all sorts of mis-begotten and degenerate breeds .
I believe that the famous Mr. WEBB HALL , who was then a practising attorney in Bristol ( of the firm of Jarman and Hall )  I believe that this profound agricultural quack of 1821 , was , in 1812 , one of the formidable phalanx which was drawn up against me .


O , how this blessed band did roar and bluster , and pretend to be shocked and horrified at my `` matchless impudence , '' in thinking to oppose `` the amiable '' and mighty candidate of the White Lion Club !
The reader will bear in mind that there never had been a real contested election in Bristol since that of 1774 , when Mr. Burke and Mr. Cruger were elected , upon the opposition or Whig interest , to the exclusion of Earl Nugent and Mr. Brickdale .
At the election in 1780 , the ministerial faction returned both members .
`` From that period till 1812 , '' says Mr. Oldfield , in his History of the Boroughs , `` the city of Bristol has been governed by two party clubs , and each club has nominated a member , who were quietly returned without any opposition . ''
The people of Bristol , I found , distinguished their two factions by the designation of the high and the low party : the Whigs deriving their principal support from the lower class of tradesmen and journeymen .


The hungry , grasping , quirking attorneys thought they were all the time pretending to be shocked at my opposition to `` the worthy Mr. Davis , '' were , in fact , frightened out of their senses , every moment of the first day , lest I should make a slip , so as to enable their worthy leader , Mr. Arthur Palmer , the perpetual Under Sheriff , to take an advantage of it and close the election .
These mercenaries were all hired at five guineas a day each , as long as the election lasted  and of course the cunning old trickster , Palmer , was always upon the look out to spoil their sport , by closing the election .
This Squire Palmer , this perpetual tormentor of the poor distressed debtors of the City , was a cavilling , quibbling , empty-headed , testy , old womanish chap , scarcely worthy to be designated by the title of a man .
He was eternally yelping , like a cur , without any rhyme or reason  and the reader may estimate the pack by the description that I have given of this , the foremost hound .
There was another of this gang who put himself very forward , and who was very insolent to some of my friends .
Such a looking creature I had scarcely ever seen in human form  he had coal-black , straight hair , hanging down a sallow-looking face , that had met with very rough usage from the ravages of the small-pox .
In fact , his face resembled a piece of cold , dirty , honey combed tripe , and had very little more expression in it  and the whole was completed by two heavy , dark eyes , which looked like leaden bullets stuck in clay .
This worthy had been going on for some time in an impertinent way , on which I was about to admonish him  and , as a preliminary , I asked him , with great coolness , `` pray , Sir , is not your naive Leach ? ''
`` Yes , '' said he , `` it is Leech , and I should like to suck thy blood ! ''
This was esteemed a brilliant sally of wit , and was received with noisy approbation by his surrounding friends .
Well !
I thought to myself , I am amongst a precious set of cannibals , indeed , and it will require all my temper to manage with such a tribe .
There , too , sat the Sheriffs .
The one of them , Mr. Sheriff Brice , a sugar-baker , was as upstart , whipper-snapper , waspish a little gentleman as ever disgraced the seat of office .
I soon discovered that I was not to expect from him an atom of liberality or fair play .
Mr. Sheriff Benjamin Bickley , the other Sheriff , appeared to be an easy , good sort of man , that wished to take it all very coolly and unconcernedly -- to wit , `` you may settle it just as you please , gentlemen , '' or some such answer as that , when he was appealed to .
However , there was , altogether , a spirit of fairness about him , which , when it came to the push , he had too much honesty to disguise  so that , when he could be moved to interfere , it was generally with impartiality .
These were our two Sheriffs and returning officers .
But , as they thought it quite beneath them to understand any thing about the law of election , they had their assessor , a barrister , to settle all the law points with me  this assessor was Edmond Griffith , Esq. who is now one of the police magistrates in the metropolis , but at which office I forget .
The points of law I carried nineteen times out of twenty , for I had Disney 's Abridgement at my fingers ends , and that author 's volume we made the umpire in all contested points .
Before I proceed any farther , I must say , that , during the whole of this tremendous contest , Mr. Griffith conducted himself in every respect like a gentleman and a man of honour  and when I have said this of Mr. Chancellor Griffith , and Mr. Sheriff Bickley , I shall not belie any person in the city of Bristol by paying him a similar compliment .
With these two exceptions , I can safely affirm , that I never received an act of civility , liberality or fair play , from any of that class that call themselves gentlemen , in Bristol , during the whole fifteen days that the election lasted .
But , to make amends for this , I received numerous acts of kindness from many worthy tradesmen , and such proofs of devoted attachment from almost the whole of the population , male and female , with the exception of the hirelings and dependents of the gentry , as I have never seen surpassed to this day .


Between the time of adjourning the poll to that of meeting again the next morning , I received no less than half a score anonymous letters , threatening my life , if I appeared at the Hall the next day .
This had , of course , no weight with me  but it shows by what a gang of desperadoes I was surrounded .
I had not the least doubt of their good will to put this threat into effect  it was the fear of a dreadful retribution that alone deterred them from hiring some of the numerous assassins , who , it was said , had volunteered for a good round sum to become my butchers .
All sorts of schemes and plans were devised to get rid of me  but nothing was thought likely to answer .
At length it was proposed , by certain members of the White Lion Club , to bribe me with the offer of a sum sufficient to purchase a seat from one of the Boroughmongers , if I wished to be in Parliament .
This was believed to be the only plan , and every one appeared to think that it would be much better to give me 5000l .
to withdraw , than it would be for them to pay 20,000 l. , which was the least the contest would be likely to cost , besides all the trouble to boot .
But just as this was apparently unanimously agreed upon , one of the sapient attorneys , who happened to know me a little personally , put this very natural question , `` Pray , Gentlemen , who is the man that is to offer Mr. Hunt this bribe ? ''
This , as I was informed , put an end at once to the scheme  there being no one who would undertake to be the messenger to bear such a proposition to me .
The task would indeed have been an absurd as well as a hazardous one  for I offered myself to the people of Bristol upon the Constitutional principle that I would not spend one shilling , neither would I canvass the electors  and I further tendered an affidavit , which I offered to swear before the Mayor , that I never would accept of a place of profit or a pension under the Crown , either directly or indirectly , either for myself or any one of my family .
It was , therefore , not very likely that I would consent to creep into Parliament by corrupt means .


Well , the election was fairly begun , two candidates were regularly proposed , it had been put to the vote , the shew of hands had been declared by the Sheriffs to be in my favour , a poll had been demanded by Mr. Davis , the poll was open and votes on each side had been taken , and the poll been adjourned till nine o'clock the next morning .
One thing was made obvious , on the first day , to my opponents .
It was clearly ascertained that I could not be put off my guard  and that in the midst of this terrible struggle and hurlyburly , I was perhaps the calmest and most collected man in the whole assemblage .
All hopes of putting an end to the election were consequently quite banished from the mind even of the arch-trickster , Mr. Arthur Palmer , and there was nothing left for them but to endure the fifteen days contest , or try to bring it by force to a sudden conclusion .
It was then , as I have before stated , that the bludgeon-men were let loose to accomplish the plan , and glut the vengeance of their enraged and mortified employers  and , after I was retired to bed at my inn , to recruit my strength , that I might be able , on the next day , to commence single-handed , the task of keeping in order these said forty limbs of the law , and dreadful was the struggle .
Mr. Davis had all the power of authority and wealth thrown into his scale  and finding that I had all the popularity , his supporters set to work the engines of intimidation , corrupt influence , and bribery .
All day long my voters had to submit to insults and assaults , committed upon them by the bludgeon-men , who had increased their numbers to eight hundred .
These fellows , together with the whole of the City police , conducted themselves in the most outrageous manner , by maltreating the people .
Their gangs had absolutely blocked up the whole of Broad-street , and every avenue leading to the hustings .
Information was frequently brought to me , that these ruffians were assaulting and beating back my votes  and I frequently left the hustings and went into the streets to rescue those who were so unmercifully attacked , which I always effected whenever I went forth .


When the evening came , and the poll was adjourned to the next day , I retired , mounted my horse , which was waiting for me at the Hall door , and rode to the Exchange , to give the multitude a history of the proceedings of the day in the Guildhall .
After giving them a correct detail of the business of the day , and the state of the poll , I urged every man to get as well armed as he could , and by all means resist the illegal violence of the hired bludgeon-men  but on no account to strike first .
It behoved them , I said , to stand up manfully for their rights , and not be driven off the field , particularly out of their own city , by hired ruffians .
I told them that , after I had been home to my inn and taken my dinner , it was my intention to ride round the city for a little fresh air , and that I should , if they wished it , have no objection to my friends accompanying me , to make a sort of general canvass .
This communication was received with universal approbation , all declaring that they would attend me  and I promised to start from my inn , the Talbot , precisely at seven o'clock , to ride an hour or an hour and a half .


At the appointed time they were all as good as their words , and the Talbot was surrounded by perhaps not less than from ten to fifteen thousand people .
I also was as good as my word , for as soon as the clock struck seven I mounted my horse , and rode out of the inn yard amongst them .
I was of course hailed with such shouts as made the whole city ring again .
Unaccompanied by any human being whom I knew , I threw myself amongst them , and made my way through a passage that was opened , over the bridge and down by the quay , gently following the course of the river from Bristol-bridge even till I came round by the Broad-quay to the draw-bridge .
The whole of this quay is covered with all sorts of timber , wood , poles , faggot piles , and other rough merchandise , principally brought .
from Wales .
The people eyed these faggot piles very wishfully  at length one drew out a stick , another followed , till , as we passed along , the whole male part of the multitude became armed with bludgeons and sticks as well as Mr. Davis 's bludgeon-men .
Though I could have wished that the weapons had been otherwise obtained , yet I must confess that I was not very sorry to see what had happened , as the White Lion hirelings had become so outrageously brutal that it was absolutely necessary to put them down , or the next day we should not have been enabled to bring up a single vote .
Eight hundred ruffians , collected from the collieries at Kingswood and from Cock-road , the haunt of every species of desperadoes  such a gang as this , well paid and well filled with ale , and knowing that , do what they would , they should be protected by the authorities , was a sort of force that was not to be trifled with .
I therefore gave the word , let none of my friends strike first , but let no one upon such an occasion as that for which we are contending , which is for the freedom of election , let no one be insulted or assaulted with impunity by the hired bludgeon-men .
If they once begin to knock down the people , let them without ceremony be driven out of the city .


Such a body of men as were with me , armed each of them with a good thick stick , made rather a formidable appearance , and I saw that the countenances of the citizens , shopkeepers , and merchants , as I passed , evidently betrayed the greatest alarm .
As soon as they had attended me to my inn , and given me three cheers at parting , the cry was , `` to Broad-street !
to Broad-street ! ''
which was the rendezvous for Davis 's bludgeon-men , who had got complete possession of that street , and remained opposite the White Lion the whole of the day , stopping up all access to the Guildhall , which is in the same street .
Every one who was not of the Blue party , and who had attempted to pass , had been not only insulted but assaulted , and sometimes knocked down and half murdered .
One man had been killed the night before .
Every one now affected to dread Hunt 's mob  but I replied `` depend upon it they only want their rights , and their rights they shall have , as far as maintaining the freedom of election , or they shall fight for it . ''
In less than a quarter of an hour after they quitted the Talbot , and before I had finished my tea , I heard a tremendous shouting , and upon inquiring the cause , I found that the bludgeon-men had all fled at the approach of my men .
On the evening before , when the people had no weapons , the bludgeon gentry had received a specimen of what they could do in resisting unjust and usurped power  and now that the people had bludgeons as well as their enemies , the hirelings took to their heels , and the volunteers were victorious , without striking scarcely a blow .
The timid and cowardly race that had employed these bludgeon-men , in whom they placed great confidence to save them from Hunt 's mob , began to quake for fear  but their fears were groundless .
Having by their victory gained that to which they were entitled , a free and unmolested passage through the streets of their city , they were content  and , instead of acting in the same way , that , under similar circumstances , their dastardly oppressors would have done , instead of committing the slightest depredations upon any body or any thing , they returned to communicate their triumph to me , which they announced by three cheers , and then quietly and peaceably dispersed , and retired each man to his home , without even having broken a single pane of glass , that ever came to my knowledge .
The very idea of having a free election was , however , quite out of the question with my opponents .
They sent off for the military , as it was reported , without further delay , though there did not exist the least riot , or probability of one  in fact , all rioting and bloodshed had been put an end to by driving the hireling bludgeon-men to quarters , and clearing the streets of them .


By this time I had received a considerable accession to my forces at the inn .
My committee , or rather the committee of the free men , mustered very strong .
Mr. Williams , a very respectable shoemaker , together with Mr. Cranidge , a schoolmaster , had now joined the standard of Liberty , and added their names to my committee .
Every one who entered the committee subscribed his name to act as a volunteer , without the slightest pecuniary remuneration .
There were the two Pimms , Lyddiard , Mr. Bright , in the Old Market , Mr. Brownjohn , Mr. Wright , the famous pedestrian , who has lately accomplished such feats in Yorkshire , such as no one but a real Radical could perform  a Mr. Webb , a sort of an attorney , a very active man , who was generally in the chair at most of the committee meetings , and who used to be very particular that every one who joined the committee should pledge himself to act as a volunteer , c. without fee or reward .
There was also a Mr. Hornbrook , who , together with Webb , took a very prominent part in the talking department .
There were several more , but these determined Radicals managed every thing , and carried all my plans into effect .
I seldom saw any thing of the committee in a body , except that every evening I paid them a mere visit of form for a few minutes .
It was real purity of election  not one shilling was to be spent or given away , every one was to do his best , and to pay his own share of any little expense they were at  and so well understood was it , that it was an election of principle , that scarcely ten persons ever asked for any thing  not even so much as a draught of porter was ever given away to a voter or any one else .
There was a daily subscription for printing , and that was all the money that was ever required , and printing was the only thing on which money was spent .
Yet even this was a heavy expense .
I have since learned that there was a rich Quaker , and two or three rich men , that , under the rose , furnished my committee , or at least some of the members of it , with liberal sums .
There was also a lady at Clifton who did the same  and , in truth , I have reason to think that money to a considerable amount was subscribed in this way , which never came to my knowledge , or to the knowledge of the great body of the committee .


I have , I dare say , missed the names of some who made up this committee .
Indeed , I at this moment remember some additional names .
There was Mr. Thomas , and Mr. Lutherel , a sort of a journeyman attorney , and a Mr. W. Weech , of all the men in the world one that I ought not to have forgotten , he was a most worthy elector of Bristol , who , together with Brownjohn , never flinched for a moment .
There were also Mr. Haines and Mr. Farr , and a brave and worthy elector of the name of Stokes , a shoemaker .
In fact , they were altogether as brave and as staunch a little band of patriots as ever met to struggle for the rights of Englishmen -- and this was indeed a mighty struggle , the force , the power , the wealth , and the corrupt influence that we had to contend with , being beyond all description .


I very soon discovered that there was not the slightest chance of carrying the election  there being a complete coalition between the Whigs and the Tories .
The whole enormous influence of both the factions was thrown into the scale against me .
The most violent menaces were used by them to deter my friends from coming forward in my favour .
Hundreds upon hundreds came to say , that they were anxious to vote for me , but if they did do so they would lose their bread , and they and their families would be ruined .
All the merchants , tradesmen , and masters of every denomination , openly vowed vengeance against all their dependants and connexions , if they voted for me .
I believe there was never any thing equal to the threats and intimidation that took place in that city during that election .
As , therefore , there was no chance of contending against all this with any prospect of success , the only course which was left for me to pursue , was to make the enemy purchase his victory as dearly as possible  and , with this view , all my efforts were directed to impress on the minds of my Committee the necessity of husbanding our resources , by keeping back all the staunch votes , so as to protract the poll to the very last hour which was allowed by law .
We did accomplish this  yet how , under such adverse circumstances , we contrived to carry on the contest for fifteen days , has often been a matter of astonishment to me .


I had been two days now without any friend to assist me , and whether it was on the third or whether it was on the fourth day , I am not quite clear  but , to my great joy , a gentleman from London , whom I had only met once or twice before , came down , as he said , when he introduced himself upon the hustings , expressly to assist me in the glorious struggle .
My pleasure was equal to my surprise , when Mr. Davenport , a gentleman well known in the literary world , walked up on the hustings and shook me by the hand , at the time that he communicated this gratifying intelligence .
Mr. Davenport was just the very man of whom I stood in need .
If I had taken the choice of the whole world , knowing him , as I now do , I would have selected Mr. Davenport .
He is rather a little man , but he is as brave as a lion , with an eye as quick as a hawk 's , decisive and rapid in executing any thing that was to be undertaken , and with wit and talent as brilliant as the sun at noon-day .
I had all along felt myself more than a match for the forty attorneys and all their myrmidons  but with such a man as Mr. Davenport by my side , I held them cheap indeed .
This was such an accession to my forces as I had not at all calculated upon .
To Mr. Cobbett and to Sir Francis Burdett was I indebted for the able assistance of such a man .
Before he arrived , I had not a friend that I could communicate with  all the Bristol men were tradesmen , and they had to attend to their business , when they were not at work either in the Committee-room or in the field  but in Mr. Davenport I found at once a delightful companion , and an indefatigable , able , assistant .
When he sees this it will recal to his recollection many and many a hearty laugh which we had together , in talking over the blunders and stupidities that had been committed by the Bristolians during the labours and fatigues o # the day , and how we enjoyed the mischief that we were making amongst the agents of The Boroughmongers .
It was calculated that Mr. Davis and his friends did not spend less than two thousand pounds a day , while we fared sumptuously , and partook of every delicacy of the season , at an expense not exceeding twenty-five shillings a day between us  this being the extent of my expenses , when I came to pay my bill at the end of the sixteen days that I was at the Talbot .
I shall never forget how he used to laugh and enjoy the fun  and it almost makes me laugh now , even in my solitary dungeon , when I recollect the way in which Snuffy Jerry tuned up the first song that Mr. Davenport wrote , beginning -- `` Tallow Dick !
Tallow Dick !
you are cursedly sick of being baited at Bristol election . ''
Tallow Dick , be it observed , was the name by which the Tory champion was known .
After being eighteen days and nights in solitary confinement , in my gloomy , dark , damp , dungeon , without having been once cheered by the voice of a friend , I can smile at the recollection of these scenes that afforded us so much mirth .
Ah !
my dear and much respected friend , when you read this , and think of my situation , I know that the tear will for a moment glisten in your eye , your whole soul will sympathise with your friend .
But again , when you think of the cruel sufferings and persecutions of those that I love more than my life , I can almost see you jump out of your seat , and , as you brush the tear indignantly from your eye , I can fancy I hear you shower down maledictions upon the unnatural monsters who can thus delight to inflict wanton misery upon a captive and his unoffending family .


The next morning very early , one of my friends came to my bed-room door to inform me that a regiment of soldiers had been marched into the city during the night , and that some of them had actually taken up their quarters and slept in the Guildhall , the very seat of the election .
I immediately rose , and while I was dressing myself , I ordered my horse , being determined to go and witness this novel scene , of a regiment of soldiers taking possession of the Guildhall and the hustings , during the time of an election  still , however , expecting that as soon as the authorities were in motion in the morning , they would remove them at least from the immediate neighbourhood where the election was going on  but I afterwards found that my haste was unnecessary .
I mounted my horse , and accompanied by a few friends , I rode down to the door of the Guildhall , which was surrounded by soldiers with bayonets fixed .
Upon hearing that I was coming , for my approach was always announced by the people , those who had slept in the Hall come flocking down the steps , to have a peep at this tremendous candidate who had created such a popular feeling that the election could not be carried on without the intervention of the military , both horse and foot -- two troops of the Scots Greys and the West Middlesex Militia .
Upon one of the officers coming to the spot , I addressed them as I sat on my horse .
But , as what I said was published at the time , in an account given of the transactions as they occurred , as well as in the details which were put forth by the London press , and collected by Mr. Cobbett , who reprinted them in the 22d volume of the Register , I shall insert his account of it , as follows : --


BRISTOL ELECTION .


From the letter , at the head of this sheet , [ Footnote : See page 519 . ]
the reader will find a pretty good preface to the history of this election , which is quite another sort of thing than what the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly appear to have taken an election at Bristol to be .


The intelligence which I have from that City comes down to Wednesday last , the 1st instant .
I may , and , I dare say , I shall , have it to a later date before this number goes to the press  but , I shall now give the history down to that day .


Sir Samuel Romilly 's friends , at their meeting at the Crown and Anchor , talked of Mr. PROTHEROE as an opponent  but , not a word did they say of Mr. HUNT .
A farmer , was , I suppose , thought beneath their notice .
We shall , however , see that farmer doing more at Bristol , I imagine , than they and their subscription will ever be able to do .
In the letter , before inserted , I have shown how Mr. Hunt , whose residence is in Sussex , was taken by surprise .
He was wholly ignorant of the vacancy , 'till Thursday evening , the 25th of June , when his newspaper of Wednesday informed him that the writ , in the room of Mr. Bragge Bathurst , had been moved for on Tuesday .


He came to London on Friday , set off that night for Bath , and got into Bristol on Saturday evening , where he was received by the people with a pleasure proportioned to their surprise at seeing him come .


Hart Davis had made his entry in an earlier part of the day , preceded by the carriages of bankers , excise and custom-House people , and , in short , all that description of persons who are every where found in opposition to the liberties of Englishmen .


As it was settled amongst the parties , that Davis was to meet with no opposition from either MR. PROTHEROE or SIR SAMUEL ROMILLY , he expected a chairing on the Monday , amidst the shouts of some score or two of hired voices .
How great was his surprise , then , and how great the consternation of his party , when they saw it announced that Mr. Hunt was about to make his appearance !


Sunday ( the 28th of June ) passed , of course , without any business being done , but not without `` dreadful note of preparation . ''


On Monday morning , the day appointed by the Sheriffs for holding the election , the Guildhall , the place for holding the election , became a scene of great interest : an injured and insulted people resolved to assert their rights against the intrigues and the violences of a set of men who were attempting to rob them of those rights .


After the nominations had taken place , the Sheriffs adjourned their court till the next day .


In the evening great strife and fighting and violence took place  the White Lion Inn , whence the Club who put in Mr. Bragge , and who are now at work for Davis , takes its name  this Inn was assailed by the people 's party , and , it is said , pretty nearly demolished .
Mr. Davis 's house at Clifton is said to have shared the same fate  and , this and similar work , with terrible battles in the streets , having continued till Tuesday night ( the 30th of June ) , the SOLDIERS WERE CALLED IN , AND , IT IS SAID , ACTUALLY MARCHED INTO THE GUILDHALL !


Pause , here , reader .
Look at this spectacle .
But , how came this to be necessary !
It is said , that it was necessary , in order to preserve property .
But , how came it to be so ?
Who began the violences ?
That is the question .


And I have no hesitation in stating my firm belief , that they were begun , not by the PEOPLE , but by their enemies .


I state , upon the authority of Mr. JOHN ALLEN , of Bath , whom I know to be a man of honour , of strict veracity , and ( if that be any additional praise ) of great property : upon the authority of this gentleman , who requests me to use his name , and who was an eye-witness of what he relates , I state , that , there were about 400 men , who had been made special constables for the purpose , who where planted near the place of election  that these men , who ought to have been for one side as much as for the other , were armed with staves or clubs , painted BLUE , which , the reader will observe , is the colour of the White Lion , or Bragge and Davis , party  and , of course , the PEOPLE , who were for Mr. Hunt , looked upon these 400 men as brought for the purpose of overawing them and preventing them by force from exercising their rights .
These men committed , during the 29th , many acts of violence against the people .
But , at last , the people , after great numbers of them had been wounded , armed themselves with clubs too  attacked the Blues , and drove them into the White Lion .


Here the mischief would have ended  but the Blues , ascending to the upper rooms and the roof , had the baseness to throw down stones , brick-bats , tiles , glass bottles , and other things , upon the heads of the people .
This produced an attack upon the house , which was soon broken in , and I believe , gutted .


These facts I state upon the authority of Mr. Allen  and I state them with a perfect conviction of their truth .


The reader will observe , that the great point is , WHO BEGAN THE FIGHT ?
We have heard Mr. Allen  now let us hear what the other parties say .
In the TIMES newspaper of the 2d July , it is said by a writer of a letter from Bristol , who abuses Mr. Hunt , that when the nomination was about to take place , `` Mr. Davis and his party made their appearance .
The friends of Mr. Davis wore blue cockades , and they were accompanied by some hundreds of persons bearing short BLUE STAVES , who had been sworn in as special constables . ''
This is enough .
Here is a full acknowledgment of the main circumstance stated by Mr. Allen : namely , that hundreds of men , sworn in as Constables , were armed with staves of the colour of one of the candidates , and that they accompanied that candidate to the Hustings .
-- In the COURIER of the 1st July , the same fact , in other words , comes out .
The writer ( of another letter from Bristol ) , in speaking of the precautions intended to be taken , says : `` Our Chief Magistrate has summoned his brother officers together , and as the constables assembled by Mr. Davis 's friends are to be all dismissed at the close of the poll , and their colours taken out of their hats , there will be no provocation on his part to Mr. Hunt 's party . ''
-- This , coming from the enemy , clearly shews on which side the aggression had commenced .
-- Therefore , for all that followed , the party of Davis are responsible .
-- We shall know , by-and-by , perhaps , who it was that permitted these hundreds of Constables to hoist the colours of one of the candidates , which was , in fact , `` a declaration of war against the people , '' and as such the letter in the TIMES says it was regarded .
-- Well , but the SOLDIERS ARE CALLED IN  and , as I am informed , the Soldiers were , on Wednesday morning , between five and six o'clock , addressed by Mr. Hunt in nearly the following words : `` Gentlemen  Soldiers  Fellow-citizens and Countrymen , I have to ask a favour of you , and that is , that you will discover no hostility to each other on account of your being dressed in different coloured coats .
You are all equally interested in this election .
You are all Englishmen  you must all love freedom  and , therefore , act towards each other as brother towards brother . ''
It is added by my informant , that Mr. Hunt was greatly applauded by the whole of his audience .
-- He expressed his conviction , that the soldiers would not voluntarily shoot their countrymen  `` but , '' added he , `` if military force is to carry the election , the `` sooner the shooting begins , the better  and here am I , '' said he , laying bare his breast , `` ready to receive the first ball . ''
-- Let us now see how the factious view this matter .
-- The COURIER abuses Mr. Hunt in the style to be expected .
The TIMES speaks of him in this way : `` The poll commenced at ten o'clock .
In this farce Mr. Hunt plays many parts : he unites in himself the various characters of Candidate , Counsel , and Committee , as he has not one human being to assist him in either of those capacities . ''
Well , and what then ?
What does he want more than a good cause and the support of the people ?
These are all that ought to be necessary to any candidate .
What business have lawyers with elections ?
And , ought the people to want any committee , to tell them their duty ?
The Morning Chronicle takes a more sanctimonious tone .
It says on the 2d of July , ( in the form of a letter from Bristol ) : `` It is much to be regretted , that the regularity and peaceable demeanour with which our elections were formerly conducted , are now totally disregarded .
Notwithstanding the exertions of Mr. Davis 's , Mr. Protheroe 's , and Sir S. Romilly 's friends , to prevent a recurrence of the outrages which endangered Mr. Bathurst 's life at a late election , the procession on Saturday was assailed by vollies of mud , stones , dead cats , c..
Mr. Davis fortunately escaped unhurt , except from one stone which struck his arm . ''
Here are two things to be observed : first , that Davis , Protheroe , and Sir Samuel Romilly 's friends , the friends of all of them , are here spoken of as co-operating .
Aye , to be sure !
League with the devil against the rights of the people !
This is a true Whig trait .
But , the mud , stones , and dead cats !
Who in all the world could have thrown them at `` the amiable Mr. Davis ? ''
It must have been some Bristol people certainly  and that of their own accord too , for Mr. Hunt was not there at the time .
-- Mark how these prints discover each other 's falsehoods .
The Courier of the 1st July gave us an account of Mr. Davis 's gracious reception .
It told us , that `` RICHARD HART DAVIS , Esq. the late Member for Colchester , and the professed candidate of the White Lion party in this city , was met at Clifton on Saturday by an immense body of freeholders and freemen , consisting of the most respectble and opulent inhabitants of the city , and was preceded to the Exchange by a cavalcade of upwards of one hundred carriages , and a numerous body of his friends on horseback and on foot . ''
But , not a word about the mud , stones , and dead cats , with which he was saluted .
Yet these were flung at him  and flung at him , too , by the people of Bristol  by hands unbought  for Mr. Hunt spends not a farthing .
They were a voluntary offering on the part of those men of Bristol who were not to be corrupted .


The COURIER of Thursday , 2d July , states , that both horse and foot soldiers had been marched into Bristol .


SIR FRANCIS BURDETT mentioned this circumstance in the House of Commons on Thursday evening .
The Secretary at War said he did not know of the troops being brought into the city .
But this will be found to have been the case .


WM. COBBETT .


State Prison , Newgate ,


Friday , 3rd July , 1812 .


After having reviewed the red coat gentry of the West Middlesex Militia , I returned to my inn and took my breakfast , and at nine o'clock I proceeded on horseback to the Guildhall , accompanied as usual by a great number of my friends , the unhired , the unbought , people of Bristol .
When I arrived at the top of Broad-street , I found , to my surprise , that I had to pass the whole of the way down that street to the Guildhall , between double lines of the military , drawn up on each side of the street , with arms supported and bayonets fixed .
This was not only a novel scene , it was such a one as had never before been exhibited at an election in England .
As I passed the first rank and file I halted , and taking off my hat , said , `` Come , my lads , let us give our friends , the soldiers , three cheers . ''
This was instantly complied with , and as I went on , each soldier exclaimed , `` Hunt for ever  '' and this was kept up by the whole line till I reached the Hall-door , when three more cheers were given , in which many of the soldiers heartily joined .
Unconstitutional and illegal as was the measure of bringing the military to superintend , or rather to overawe , an election , it must be owned that the soldiers were at least much less dangerous than the brutal bludgeon-men .
This , however , had the desired effect of deterring almost all the electors from coming to the poll , except those who came for Mr. Davis , and knew that they were protected by the authorities .
The very idea of introducing military at any time into the streets of Bristol , had a very disagreeable and alarming appearance , and called to the recollection of the citizens the horrors which had occurred at the massacre of Bristol Bridge , some few years before , when the people were fired upon by the Herefordshire Militia , and I think as many as ten or twelve were killed , and a great many wounded .
The introduction , therefore , of troops into the city , in the midst of an election , naturally excited a great panic amongst the timid and the weak , and those who prided themselves for prudence took care to keep from the spot .


The moment that I got upon the hustings I protested against such a violation of the constitution , such an outrage upon the rights of freedom of election , and pledged myself that I would present and prosecute a petition against the return which might be made under such circumstances .
The Sheriffs declared they knew nothing about it  that the military were introduced by the Mayor to preserve the peace of the city .
The soldiers , nevertheless , continued to occupy the whole of Broad-street , and kept guard over the door to the hustings , during the whole of that day .


Seeing the state of intimidation in which the people of Bristol were placed , and learning the threats and the violence which had been used to prevent the voters from coming up to poll for one , it now became my care to husband those few independent votes upon whom I could depend , and to avoid bringing up those whose bread was dependent upon my opponents .
Of the latter there were some as brave as lions , who , defying danger , set all consequences at defiance .
I recollect some instances of peculiar devotion and heroism .
There was a smith in Balance-street , of the name of Pollard , a freeman , who possessed a soul that nothing could shake  there was also a young freeman , named Milsom , and several others , who attended the hustings every day , but held back their votes to the very last , and bravely came up to the bar when called upon .
It required nerves , courage , and virtue , of no common cast , to do this , in defiance of all the authorities , as vindictive and virulent a gang of petty tyrants as ever disgraced the robes of office .
In this manner the election proceeded from day to day , without any chance ever having been given by me to enable the Sheriffs to close it .


In the evening , after this exhibition of the military , I heard that they were quartered all over the city  but the next morning they did not appear to keep guard over the hustings .
Great bodies of them were , however , stationed at the Mansion House , and other public offices .
A circumstance meanwhile occurred , which , at the time , I communicated only to a few confidential friends , and have seldom mentioned since , for fear that there might be a remote possibility of placing in jeopardy the parties concerned .
The knowledge of the Middlesex Militia having been marched into the city of Bristol , to overawe the electors in the free exercise of their franchise , was rapidly spread far and wide .
About eleven o'clock , just before I was going to bed , a message was brought to me to say that there were three men , strangers , who wished to see me in private , upon business which they said was of importance .
I had a friend sitting with me , who was about to depart  but I detained him , and desired that the gentlemen might be told to walk up .
Three decent-looking young men were introduced , and one of them , who acted as spokesman , addressing himself to me , said , `` We wish to communicate something of consequence to you in private , if you please , Sir . ''
My answer was , `` As you are strangers to me , I ought to see you only one at a time  but as there can be no secret that I would wish to hear from you that I would not intrust my friend with , I beg you will proceed . ''
`` Can you rely upon your friend , Sir , '' said the speaker , `` as our communication will place our lives in your power ? ''
I replied that I would trust my own life in the hands of my friend  but I saw no reason why they should commit themselves either to me or to him . ''
The reply was , `` It concerns you , Sir , as well as us . ''
`` Well , then , '' said I , `` proceed , for I will be answerable for my friend , that he will never betray you . ''
`` I , Sir , am a corporal in the -- regiment --  these are two privates , my comrades  we are quartered at -- .
Yesterday one of our men was sent over by an officer to vote for Mr. Davis  he had a conversation with a serjeant of the Middlesex Militia , who told him , in confidence , that they had private orders , in case of any row or riot , to shoot you , Sir  which the serjeant told him would be certainly put in execution in case there was the slightest disturbance to give a colour for such a measure .
This he related to us upon his return last night .
The circumstance has been communicated in confidence to every man in our division , except the officers and one non-commissioned officer , and we have , one and all , sworn to come to your relief , and , by driving these bloody Middlesex men out of the city , protect you from the violent death which is intended for you .
We were chosen by lot to come over to you with this offer .
Your life is in danger , and we are , one and all , ready to sacrifice our lives to protect you .
We do not expect , as you do not know us , that you will openly accept our offer  but only give us a nod of assent , and we will march into the city of Bristol at any hour to-morrow night that you may think proper .
We shall have no commissioned officers , but we shall have all the non-commissioned officers , except one , and him we did not choose to trust .
Our lives are in your power , and we pledge them upon the accomplishment of what we offer  we are ready to lay them down to save you .
It was first proposed to come off this night , in which case the whole of our four companies would have been here by this time , but it was at length resolved to make you acquainted with our design , lest you might be sacrificed in the onset , before you were aware of our intentions .
The lot having fallen upon us to communicate this to you , Sir , we put on coloured clothes , and started before it was scarcely dark , and here we are , in your power , or at your command . ''
The two privates testified to the truth of the corporal 's statement , and gave their names .


During this harangue , I had time to collect myself , and I deliberately replied -- `` If you are spies , sent to entrap me , your own guilty consciences will be your punishment  but as you appear to have placed yourselves in my power , and claimed my confidence , I will not betray you .
If you are honest , you have my thanks for your indiscreet zeal , in running such a great risk to preserve my life .
The motive is laudable , but the means are most dangerous , and I fear you have not well weighed the consequences .
Should the sword be once drawn in such a cause , there is no middle course to pursue  the scabberd must be thrown away .
The period is not yet come for such a movement  neither will the occasion warrant it .
I must trust to the laws for my protection , or rather to the fears of my enemies  as their dread of a terrible and summary retribution , I have no doubt , will prove my greatest shield of safety .
I must recommend you to return immediately to your comrades , and tell them they are not wanted  and rely upon it , as you have placed such confidence in me , I will never betray it . ''
They all replied they had not the slightest fear of that , and they declared that if any accident or foul play happened to me , that they would take an ample and an awful retribution .


This was a very serious occurrence , and it made a deep impression upon my mind .
I was grateful for their zealous attachment to me  but I trembled when I thought of the result .
Yet , had I at last found that no other resource remained to save me from being basely murdered , I might , perhaps , have been tempted to accept their offer , and to make one grand effort to preserve my life and the liberties of my country , and either have accomplished my purpose , or have gloriously fallen in the struggle .
I never doubted the truth of the corporal 's account respecting the private orders which were delivered to the non-commissioned officers of the West Middlesex militia  and I have never had any occasion to doubt the sincerity of these men .
If the event had taken place six years later , I should at once have been of opinion that it was a plot to entrap me  but I am thoroughly convinced , from what came to my knowledge afterwards , that this was a most sincere and devoted offer  and , further , that if I had been killed during that election , rivers of blood would have flowed in Bristol .
The friend who was present will read this , and will perceive the correctness with which I have related the circumstance .
In fact , it made such an impression upon both of us , that we shall never forget it .


The military were still retained in Bristol , and one or two troops of the Scots Greys were kept , during the whole election , at Clifton , within a hundred yards of the bounds of the city .
The election was still continued , but very few were polled on either side , although those who polled for Davis , more than trebled in number those who polled for me .


One day , when I came from the hustings , I announced that I should take a ride in the evening , down the Hot-well-road , and round by Clifton .
This was hailed with that sort of applause which was an earnest that my numerous friends would attend me .
The plan was , however , thought by some to be a hazardous one , as we had over and over again been threatened , that if we went out of the bounds of the City , the military should assuredly be called into action to disperse us .
My answer was , `` my friends are always very well behaved  they never commit any breach of the peace  and I shall certainly ride where I please  besides , I wish to see the example that was made of Mr. Davis 's house , in consequence of the outrageous assaults committed on the people by the bludgeon-men . ''


The hour of six came .
I mounted my horse , and was accompanied by Mr. Williams , of Clare-street , on one side , and Mr. Hornbrock on the other , both mounted , and Mr. Cranidge walked in front , exhorting the people to be firm and peaceable .
When our setting out was announced , we could hear the bugle sounding to arms , and see the horse soldiers galloping in all directions towards the parade upon Durdham-down .
This bore a resemblance to the state of things when a town is about to be attacked by an invading army .
My friends were not less than five or six thousand , but they were known to be peaceably inclined , and without the least disposition to commit any act of violence or riot  they merely testified their approbation of a popular candidate at an election , with the usual demonstrations of cheering , c..
We had passed down the Hot-well-road , and had turned up the hill towards Clifton , with the intention of passing over Durdham-down , by Brandon-hill , and returning to the city down Park-street .
This was the route which I had marked out for what I called my evening general canvass .
1t must be recollected that I never solicited or canvassed one individual for his vote  it was , on my part , a specimen of real purity and freedom of election  whilst on the other side every thing corrupt , every means of bribery , cajolery , fraud , perjury , intimidation by threats , and even violence , was resorted to for the purpose of bringing up votes , many hundreds of whom came to the poll in all appearance as reluctantly and as much against their will as a man goes to the gallows .


Before we had reached half the summit of the hill , some respectably dressed females came running down to meet us .
They were received with cheers , but they no sooner approached than they addressed me in the most fervent and supplicating manner to return , as the Scots Greys were drawn out with their carbines loaded , and they had heard the magistrates and gentlemen give orders to fire upon the people , and Mr. Goldney , the magistrate , had read the Riot Act .
Some of the women fell upon their knees to implore me to return , if I had the least regard for my life , as they had heard the officers and gentlemen give orders by all means to shoot me .
I thanked these ladies for their kind wishes and good intentions , and then turning to any attendants and friends , I addressed them , urging every one that feared death to go back , as it appeared very evident that murder was premeditated  as to myself , I told them , that , as I had promised to pay my friends a visit that evening at Clifton , I should proceed , if I went alone .
Having promised to go , go I would , for I would much rather be punctured like a cullender , by a thousand balls , than live in such a state as not to travel peaceably in any part that I might choose , and particularly during an election .
If I went back , and failed to perform my promise through fear , I should justly deserve to be execrated as a contemptible coward as long as I lived  and whatever they might think of me , I would much rather be out of the world than have such a despicable opinion of myself .
I therefore intreated those who meant to proceed with me to be firm and peaceable , but those who had the least doubt upon their minds to return .
The exact language that I used , I , of course , can not recollect  but I shall never forget the effect which it had upon my hearers .
The eye of my worthy old friend Cranidge , the school-master , ( who fifty years before had been in the army ) sparkled like fire .
I believe he was the first to pull off his hat , and the air resounded with one tremendous shout , which was repeated three times .
Even the ladies , who had so earnestly intreated me to return , joined in the cheers , and every soul passed steady and cheerfully on  not one person returned .
Thus we proceeded , receiving and returning the friendly salutations of those whom we met , and of those that hailed us from the windows and houses , by the waving of handkerchiefs , colours , c..


Just as we were turning off the Down , to go back to Bristol , through Rodney Place , all at once a troop of the Scots Greys wheeled in full gallop from behind some houses and plantations , and formed in line across the road  so that our progress was apparently stopped .
At the same time we discovered Mr. Goldney , the Magistrate , accompanied by half a dozen of Mr. Davis 's friends , running with a book in his hand , to meet us .
He came up between us and his troops as pale as ashes , and in a trembling hurried accent , he exclaimed , `` Stop , Sir !
and hear the Riot Act read . ''
I knew the gentleman well whom I had to deal with , and therefore pushing my horse steadily forward , I deliberately said , `` Stand out of the King 's highway , Sir , and suffer me to pass , or I shall be under the necessity of riding over you  it appears you want to commit a riot , by interrupting the progress of those who are peaceably passing on the King 's highway , but we shall not indulge you in your amiable plot  Stand aside ! ''
He and his friends now exclaimed , TURN BACK , which caused a great laugh  while we proceeded forward , to within twenty paces of the more formidable interruption of the horse-soldiers , drawn up across the whole road , to cut off , as it were , our return to Bristol .
We gave the heroes three friendly cheers , and proceeded deliberately on , up almost to the noses of their horses , upon which the officer gave the word to the left wheel , march !
and they instantly wheeled out of the road , left us a clear passage , and resumed their former position behind the plantation and houses .
I took off my hat , bowed to the officer , and politely thanked him , adding that it was a beautiful manoeuvre , well planned and most adroitly executed  this was said in such an ironical manner , that the officer burst into a loud laugh , in which he was heartily joined by his men .


Be it recollected , that all this time we had never halted for a moment , but had proceeded calmly on , as we had a right to do , without once pulling our horses up out of a walk  and , in the mean time , poor Mr. Goldney and his friends excited the greatest merriment , for they were shuffling after , roaring out , `` Stop , and hear the Riot Act read ! ''
there being no more symptom or likelihood of a riot , than as if the party had met in a church or chapel to join in Divine Service .


We passed on gaily by the remains of Mr. Davis 's house , without any other interruption or accident , with the exception of one disgraceful transaction , which I shall record as a specimen of the character of our opponents , who professed themselves to be so anxious to preserve the peace , by endeavoring to create a riot , that they might massacre the people , under the pretence of quelling it .
A fine , handsome , decently-dressed female , about fifteen years of age , who had remained a little behind our party to speak with a friend , was stopped , seized , and brutally assaulted by some of the ruffians , who attempted to take the most indecent liberties with her person .
Those attempts she successfully resisted , and made them feel the effects of her virtuous resentment , by stamping coward , ruffian , and lawless brute upon their faces  which punishment she inflicted with her teeth and her nails .
Stung with shame and fury at their disgraceful defeat , one of the ruffians levelled her to the ground by a violent blow upon the head with a bludgeon , and then retreated .


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME .


Volume 3


`` Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see , Thinks what ne'er was , nor is , nor e'er shall be .
In every work regard the Writer 's end , Since none can compass more than they intend  And if the means be just , the conduct true , Applause , in spite of trivial faults , is due . ''
POPE .


MEMOIRS OF HENRY HUNT .


This wanton outrage was perpetrated in the presence of those , who will , perhaps , blush when they read this .
I do not say that this was done by the Magistrate  but it was done by the gang that surrounded him , and I know the villain who did it .
The poor thing lay senseless for some time  no one of the numerous spectators daring to go to her assistance .
When she came to her senses , she was covered from head to foot with blood , that had flowed from the wound , which was on the scalp , and was four inches in length .
In this state she came running to me , and made her way up to the front of the procession : -- we halted , horror-struck at her appearance .
The blood was streaming down her snowy bosom , and her white gown was nearly covered with the crimson gore  her cap and bonnet and clothes had been torn to rags  her fine black hair reached her waist  and , in this state , she indignantly recounted her wrongs .
O God , what I felt !
There were from four to five thousand brave Bristolians present , who heard this tale , and with one accord they burst forth in exclamations of revenge  every man of them was worked up to such a pitch of excitement by the cruelty of the atrocious act , that they would have instantly sacrificed their lives , to have executed summary justice upon the cowardly authors of it .
I own that I never was so near compromising my public duty , by giving way to my own feelings , as I was at this moment .
Burning with indignation , I half turned my horse 's head  but , recovering my reason , I took the fair sufferer by the hand , and led her forward , admonishing my friends not to be seduced into the trap , that had been so inhumanly set for them .
In this state we proceeded through the streets of Bristol  the poor girl streaming with blood .
I took her to my inn , sent for a surgeon , and had the wound dressed and the scalp sewed up .
She never failed to attend the election every day afterwards , and she displayed as genuine a specimen of female heroism , as ever I met with in my life .


I could relate a hundred such instances of the manly conduct of my loyal opponents during the election , if I chose  but , in spite of their baseness , we continued steadily and resolutely to attend the poll , from nine till four , for fifteen days  our enemies writhing with the expense that was daily incurred , and groaning under the lash of my daily exposures .


The above-named Mr. Goldney was , in his private character , esteemed a very worthy man  but when he gave way to the baleful system of factious politics , he became as great a tool , and as blind a bigot to the over-ruling power of intimidation , as any one of the execrable gang that composed the Members of the White Lion Club .
`` But list !
O list ! ''
Amiable as Mr. Goldney is , he could not resist the temptation of coming to Ilchester , out of his own County of Gloucester , forty miles , to have a peep at the captive in his cage .
I , however , felt just as much superior to him , when I saw him here , as I did when he was running about with Burn 's Justice in his hand , exclaiming , `` Stop , and hear the Riot Act read ! ''
If he meant to gratify himself , by having a peep at him , whom the Courier calls a fallen leader of the rabble , he never was more disappointed in his life  for he came just at the time that I had substantiated before the Commissioners all my charges against the Gaoler and the Magisstrates .


Every evening , after coming from the hustings , I went to the public Exchange , and delivered an oration to the assembled multitude , who always came there at that time to hear an account of the transactions of the day  for the Guildhall was not capable of containing a fiftieth part of the inhabitants who were interested in the election .
It will be recollected , and let it never be forgotten , that not only the whole press of Bristol , but the whole press of England was employed in traducing and vilifying me  for I was daily exposing the two factions who had united against me : in fact , that has been always the case , both the factions have always united against every friend of the people , whether in or out of Parliament .
Mr. Oldfield , in his History of the Boroughs , gives this short account of this election : `` Henry Hunt , Esq. of Middleton Cottage , in Hampshire , offered himself as a candidate , upon the old constitutional system , of incurring no expenses , nor canvassing votes .
He was received with every demonstration of popular enthusiasm , though the newspapers were hired to traduce him , and every measure was resorted to , that the ingenuity of his opponents could devise , to injure him in the public opinion . ''


This is a brief , but a true , history of the case  this election was , perhaps , one of the most severe and expensive contests that the White Lion Club , or Tory Faction , ever had to encounter  and , for the purpose of shortening it , every art , trick , and manoeuvre was resorted to , in the vain hope of drawing me off from the main point , that of being always present upon the hustings , and keeping open the poll .
They flattered themselves , too , with the idea , that it would be physically impossible for me to hold out .
I was , indeed , very ill , for I had caught a cold , and laboured under an irritation of the lungs , which bordered closely on inflammation , and was aggravated by daily speaking .
The papers announced , that I was suffering under a very severe fit of illness , although I never quitted the hustings .
This reached my family at Rowfant , in Sussex , and they began to grow uneasy upon the subject .
Fortunately , they set off to Bristol the very day before one of the most diabolical acts of malice and cowardice , that ever disgraced the character of a human being , was put into execution by my despicable opponents .
One of the cowardly wretches wrote into Sussex , a letter to one of my family ( it was to a female too ! )
in the name of the Chairman of my Committee , to say , that I had fallen a sacrifice to the fury of the mob , whose rage had been turned against me by some circumstance .
The caitiff described , in very pathetic language , the distress of my friends , and requested instructions for the funeral of the mangled corpse .
This letter was written in the most plausible manner  the hand-writing and name of the Chairman of my Committee was forged , and every thing was admirably calculated to give the impression , that it was genuine truth .
But , fortunately , this fiendish scheme failed of its purpose  for , as my family had left Rowfant before the letter arrived , the letter was never opened till we returned together after the election was over .


The day subsequent to the closing of the election , Mr. Davis was to be chaired  he having been returned by a very large majority , only Two Hundred and Thirty-five freemen having voted for me .
I left Bristol on that day for Bath , as I by no means wished to interrupt the ceremony of chairing Mr. Davis , who was so very unpopular , that half the city were sworn in as special constables on the occasion , and all the avenues were barricaded and blockaded with three-inch deal planks , to prevent the populace from making any sudden rush upon the procession .
He was chaired amidst the hisses , groans , and hootings of an immense majority of the population .
I had promised to return to dine with my friends the day following .


The White Lion Club immediately printed and posted up a large placard , containing the names , trades , and places of abode , of all those persons who voted for me .
This was done to injure them in their business , by pointing them out to the malice and the vengeance of my opponents .
But I will now publish a list for a very different purpose , to hand their names down to posterity , as follows :


Bristol .
July 22 , 1812 .
A LIST OF THE PERSONS WHO VOTED FOR MR. HUNT AT THE LATE ELECTION .


Those marked fr .
are Freeholders , and voted as such .


Attwood John , cabinet-maker , Castle Precincts .
Atkins George , tiler and plasterer , St. Mary , Redcliff .
Allen William , shipwright , St. Mary Redcliff .
Anderson George , gentleman , St. James ( fr .
St. James ) .
Barnett S. A. carpenter , St. Philip and Jacob .
Baker Thomas , cordwainer , St. Paul .
Baker John , cordwainer , St. Paul .
Baker Joseph , cordwainer , St. Paul .
Brown Charles , sailcloth-maker , St. Philip .
Burge Samuel , cooper , St. Paul .
Bartlett Robert , cordwainer , St. Philip .
Belcher Joseph , tailor , Castle Precincts .
Bright Newman , brickmaker , St. Philip ( out ) .
Brown George , brightsmith , St. Philip .
Brewer Richard , ironfounder , St. Philip , Ballard John , tobacco-pipe-maker , St. Philip .
Broad William , freestone mason , St. Philip ( fr .
St. Paul ) .
Bansill John , brazier , St. James .
Buffory Mark , tyler and plasterer , St. Augustine .
Brownjohn William , peruke-maker , Castle Precincts .
Biddell John , printer , Temple .
Bright William , cutler , St. Philip .
Bennett Elisha , labourer , St. Philip .
Briton William , house-carpenter , St. John .
Bush Peter , turner , Kingswood .
Bright William , brightsmith , St. Paul .
Beale John , glasscutter , St. Mary Redcliff .
Brookes Samuel , mason , Bitton , Gloucestershire .
Bowles Peter , cordwainer , Temple .
Blacker Henry , carpenter , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Bennett Francis , brazier , Temple .
Beckett Charles , cooper , St. Paul .
Bower William , tailor , St. James .
Clark W. N. carpenter , St. James ( fr .
St. James ) .
Cardwell Thomas , gentleman , St. Philip ( fr .
St. Michael ) .
Codrington John , corkcutter , St. Mary Redclif .
Cole Joseph , butcher , St. James .
Coles John , upholsterer , St. Paul .
Cork John , victualler , St. Augustine .
Coombs John , brightsmith , St. Philip .
Coombs John , baker , St. James .
Crew Solomon , coal-miner , Bitton , Gloucestershire .
Cunningham B. B. , cordwainer , St. Mary Redcliff .
Coddington Richard , corkcutter , Bath .
Clark John , toymaker , St. Philip .
Dolman Charles , brightsmith , Christ Church .
Duffett John , brushmaker , St. Philip .
Daniel Samuel , barber-surgeon , St. Philip .
Duffy Jonathan , labourer , St. Paul .
Davis James , miller , St. George .
Daniel Thomas , painter , St. James .
Davis David , mason , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul ) .
Davis William , victualler , Castle Precincts .
Duffett Daniel , brushmaker , St. Philip .
Docksey Thomas , peruke-maker , St. James .
Ellis John , cordwainer , St. Philip .
Edmonds Richards , barber-surgeon , St. James .
Elliott Alexander , tailor , Temple ( fr .
Temple ) .
Emers James , mason , St. Paul .
Ellis James , brightsmith , St. James .
Eagle William , tailor , St. Philip .
Francis James , cooper , St. Michael .
Foot John , cordwainer , St. Philip .
Fudge George , mason , Temple ( fr .
St. Philip ) .
Fenley John , bookseller , St. James ( fr .
St. James ) .
Ferris John , tailor , Bath .
Godwin John , wire-worker , St. Thomas .
Griffin John , shipwright , St. Michael .
Grimes John , silk-weaver , St. James .
George John , stone-cutter , St. James .
Green William , mariner , Bedminster .
Hughes Benjamin , blacksmith , St. Philip .
Hobbs James , mason .
St. James .
Hobbs William , mason , St. Philip .
Haycock William , tailor , St. Philip .
Harding John , gentleman , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul ) .
Hewlins Moses , currier , St. Philip .
Hopwood William , labourer , St. Philip .
Hunt James , cordwainer , Temple .
Hole James , shoemaker , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul ) .
Hughes Joshua , cordwainer , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Michael ) Hurst Joseph , mason , St. James .
Hope John , labourer , St. Michael .
Hardwick Robert , waterman , Hanham .
Hone James , tailor , St. James .
Haskins Samuel , plasterer , St. Michael ( fr .
St. Michael . )
Hemmings James , maltster , Castle Precincts .
Hunt William , hooper , Clifton .
Autchinson , John , currier , Temple ( fr .
Temple ) .
Jones Richard , joiner , St. John .
James Thomas , brewer , St. James .
Jewell William , smith , St. Mary Redcliff .
Jeremiah Edmond , wheelwright , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Jennings Benjamin , carpenter , St. Mary , Redcliff .
James John , tailor , St. James ( fr .
St. James . )
James Philip , pin-maker , St. George .
Jennings James , tailor , St. Thomas .
Jones Isaac , plumber , Temple .
James John , shipwright , St. Augustine .
Kennecott Nicholas , tobacco-pipe-maker , Bedminster .
Knight William , labourer , St. James .
Knight Joseph , broker , St. Thomas ( fr .
St. Thomas . )
Lovett John , waterman , St. Philip .
Liscombe Robert , carpenter and joiner , St. James ( fr .
St. James . )
Lewis John , mason , St. James .
Lansdown William , hooper , St. Philip .
Lewis Matthew , mason , St. James .
Leonard William , pork-butcher , St. James ( fr .
St. James . )
Lewis Edward , plumber , Redeliff .
Languell Thomas , mason , St. James .
Lawful Francis , sawyer , St. Philip .
Lancaster James , cordwainer , St. James .
Lewis John , joiner , Bridgewater .
Liddiard James , turner , Temple .
Martin John , rope-maker , Temple .
Morgan William , carpenter , Redcliff ( fr .
St. Mary , Redcliff . )
Meredith James , confectioner , St. Stephen .
Morgan William , glazier , St. Philip .
Milton Francis , printer , St. James .
Mittens Thomas , cabinet-maker , St. Paul .
Mountain Abraham , blacksmith , St. Philip .
Mutter Joshua , carpenter , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Moore Joseph , crate-maker , St. Mary , Redcliffe .
Mitchell James , sawyer , St. Paul .
Melsom William , cheese-factor , St. James ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Norris John , tobacconist , St. Peter .
Oliver George , victualler , St. Mary , Redcliff ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Owens Lewis , tailor and mercer , St. Michael .
Owen Robert , tiler and plasterer , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Pymm Thomas , currier , Christchurch .
Phelps James , gardener , St Philip .
Perry James , jun. .
Cooper , St. Peter .
Parker William , yeoman , St. Paul .
Primm Jacob , cordwainer , St. Michael .
Prescott William , carpenter , St. Philip .
Palmer William , hat-maker , St. Philip .
Pymm William , tailor , Christchurch .
Parfitt Thomas , cabinet-maker , St. Thomas .
Perry Charles , labourer , Frenebay .
Pearce Joseph , cordwainer , St. Paul , ( fr .
St. James . )
Perrins John , potter , Temple .
Parker James , carver and gilder , St. James .
Phillips Samuel , glass-maker , St. Philip .
Parker Edward , grocer , St. James ( fr .
St. James . )
Philips Christopher , victualler , St. Nicholas .
Prigg Francis , iron-founder , St. Philip .
Poole William , tailor , St. Michael .
Phillips William , plasterer , St. Phillip .
Price William , tiler and plasterer , St. Philip ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Pollard William , blacksmith , St. Nicholas .
Penny Thomas , painter , Castle Precincts .
Phillips Thomas , saddler , Bath .
Perrin Robert , painter , St. Michael ( fr .
St. Michael . )
Perrin William , jun. .
Cooper , St. Paul .
Philips James , turner , St. James .
Palmer William , brass-founder , Bedminster .
Price James , shopkeeper , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Roberts John , baker , St. Philip .
Rate John , shoemaker , St. Paul .
Rowland Thomas , carver , St. Stephen ( fr .
St. Stephen . )
Rosser John , turner , St. James .
Rogers Churchman , yeoman , St. James .
Rumley Benjamin , labourer , Temple .
Ravenhill Robert , bellows-maker , St. Philip .
Rivers James , potter , Temple .
Rees David , stationer , Christchurch ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Rogers John , cooper , St. Mary , Redclif .
Robins Charles , cabinet-maker , St. James .
Reynolds John , wheelwright , Castle Precincts ( fr .
Castle Precincts . )
Reed William , cordwainer , St. James .
Radford Joseph , brass-founder , Temple .
Rawle William , cordwainer , St. Philip .
Stanmore Samuel , shipwright , Temple .
Sexton , Daniel , trunk-maker , Temple .
Sheppard John , brazier , Temple .
Stinchcomb William , cabinet-maker , St. James .
Simms Thomas , glass-cutter , Nailsea .
Sheppard William , hatter , St. Philip .
Stringer Thomas , confectioner , St. Philip ( fr .
St. Philip . )
Sheppard Benjamin , clothier , Frome .
Skone William , grocer , St. Paul .
Smith John , pewterer , St. Michael .
Slocombe John , glazier , St. James .
Sayce Thomas , carpenter , St. Paul .
Smith Thomas , shopkeeper , Temple .
Stephens James , carpenter , St. Augustine .
Stokes John , joiner , St. Paul .
Stretton William , cooper , St. Nicholas .
Sweet Thomas , potter , St. Philip .
Stokes Henry , cordwainer , Chepstow ( fr .
Temple . )
Simms William , glassman , Wraxall .
Sims James , glass-maker , Nailsea .
Skammell R. V. tiler and plasterer , St. James .
Searle Benjamin , plasterer , St. Philip .
Simpkins George , cordwainer , St. Paul .
Smith William , ironmonger , St. Mary , Redcliff ( fr .
St. Mary , Redcliff . )
Snig William , box-maker , St. James .
Shackell Robert , cordwainer , Frampton ( fr .
St. James . )
Thomas Timothy , tallow-chandler , St. Stephen ( fr .
St. Stephen . )
Taylor James , brushmaker , St. Mary , Redcliff Thomas John , brushmaker , St. Mary , Redcliff Tilly John , block-maker , St. Stephen .
Tippet James , shipwright , St. Augustine .
Tilley William , crate-maker , Temple .
Thomas Thomas , carpenter , St. Paul .
Tiler William , gentleman , Bedminster ( fr .
St. James . )
Taylor Thomas , glazier , St. Peter .
Underaise James , merchant tailor , St. James .
Vaughan John , gentleman , St. Paul ( fr .
Temple , ) Walker Richard , accomptant , St. Michael ( fr .
St. Michael . )
Westcott James , cabinet-maker , St. Michael ( fr .
St. Michael . )
Wood William , twine-spinner , St. Philip .
Whittington Thomas , carpenter and joiner , Temple .
Williams Isaac , carpenter , Mangotsfield .
Weetch Robert , undertaker , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
White John , mariner , Temple .
Welsh John , butcher , St. Philip .
Williams Robert , cordwainer , St. Augustine .
Watts William , cordwainer , St. Paul .
Watts Thomas , cordwainer , St. Philip .
Wilmot W. W. glass-cutter , Temple .
White William , carpenter , St. Paul .
Wipperman Christopher , baker , St. Augustine ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Wells Robert , wheelwright , Bath .
Wilson William , Accomptant , St. Paul .
Ware George , cordwainer , St. Paul ( fr .
St. Paul . )
Webb George , carver and gilder , St. Michael .
Woodland William , turner , St. Philip ( fr .
St. Philip . )
Welch James , brickmaker , Binegar .
Waters Benjamin , wine-hooper , St. Philip .
Wood John , clerk , Newton St. Loe .
Young George , cutler , St. Philip .
Yearbury R. A. cordwainer , Frome .


I have recorded the names of these brave men , for the purpose of handing them down to posterity , as a specimen of genuine patriotism and disinterested love of Liberty .
Men who , in the nineteenth century , regardless of every personal consideration , and anxious only to perform conscientiously what they considered to be a sacred duty to their country , had the courage and the honesty to give their votes agreeable to the dictates of their hearts , in spite of the terror and threats of lawless power  in defiance of the corrupt influence of the corporation , the clergy , and the merchants of Bristol , and all the bribes that were held out to seduce them from giving me their support .
Men such as these deserve to be remembered with honour .
I am bound to declare that , during the election , I witnessed as great a degree of enthusiasm as was ever exhibited by the people upon any occasion  and I beheld such daily individual acts of heroism as would have done honour to the character of the most revered Roman or Spartan patriot .
My worthy friends Williams , Cranidge , Brownjohn , William Pimm , and many others , were incessant in their labours to assist me , and most cheerfully braved the anger and the ungovernable rage of our opponents .
We had daily to encounter the most artful and unprincipled manoeuvres , which were put in practice to entrap and mislead us .
There was no mean and despicable art , nothing which was likely to irritate and inflame , that was not tried , for the purpose of throwing me off my guard  and all those who chose to try these experiments upon my patience and my temper , let them commit any atrocity however glaring , were sure to be shielded by the authorities .
There was no law , no protection for me or my friends  and we had only to rely upon the goodness of our cause , our general forbearance , or our prompt and courageous resistance to lawless violence .
One day , towards the latter end of the contest , a person introduced himself into my room ( for any one who asked was instantly admitted ) , and , after behaving in a very improper manner , he placed himself in a boxing attitude , and commanded me to defend myself , or he should floor me .
I had no inclination to have a set-to with a perfect stranger , and was about to request his immediate departure , when he struck me a smart blow upon the chin , and then affected to apologise for the insult , or rather assault , by saying , that it arose entirely from the want of my keeping a proper guard .
I , however , instantly spoiled his harangue , by retaliating in a way that he little expected : I seized the gentleman , and , having sprung with him out of the door , I gave him , in spite of the most determined resistance , a cross-buttock , and pitched him a neat somerset over the banisters , into the landing-place of the ground-floor , before my friend Davenport had scarcely left his seat .
This being witnessed by some of my friends , who were standing at the bottom of the stairs , and saw the fellow come flying over the banisters , with part of my coat in his hand , which he had seized hold of , and held fast in the struggle  they , without farther ceremony , began `` to serve him out '' in proper stile , as he was immediately recognized to be a sheriff 's officer , and a notorious bruiser , belonging to the White Lion faction  and if Mr. Davenport had not rushed to his assistance , and secured him by consigning him to the custody of two constables , he would have paid very dearly for his insolent frolic  and , as it was , he came off very roughly , with several bruises and a dislocated shoulder .


I had given my word to my friends , that on the day after the chairing of Mr. Davis , I would return from Bath , and dine with them .
I kept my word , and I was met at Totterdown , about a mile from the entrance of the city , and conducted through the streets in the most triumphant manner .
I was taken to the Exchange , where I protested against the illegal manner in which the election had been carried by the lawless introduction of the military force , and I pledged myself to petition Parliament against the return of Mr. Davis  this pledge was received with every demonstration of applause , and promises of pecuniary support were reiterated from every quarter .
I dined with a very large party of my friends , and thus ended a contest as severe as ever was maintained at any election upon record .


From this contest there resulted one benefit , which amply paid me for my toils .
During fifteen days , the people of Bristol had an opportunity of hearing more bold political truths , than they had ever heard before  both the factions of Whigs and Tories were exposed , and their united and unprincipled efforts to deceive and cajole the people were freely canvassed , and rendered incontrovertible .
-- There had always been in Bristol two factions , nearly equally divided between the Whigs and Tories  and the whole of the politics of the people consisted in supporting these two factions , which were designated the high and the low party .
The opposition , or Whigs , had always contrived to make the people believe that they were their friends , and that the Government , or Tory faction , were their enemies  that the Whigs were every thing that was pure and honourable , and disinterested and patriotic  but that the Tories , or Blues , were every thing that is the reverse .
During these fifteen days , this delusion was dispelled , and the actions of the Whigs were as rigidly discussed as those of the other faction  in fact , more so , for the people all well understood the practice as well as the principles of the Tories , but they had not till now been enlightened upon the subject of the Whigs , so as plainly to see and understand their situation .
The task of enlightening them on this head , I made it my business to accomplish , and , aided by the Whigs themselves , I did accomplish it effectually .
At the appearance of such an antagonist as I was , all the leading Whigs , united with those whom they had heretofore made the people believe to be their greatest enemies , their chiefs of the low party , now left that party , and joined the high party , though hitherto it had been the constant study and care of both these factions , to make the people give credit to the sincerity and purity of the opposition .
To banish this delusion was my grand object , in which I flatter myself , that I succeeded to a miracle .
I not only recounted the famous acts of the Whig administration , and dilated upon the sinecures , pensions , and places of profit , that the Whigs enjoyed out of the earnings of the people  but I also caused the list of them to be published and placarded .
There were the sinecures of Lord Grenville and his family , the Marquis of Buckingham and others , placed side by side with those of Lord Arden and the Marquis Camden  Whigs and Tories were blended together  and when this light was thrown upon the business , the people soon saw through the mist of faction , by which they had been kept in utter darkness .
This mode of proceeding , of course , drew down upon me the maledictions of both factions  nor was this all , for they joined heartily in misrepresenting me , and fabricating every species of calumny against me .
There was no falsehood too gross to serve their turn .
They seem to have acted on the old rascally maxim , of throwing as much dirt as possible , in the presumption that some of it will stick .
Perhaps , since the invention of printing , no man had ever been so grossly attacked and belied as I was , by the whole of the public press  with the exception of Mr. Cobbett , who stood manfully by me .
I do not know a single public newspaper in the kingdom that did not vilify me , and labour in all ways to sully my character , and to depreciate my exertions .
The liberal and enlightened editor of the Examiner , took the lead in making these attacks upon me , and professed to be desperately alarmed , lest the public should imagine that he was the vulgar candidate for Bristol , of the name of Hunt .
He not only disclaimed all connection with me , or even knowledge of me , but he professed to lament , as a misfortune , that his name was `` Hunt . ''
This being the subject of conversation one night , when Sir Francis Burdett and some other friends were spending the evening with Mr. Cobbett , in Newgate  the Baronet , speaking of this foul abuse from Mr. Leigh Hunt , said `` that the editor of the Examiner was not worthy to wipe the shoes of his friend Hunt . ''
This was what I was afterwards told by those who were present .
Nothing , indeed , could be more unfair than the conduct of Mr. Leigh Hunt upon this occasion , because he was not writing from his own knowledge , nor from the knowledge of any one that he could rely upon  but all his information must have been derived from the venal press  and to be sure , I was bespattered and misrepresented as much by the opposition press , as I was by that of the ministerial hacks .
I freely forgive Mr. Hunt , however , as I have no doubt that he was imposed upon , in fact , he has long , long since , honourably done me ample justice , and made amends for his former attacks and mis-statements .


After the election was over , I returned by the way of Botley , in Hampshire , on purpose to pay a visit to my friend Cobbett , who had just been liberated from Newgate , after having been imprisoned there for two years , if it might be called imprisonment , though I can scarcely call it imprisonment , when compared to my incarceration in this infamous bastile .
I do not hesitate to say , that one month 's imprisonment in this gaol , is a greater punishment than one year 's imprisonment in Newgate  and that I have suffered many more privations during the FORTY DAYS Of my solitary confinement here , than Mr. Cobbett suffered during the whole of the two years that he was in Newgate .
As I have before said , his sentence was not much more than living two years in London in lodgings .
To be sure , he paid dear for that accommodation , but actually little more than he would have paid for ready furnished lodgings , of equal goodness , in any other part of London .
He would have paid just as much for good lodgings upon Ludgate-Hill  and his lodgings in Mr. Newman 's house were equal , if not superior , to any on Ludgate-Hill .
All his friends had free access to him , from eight o'clock in the morning till ten at night , and his family remained with him night and day .
As I visited him a great deal , I know how well he was at all times accommodated .
When I knocked at Mr. Newman 's door , and asked for Mr. Cobbett , I was received with attention by the servant , and introduced immediately  in fact , the reception given by Mr. Newman 's servants to Mr. Cobbett 's visitors , was much more respectful , and more attentive and accommodating , than they ever experienced from the servants of Mr. Cobbett at his own house  at least it always struck me so , as my friend Cobbett 's servants were not always the best mannered in the world , I mean his domestic servants , those who were not under his management altogether , but under the direction and management of the female part of his family .
In truth , I do not remember ever going to Mr. Cobbett 's house twice following , without seeing new faces , or rather new maid servants .
Mrs. Cobbett was , what was called amongst the gossips , very unfortunate in getting maid servants  they seldom suited long together .
But not so with Mr. Cobbett  it was quite the reverse with him : his servants about his farms always lived as long with him as they conducted themselves with propriety  he was , indeed , what is called very lucky the choice of his servants .
For years and years , and years together , when I went to visit him , I found the same faces , the same well-known names .
The same tenant occupied the same cottage  the same carter drove the same team  the same ploughman held the same plough  the same thrasher occupied the same barn  and the same shepherd attended the flock .
The names of Dean , Jurd , Coward , and Hurcot , and many others , were for a number of years , as familiar to me as the names of my own servants .
The editors of the venal hireling press , and the enemies of Mr. Cobbett 's political writings , have always represented him as a bad master , and as being capricious , cruel , and tyrannical amongst his servants and poorer neighbours  and by means of as foul a conspiracy against him as ever disgraced the age in which we live , or as ever disgraced the courts of justice in any country .
The calumny about Jesse Burgess was propagated from one end of the land to the other , by the whole venal press of the kingdom , sanctioned by the dastardly conduct of the hireling barristers of the day , particularly by the infamous conduct of Mr. Counsellor , now Judge Burrough .
The whole of this was a base , fraudulent , and infamous transaction .
Mr. Cobbett has behaved very ill to me ever since his return from America  his desertion of me at a time of danger and difficulty , and his neglecting to aid me with his pen , in the herculean task which I have had to perform in this bastile , must to every liberal mind appear unpardonable .
Such a struggle , and made by a prisoner under such circumstances too , to detect , expose , and punish fraud , cruelty , tyranny , and lust , perpetrated within the walls of an English gaol , surely deserved the assistance of every enemy of oppression .
-- Mr. Cobbett having failed to render me the slightest assistance , and by his silence having even done every thing that lay in his power to counteract my exertions , and to encourage my cowardly and vindictive enemies to destroy me , it will not be imagined that I shall write with any degree of undue partiality towards him , or that I can be prejudiced so much in his favour as to exceed the bounds of truth .
But I have a duty to perform to myself , and a duty to perform to the public , and no feeling of personal irritation on my part , arising from neglect on his , shall induce me to withhold the truth .
I most unequivocally and most solemnly declare , from my own personal knowledge , that Mr. Cobbett was one of the kindest , the best , and the most considerate masters , that I ever knew in my life .
His servants were indeed obliged to work for their wages , as it was their duty to do  but they always had an example of industry and sobriety set them by their master  they were always treated with the greatest kindness by him  they were well paid and well treated in every respect  and the best proof , if any were wanting , after what I have said , that they were well satisfied with their employer , is , that they all lived with him for very long periods , and that those who left his service did so not in consequence of any dislike to their MASTER , and were always anxious to return to him .


While on the subject of servants , I may be allowed to say a word respecting myself : I was never accused , even by the venal hirelings of the press , of being a bad master  but , on the contrary , I was always proverbial for being a good one .
The fact that I was so , is abundantly proved by one circumstance .
When I left my farm in Wiltshire , and went to reside at Rowfant , in Sussex , my old servants followed me there , a distance of nearly one hundred miles , so that in Sussex I had the same servants , the whole time I remained there , that had lived with me and my father for , from ten to thirty years before  they all followed me into Sussex at their own risk , and they remained with me as long as I lived in that county  and when I left it to go into Hampshire , they also all left it , and accompanied me .
This is the best evidence that can be given of my being a good master  yet I have no hesitation in saying , that there never was a better master living than Mr. Cobbett .
I was , however , more fortunate than he was in my domestic servants  for in twenty years I have only had three cooks , three housemaids , and three men servants , each of them having lived seven years , and none of them having left us till they married and settled  and , thank God , it is a great satisfaction they have all done well , improved their situation in life , and got up in the world .
The man servant and two maid servants , whom I have now remaining with me , to take care of my cottage , have lived with me , I think it is now nearly eight years .


During the whole time that Mr. Cobbett was in Newgate , I was in the constant habit of visiting him  there was never a month , and seldom a fortnight passed , that I did not go to London to see him .
Up to this period I had always received from Mrs. Cobbett the greatest civility and attention , in return for my attention to her husband .
I was never an evening in London but I passed it with my friend who was in prison , and very delightful and rational parties we used to have in Mr. Cobbett 's apartments  these parties consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Cobbett , Sir Francis Burdett , Col. Wardle , Major Cartwright , Major Worthington , Mr. Peter Walker , Mr. Samuel Millar , and a few other select friends , all staunch assertors of the cause of Liberty .
I will relate two circumstances which occurred at these meetings , because I have always considered them to have had a very important share in creating the political hostility that has since existed between Sir F. Burdett and myself , and to have ultimately led to that coolness which has been so visible in the conduct of Mr. Cobbett towards me , during the last two years .
There is no breach of confidence in my mentioning them , and the narrative will shew by what trifles important results may be produced .
One evening , Sir Francis and Mr. Cobbett were speaking in very warm terms of my exertions in procuring a Requisition which led to the first County Meeting held at Wells , in Somersetshire  and the former was giving me great credit for having roused such a large , long , dormant county , and for having made such a favourable impression upon the Free-holders , in the cause of Reform .
With the intention of putting an end to such overwhelming praise bestowed on me to my face , I replied , that I was a zealous and devoted political disciple of the Baronet , that I would continue to follow his praiseworthy example , and never would desert the cause in which we were embarked .
`` But , '' said I , `` remember , Sir Francis , that at the same time that I promise you never to withdraw my zealous and faithful support to those principles which you advocate , and of the partizans of which principles you are deservedly the leader  yet , if ever you should stand still , so far from promising you , that I also shall halt , I assure you that nothing shall deter me from proceeding  then , and only then , shall I leave you . ''
What induced me to utter this speech , I can not tell  I certainly had not the slightest opinion or suspicion that the Baronet would ever stand still .
It was the farthest thing in the world from my intention to say any thing to create surmises , or to give the slightest offence .
My words were merely a sort of involuntary , random-shot effusion of the heart , meant only to evince my sincerity , and to silence the praises which were bestowed upon me to my face .
It certainly had the latter effect  it immediately put a stop to the conversation altogether .
I saw that I had unintentionally committed a blunder  I saw , or thought that I saw , Mr. Cobbett look at me with a most inquiring eye , endeavouring to discover whether my words were meant to convey an impression that I really suspected that the Baronet would ever stand still .
God is my witness , I had not at the time the slightest idea of the sort  for Sir Francis Burdett , in his professions and conversation , if not in his actions , always appeared to desire for the people the full extent of that liberty for which I was contending , namely , the representation of the whole of them in the House of Commons .
Sir Francis Burdett drew up instantly , and I perceived that I had , without meaning it , cast a damp upon the cheerfulness that had previously prevailed .
There was , however , no room for explanation .
I looked grave myself , and my mind was occupied with such thoughts as had never obtruded themselves before  not created by what I had said , but by the impression which it appeared to have made upon my hearers .
Whether it was imagination , or whether there was any just ground for it , I do not know , but I always fancied , from that time forward , that the Baronet was not so familiar as he was before  and , although we continued upon the best of terms , that he manifested a degree of reserve that I had never previously observed .


The other blunder which I made was as follows : -- one evening , when there was a large party , and Mr. Cobbett had been keeping us in a roar of laughter by his wit and vivacity , the very life and soul of the company , which he always was when he chose , all at once , in the midst of our mirth , he exclaimed , addressing himself to me , `` Hunt , I have a particular favour to ask of you  will you promise to grant it me ? ''
This was said with great earnestness , and with peculiar emphasis .
I replied , `` if it is any thing in reason and within my power , I will  but let me know what it is , and I have no doubt that I shall gratify your wish . ''
He urged me again and again to promise him before-hand -- all eyes were fixed upon me , and Mrs. Cobbett appeared by her looks to desire that I should comply with her husband 's request , evidently indeed shewing that she anticipated what it was he wished me to promise him .
This earnestness made me press him to explain , and at the same time I repeated my assurance that I would comply with his wish , if within my power .
I own I expected that he was about to get me to promise him , in the presence of our mutual friends , that I would accomplish something of importance  as he knew if I once gave my word , that nothing would deter me from endeavouring to carry my promise into effect .
Expectation was upon the tiptoe , every one seeming anxious to know what was the object of such a serious and almost solemn request .
`` Well , '' said he , `` promise me then that you will never wear white breeches again ! ''
Every one appeared thunder-struck , that the mountain had brought forth such a mouse .
I had on a clean pair of white cord breeches , and a neat pair of top boots , a fashionable , and a favourite dress of mine at that time .
There was a general laugh , and as soon as this subsided , all were curious to hear my answer .
It was briefly this : `` I certainly will , upon one condition . ''
`` What is that ? ''
-- `` Why , that you will promise me never to wear dirty breeches again . ''
Cobbett at the time had on a remarkably dirty pair of old drab kerseymere breeches .
The laugh was now turned against my friend , and I instantly felt sorry for the repartee .
I saw that my friend was hurt .
He thought it unkind , and dropped his under lip .
Mrs. Cobbett 's eyes flashed the fire of indignation , and she was never civil to one afterwards .
Nothing could be farther from my intention than to hurt the feelings of my friend  it was an ill-natured and thoughtless , although a just retaliation .
At all events I was very sorry for it , and it called to my recollection an old saying , which was very commonly used by my father , `` a fool 's bolt is soon shot . ''


In consequence of Mr. Cobbett having given me the support of his able pen previous to the Bristol election , every exertion was made to induce him not to write upon that occasion in my favour .
On the day that I was going down to Bristol , I was sitting with Mr. Cobbett , in his room in Mr. Newman 's house , in Newgate , and consulting with him about the best plan of operation , when a gentleman was introduced  he was a stranger to me , and Mr. Cobbett rose hastily , and said , `` walk this way , my Lord , '' and instantly took him into the next room .
After having remained with him some time , and then sent him down the back stairs .
He returned to me , laughing , and informed me that it was Lord F -- c , who had been endeavouring to prevail upon him not to support me for Bristol , but to give his aid to Sir Samuel Romilly .
The reader will , however , have seen by the letter , and the observations published in my last two numbers , selected from Mr. Cobbett 's Register at that period , how little weight those attempts to injure me in his opinion had upon him .
But my enemies took a more effectual course to injure me with Mr. Cobbett , by whispering calumny to those who were more ready to listen to it than he was  they assailed Mrs. Cobbett , and endeavoured to injure me in the estimation of my friend , by poisoning the ear of his wife .
I may , perhaps , relate a few instances of this sort hereafter .
But there was one act of baseness that ought to be , and shall be recorded , to enable the world to form a proper judgment of the villain who could be guilty of it .
It occurred at the latter end of the year 1811 or at the beginning of the year 1812 , at the time when there was such a desperate attempt made to impose upon the public , by endeavouring to persuade them that a one pound note and a shilling , were equivalent to a guinea , although the latter was selling in the market at the time for twenty-seven shillings .


As I have alluded to the paper system , I may as well , before I proceed to my promised story , mention one circumstance connected with it .
To expose that system was always a favourite scheme with Mr. Cobbett , and he was now anxious to try the question with a country banker , to shew that , notwithstanding the Bank of England was protected against paying in specie , yet the country banks were liable to pay in gold .
If you carried 50l .
to the Bank of England of their notes , scribbled over with the lying formula `` I promise to pay , '' instead of giving cash for them , they only give you other paper of `` I promise to pay , '' in exchange .
If you carried 50l .
of country notes to the bank which had issued them , instead of giving you cash , they gave you Bank of England notes in exchange .
Mr. Cobbett very much wished to have this question tried , and , at his request , I promised him that the first time I went into the country I would do it .
Being at Bath soon afterwards , and having received , in payment of rent , some of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse 's bank notes , I took my tenant with me to the Bank , and tendered twenty-six pounds worth of their notes , for which I demanded cash in payment .
They refused to give it , and tendered in return twenty-six pounds in Bank of England paper .
This I declined to receive , and persisted in my demand for cash .
One of the partners was called  and , upon my peremptorily demanding payment in coin , he as peremptorily refused to pay it , and once more offered me Bank of England paper .
This I again declined to take , assuring him , that if he did not pay me the amount in cash , I would bring an action against him for the debt , and compel him to do so .
This then he treated with great levity , and I left his shop and the twenty-six pounds of bank notes together .
I immediately went to an attorney in Bath , and instructed him to bring an action against the firm of Hobhouse and Co. for a debt of twenty-six pounds , to which I offered to make an affidavit .
When I explained the circumstance , the Bath attorney declared that he would not act .
I then applied to my own attorney in London , who politely declined the honour of conducting such a suit , as he very honestly said , that if he did conduct it , he must never expect to have another bill discounted , or any accommodation from one of these formidable country bankers .
At length , after some difficulty , Mr. Cobbett procured me an attorney in London , who commenced an action against the firm of Hobhouse and Co. .


I will now proceed to my story , which is , indeed , connected in some degree with what I have just related .
While I was in the country , at Glastonbury , I let several little odd lots of land by auction , specifying that those who might become tenants should find security for payment of the rent .
Mr. John Haine , a perfect stranger to me , took the manor-house , orchard , and the fishery within the manor , for thirty-six pounds a-year , for three years .
The next morning , when he came to sign and complete his contract , I told him , that , as he was a stranger to me , and as I had great trouble in collecting my rents , I must require him to give security for the payment of the rent .
Mr. Haine , who was a man of considerable property , felt very indignant at this proposition , and certainly expressed his indignation in no very equivocal terms .
In the course of some rather warm conversation , I told him , that I should expect he would pay the rent in cash , if he were called upon to do so .
He contended that I could not compel him to do that  however , to shew me that he was a man of property , and to get rid of all difficulty about finding security for the payment of the rent , he pulled out of his pocket several hundred pounds in bank notes , and offered to pay me down the three years ' rent , amounting to one hundred and eight pounds , which money he tendered to me upon the table , saying , that it was no difference to him , and that it would at once save trouble and the expense of drawing up any agreement or lease , as I should have nothing to do but to give him a receipt .
At first I declined to do this , but a person who was with me suggested , that , if I allowed Mr. Haine five per cent .
for the money , nothing could be more equitable on both sides .
This was at once assented to  I threw my tenant back five per cent .
and gave him a receipt for the three years ' rent  we had , therefore , no occasion for any settlement till the three years were expired , when we renewed the agreement , and never had a word of dispute as to the rent afterward .


This , however , led to the following misrepresentation , by one of those persons who had been very pressing to induce Mr. Cobbett not to write in my favour on my becoming a candidate for Bristol , but to support the cause of Sir Samuel Romilly .
This man , one William Adams , a currier , of Drury Lane , one of the pillars of the Westminster Rump , had frequently been traducing me to Mr. Cobbett , who always dared him to the proof of any of the calumnies that he urged against me  and , in order to get rid of the fellow 's impudent and malignant representations , told him plainly , that he should not be prejudiced against me without proof .
`` But , '' added he , `` Adams , I promise you , that if you will bring me proof that Mr. Hunt has ever been guilty of a dishonest or dishonourable act , I will give him up instantly , and will have no more to do with him : but , till you do this , I beg you will refrain from all your little tittle-tattle about his wife , of whom you appear to know nothing . ''


Adams took his departure , but called again some time after , saying , that he had been to Bristol fair , and he now could substantiate , upon unquestionable authority , that I had been guilty of a most flagrant act of dishonesty to all my tenants at Glastonbury .
`` Well , '' said Cobbett , `` let us hear what it is . ''
Adams proceeded as follows : -- `` Mr. Hunt went down to Glastonbury , and under a threat of compelling all his tenants to pay their rent in specie , he induced them to advance him three years ' rent , for which he gave them receipts .
But , no sooner had they paid him their rent , than the mortgagee came , and made them all pay it over again , so that all his tenants were paying double rents . ''
`` Well , '' said Cobbett , `` if this be true , it is a very dishonourable act  but , as I have ascertained that the last story you told me , about his having turned his wife out of doors to starve , without making her any allowance , is a fiction , or , to speak plainly , I have ascertained it to be a most scandalous and wicked falsehood , you must excuse me if I do not believe one word of this affair , about his tenants , till you bring me some better proof than your bare assertion . ''
At length , Adams confessed that he was only told so by a person with whom he met at Bristol fair .
The fact was , that Mr. Haine had related the circumstance at Bristol amongst his friends , just as it happened  Adams heard of it , and out of such slender materials , he manufactured as base and as unfounded a lie as ever defiled the lips of an inhabitant of Drury-Lane or St. Giles 's .
Mr. Cobbett saw at once through the villainy of this Mr. Currier Adams , and he always afterwards treated him  as he deserved , with merited contempt .
This Adams is the person who , in the Court of King 's Bench , upon the trial of `` Wright versus Cobbett , '' for a libel , ( if Wright 's and the other reports are true , ) swore that he had several times assisted in turning Hunt out of the room at public meetings .
This is a most bare-faced falsehood as ever was stated in a court of justice  and Mr. Cobbett , who knew that it was false , should have indicted the fellow for perjury .
No human being ever laid hands upon me in the whole course of my life , to turn me out of a room , either public or private , with the exception of the ruffians who endeavoured to drive me and my friends out of the theatre at Manchester , in the year 1818 .
The very idea of Mr. Currier Adams ever attempting to do any such thing , is absolutely ludicrous .
If the ruffian had said that he had often been hired to assail me at the Crown and Anchor meetings , for the purpose of preventing the truths that I delivered being heard there , he might have told the truth  but to swear that he or any of his gang had ever dared to lay hands on me , either at a public or a private meeting , is as arrant a falsehood as ever was uttered at the Old Bailey .


As I observed before , when the election was over at Bristol I returned to Rowfant , in Sussex , by the way of Botley , in Hampshire , to congratulate my friend upon his release from Newgate , and to talk over the election at Bristol .
When I arrived there with my friend Davenport , Mr. Cobbett received us with that hearty welcome which he was accustomed to give  but the other part of the family behaved in the most rude , unhandsome , and disgusting manner , both to Mr. Davenport and myself .
I shall not descend to particulars  but I am sure my friend Davenport will never forget it , as long as he lives .
There is , however , no accounting for the conduct of some women .
Mr. Cobbett was always , as far as I was capable of seeing , a kind and indulgent husband , as well as a most fond father , and this he carried even to a fault  and it now appeared very evident that he began to feel his error .
But perhaps Socrates would never have proved himself so great a philosopher , if he had not been blessed with the little ripplings of Xantippe .


I returned to Rowfant , where every thing had gone on pretty well in my absence , under the care of my brother and my old Wiltshire servants .
The hay was all made , and the harvest was near at hand .
I soon recovered from the excessive exertion which I had undergone at Bristol , an exertion , such as few men ever overcome , and in consequence of which , my family always said , I was seven years older .
It is a fact , that my hair turned grey during the three weeks that I was at Bristol , and I have no doubt but it was occasioned by excessive mental and corporeal efforts .
On our arrival at Rowfant we found the infamous letter , which was written from Bristol to my family , giving a detailed and sanctimonious account of my death .
I have met with a great number of base scoundrels during my political life , but it was reserved for the gentlemen of Bristol to find among them a monster in human form , capable of committing so detestable and cowardly an act as that .
The people of Bristol are proverbial for their bravery  witness the Belchers , Pierce , Neate , c. but what is called the gentry of Bristol , with a very few exceptions , are the most mean , dastardly , selfish , and cowardly of their species .
Burke 's definition of a Bristol merchant is truly characteristic .
`` He has no church but the Exchange  no Bible but his ledger  and no God but his gold !!! ''
Burke stood a contested election for Bristol , and represented that city many years in Parliament , and he well knew the character of the dominant classes .
I believe that this race of Bristolians are greatly degenerated since Burke 's time .
The people , the populace , are brave , generous , and humane  but the merchants and gentry , as they are called , are the most selfish , the most corrupt , the most vulgar , the most ignorant , the most illiberal , and the most time-serving race that are to be found in Europe .
It is said that a Bristol man is known all over the world for his underhanded , tricking , overreaching , sharper-like dealing  he is described to be exactly the reverse of a Liverpool merchant  and it is added , ( and the sarcasm is not too bitter ) that you may know a Bristol merchant , by his always sleeping with one eye open .
There are , of course , some very honourable exceptions , though I am compelled to say , that I met with very few instances of liberality , Christian charity , or even common honesty amongst them , while I was there .
The Corporation is the richest in the world , perhaps , except London  while the freemen , whose property goes to enrich the said Corporation , are the very poorest freemen in the world .
Queen Anne granted a charter to the city , by which the daughters of a freeman confer upon their husbands the right of voting at an election .
Tradition says , that the Queen , when at Bristol , took notice that the women were so remarkably plain , that she conferred this boon upon them as a sort of dower  so that whoever marries the daughter of a freeman , is himself immediately entitled to the freedom of the city .
So that the freedom of Bristol may be gained by birth , by marriage , or by servitude .
While , however , I relate this circumstance , I do not mean to concur in the assertion , that the women of Bristol are proverbially ugly  on the contrary , some of them are very pretty  and I recollect that , when I was a young man , Bristol justly boasted of having given birth to one of the handsomest women of the age .
Miss Clementina Atwood , who was a native of Bristol , was , at the period when I knew her , universally esteemed , and in my estimation was the most beautiful , elegant , and accomplished female in the British dominions .
I remember riding from Enford to Bristol and back again , a distance of ninety-two miles , on the same day , only for the chance of passing a few hours in her society  and the worst of it was , that I was disappointed at last , as she had left Bristol for a few days , with her friend Miss Rigg , whose mother was just deceased .
But I passed the day with her cousins , and returned home in the evening .


I now directed my attention towards the management of my farm , with as much zeal as I had recently directed it to the concerns of the election .
My natural disposition , my taste , and my habits , all led me to the enjoyment of domestic comforts , in a rural sphere .
I was always doatingly fond of the country , country pursuits , and a country life .
The sports of the field -- hunting , shooting , c. , to me afforded the most captivating delight .
The pleasures of cultivating the soil , and attending to the growth and progress of the crops , can only be known to , and can only be estimated by , one who has a perfect knowledge of agricultural pursuits .
Then , the domestic felicity enjoyed in a quiet , cheerful country house , surrounded by one 's own family , and every now and then a good neighbour and sincere friend dropping in , has always been to me that sort of exquisite enjoyment which I could never find in any other situation , or in any other occupation .
My natural taste is so domestic , that I should not wish , on my own account , ever to mingle in the busy haunts of man .
I could freely remain in the country , and never enter a city or a town again .
Nothing but a sense of public duty should ever induce me to sacrifice myself by residing in a town  and if I could once see my country free , and the people happy , and honestly represented , the greatest blessing I could wish for , would be , to pass uninterrupted , a tranquil old age in the country , far away from the harassing turmoil , danger , and misery of boisterous , unprofitable politics .
But the man who would immolate the interest , the honour , the freedom , and the happiness of his country , to gratify his own love of ease and comfort , is unworthy the name of patriot .
I can scarcely hope to be permitted to enjoy such unmixed bliss , such delightful tranquillity , during the remainder of that short race which I have to run in this sublunary world  neither shall I sigh and pine after that , which it appears fate has forbidden .


In the early part of this year 1812 , there had been great riots in the North  great mischief was done at and near Nottingham , by the Luddites destroying knitting frames .
On the 9th of January , a number of those Luddites were taken up at Nottingham , for breaking frames , and they showed a spirit of resistance , and had several skirmishes with the military .
On the 16th of March , the Spanish constitution was settled by the Cortes , which Cortes abolished the Inquisition in Spain , on the 20th of June .
On the 9th of May , Napoleon left Paris for Poland , and entered upon that fatal campaign which ended in his ruin .
The Senate met in Paris , and decreed extraordinary levies of soldiers , and an immense army was formed , to attempt the subjugation of Russia .
Both Prussia and Austria had now signed treaties of alliance with France .
A negotiation was entered into between France and Russia , but without success  and the latter power concluded treaties with England and Sweden .
Having passed the Vistula , Napoleon declared war against Russia on the 22nd of June .
The French then advanced , and entered Wilna on the 28th of June  upon which the Russians formed a plan of a gradual retreat , and the invaders pursued them towards the Russian frontiers .
Many partial actions took place , and on the 17th of August , the Moscovites sustained a severe defeat at Smolensko , which city they set on fire before it was entered by the French .
A second battle was fought at Viasma  but that at Borodino , on the 7th of September , was most decisive in favour of the French  when the Russians , having been completely routed , left open the road to Moscow , into which city Buonaparte entered on the 14th  Rostophin , the Russian Governor , having taken the dreadful resolution to have it set on fire in various quarters , previous to the entry of the French army .
He accomplished his purpose by means of criminals , whom he employed under the promise of having their lives saved .
It is said , that 30,000 Russians were burnt in this city , whose wounds rendered them incapable of escaping from this terrible conflagration .
Half the city was destroyed before Napoleon and his troops entered , and the work of ruin was nearly completed before a stop could be put to the flames .
Napoleon ordered the execution of all those that were detected in spreading and increasing the fire .
This city being mostly built of wood , nothing could equal the dreadful ravages which the flames committed .


Calculating too confidently upon the character of the Emperor Alexander alone , which he knew well to be timid and indecisive , and anticipating that the moment he approached his capital , the Russian sovereign would sue for peace , in which case the French troops might take up their winter quarters in Moscow with perfect safety , Napoleon had pushed on to Moscow so late as the 14th of September , the time when a Russian winter was already approaching .
In thus calculating upon the fears of his enemy , Napoleon was perfectly correct , and it was well known that Alexander would come himself , with open arms , as he had before done , to ask for terms of peace from Napoleon , the moment after the decisive battle of Brorodino , if he had not been prevented by his nobles .
It was by his not taking the nobles into the account that the French Emperor failed in his calculations .
It is confidently said , and I can readily believe the fact , that Alexander was threatened with sharing a similar fate to that which was inflicted upon his Father Paul , if he offered to make any terms with Napoleon  these nobles having determined to burn riot only Moscow , but , if necessary , Petersburgh itself , and three-fourths of the inhabitants , in order to harass and destroy the French army by the frost , as they well knew that they could not conquer it by arms .


I will now leave Napoleon amidst the ruins of Moscow , and return to what was passing in the southern parts of Europe  and if I dwell a considerable time on the events of this year , my readers must recollect that it was the most interesting period in the history of the world , and that more important events occurred in this year than in any other that I have recorded .


In England , the manufacturing population began to suffer the greatest distresses , and consequently rioting and Ludditism were the order of the day .
Great and destructive riots occurred at Macclesfield , Manchester , Leeds , Sheffield , Nottingham , and various towns in the North : the people were ignorant of the cause of their distresses , and they wreaked their vengeance upon the knitting frames , machinery in general , and destroyed the property of their employers .
These excesses they were , no doubt , led to in consequence of the delusions and deception practised upon them by the venal hirelings of the public press , under the influence and controul of the Government .
Every particle of the real liberty of the press was nearly destroyed  almost every liberal writer in the kingdom had been prosecuted by the ex-officio informations of the vindictive and remorseless tyrant , Sir Vicary Gibbs , the Attorney-General , encouraged by the equally cruel and remorseless Chancellor of the Exchequer , Spencer Perceval .
Mr. Cobbett , Messrs. Hunts , of the Examiner , Mr. Drakard , of the Stamford News , Mr. Peter Finnerty , and other literary characters , were incarcerated in the dungeons of the borough-mongers .
Under this system eight persons were executed at Manchester for rioting , and many others suffered death in various parts of the country .


While Napoleon in person had been successful in every battle that he fought , and had penetrated even to the Russian capital , his Generals in the south had been much less successful , probably in consequence of the main energies of the empire being directed to the great object of subduing the powerful Autocrat .
The French armies in Spain sustained several signal defeats .
Ballasteros defeated the French , and the grand combined army , under Wellington , stormed Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajos .
This army also took Salamanca on the 16th of June .
On the 1st of July it was ascertained that the number of prisoners of war in England was 54,517 .
Another battle was fought at Salamanca , on the 23d of July , when the French were again defeated by Wellington 's army .
On the 11th of August , Lord Wellington entered Madrid , and on the following day the French evacuated Bilboa .
On the 19th of August , Soult abandoned the siege of Cadiz , and on the 27th Seville was taken by the combined army of English and Spaniards .
It is necessary to record the fact , that during the whole of the war in Spain , whenever the French obtained possession of a place , the inquisition was abolished  whenever the English got possession , the inquisition was restored with all its terrors , until at length the Cortes formally caused it to be abolished , in the latter end of June , in this year .
While these things were going on abroad , an event occurred at home that caused a great political sensation throughout the whole kingdom .
On the 11th of May , Mr. Spencer Perceval , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , was shot in the lobby of the House of Commons , by Mr. John Bellingham .
It is an extraordinary coincidence , that Mr. Perceval should thus come by his death , at the threshold of the House of Commons , on the anniversary of the ever-memorable day on which Mr. Maddocks made his motion , in the House of Commons , charging him and Lord Castlereagh with having been concerned in trafficking for the seat of Mr. Quintin Dick , in Parliament , into the grounds of which motion the Honourable House refused to inquire .
Bellingham never attempted to make his escape , which he might easily have done in the confusion which the event created .
After the consternation had a little subsided , some one present , who had been brought out of the House by the report of the pistol , inquired who was the murderer ?
Bellingham replied , `` I am the man that killed Mr. Perceval  '' upon which he was seized and searched , and another pistol loaded was found in his pocket .
He was then taken into the House of Commons , and being examined , he admitted the fact , adding , `` I have been denied the redress of my grievances by Government  I have been ill-treated , I sought redress in vain , and I feel sufficient justification for what I have done . ''
The fact was , that Mr. Bellingham was a merchant of Liverpool , and had , while in Russia , been wrongfully accused and thrown into prison by the Governor-General .
He applied to the English Consul , Lord Leveson Gower , for redress , but his application was fruitless .
He had suffered great pecuniary losses in consequence , and when he returned to England , he laid his case before the Government , who at first treated his application with neglect , and ultimately refused to grant him any redress , or to inquire into the cause of his complaint .
He was then induced to draw up a petition to be presented to Parliament  but he was informed , that it was necessary to obtain the consent of the Chancellor of the Exchequer , before his petition could be received , as it prayed for pecuniary remuneration .
He applied in vain  and , in his own words upon his trial , `` he was bandied about from one Minister to another , '' till he became desperate .
He then wrote a letter to the Magistrates at Bow-street , to inform them , that unless his case was inquired into , `` he should feel justified in executing justice himself . ''
`` Justice , and justice only , '' said he , `` was my object , which Government had uniformly denied me , and the distress it reduced me to , drove me to despair .
In consequence , and purely for the purpose of having this affair legally investigated , I gave notice at the Public-Office , at Bow-street , requesting the Magistrates to acquaint his Majesty 's Ministers , that , if they persisted in refusing justice , or even to permit me to bring my just petition into Parliament for redress , I should be under the imperious necessity of executing justice myself ?
At length I was told , by a Mr. Hill , at the Treasury , that he thought it would be useless for me to make further application to the Government , and that I was at full liberty to take what measures I thought proper for redress .
Mr. Beckett , the Under Secretary of State , confirmed the same , adding , that Mr. Percecal had been consulted , and could not allow my petition to come forward .
Thus a direct refusal of justice , with a carte blanche to act in whatever manner I thought proper , were the sole causes of the fatal catastrophe  and they have now to reflect upon their own impure conduct for what has happened . ''
Mr. Bellingham was found guilty and sentenced to death , and was executed in the front of Newgate , on the Monday following .
Previously to his being taken upon the scaffold , one of the Sheriffs put some very impertinent and unfeeling questions to him , which he answered with great coolness and dignity .
In fact , from the time of his committing the deed , he conducted himself with the greatest calmness and courage  he made a most eloquent defence , always acknowledged the fact , but vindicated it to the very last moment of his existence .
No man was treated with greater neglect , no one endeavoured more to gain a hearing and a fair inquiry into his case  but , alas !
justice was denied him  and injustice will drive the soundest mind to acts of desperation .
His answer to a most unfeeling and impertinent question of one of the Sheriffs was , -- `` I bore no resentment to Mr. Perceval as a man -- and as a man I am sorry for his fate .
I was referred from Minister to Minister , from office to office , and at length refused all redress for my grievances .
It was my own sufferings that caused the melancholy event  and I hope it will be a warning to future Ministers to attend to the applications and prayers of those who suffer from oppression .
Had my petition been brought into Parliament , this catastrophe would not have happened . ''
SHERIFF -- `` I hope you feel deep contrition for the deed ? ''
Upon which the prisoner drew up , and said , with a severe firmness , `` I hope , Sir , I feel as a man ought to feel . ''
After the cap had been drawn over his face , at the moment when he was going out of the world , his ears were saluted with `` God bless you !
God Almighty bless you ! ''
issuing from the lips of thousands .
He met his fate with the greatest fortitude and resignation , and left the world apparently with an unchangeable impression that he had only committed an imperious act of necessity , an act of justice .
I am one of those who will never assent to the justice of taking away the life of man in cold blood , upon any other principle than that of law , and laws made , too , by universal consent .
A man put to death in cold blood , deliberately executed , in pursuance of any law that is not made by common consent , that is , by the assent of the whole community , I shall always hold to be murdered  this consideration alone is quite sufficient to justify the demand for universal suffrage .
If the laws had been made by persons chosen by the whole people , Mr. Perceval would not have been shot  it was the want of an honest House of Commons that made Mr. Perceval a tyrant  it was the protection that he was sure of receiving , from a corrupt majority of a corrupt and packed House of Commons , that induced him to persevere in denying justice to Mr. Bellingham  and if ever a man received the reward of his own injustice , it was Mr. Perceval .
I repeat , that I by no means defend assassination  but in examining an act we must be careful to inquire whether some palliation of it may not be found in the motive by which it is prompted .
This was an extreme case  Bellingham had been grievously oppressed , he could not obtain justice from the Government  he could not even make his case known in any way except by means of a petition to Parliament  and , as he had asked for remuneration for his losses , his petition could not , according to a rule of the House , be presented without the consent of the Minister or the Chancellor of the Exchequer .
At the end of eighteen months of hope and fear and agony , Mr. Bellingham found that the consent of Mr. Perceval was positively refused  he was driven to despair , and he shot him .
It may not be amiss to say a few words here respecting Mr. Perceval .
He had become , most unexpectedly , Chancellor of the Exchequer .
He was a lawyer , and had been hired as the advocate of the Princess of Wales .
During the `` delicate investigation , '' he had not only made himself master of all her secrets , but , it is said , had also obtained the knowledge of all the private history of the Royal Family , particularly of the Prince of Wales .
When the `` delicate investigation '' was closed , and the Commissioners had acquitted the Princess of all the charges brought against her , the Morning Post announced that two gentlemen of the Bar had been employed by the Princess , to draw up a report of the matter , which would speedily be published .
The fact is , that Mr. Perceval did print this book , but he suppressed it , and became Chancellor of the Exchequer and First Lord of the Treasury .
If he did not betray his mistress , the Princess of Wales , which is doubtful , there can be no doubt that he at least deserted her for place and power .
All his family and political connections , of course , lamented his death  but it can not be disguised that the people were far differently affected by it , and , in many parts of the kingdom , they openly testified their feeling by acts of public rejoicing .
There was a woeful howling set up by the writers of the Ministerial press , about the great loss of Mr. Perceval , on account of his being such an excellent husband .
According to the statement of these hirelings , there was not such another husband in the kingdom  and a very large pension was in consequence settled upon his wife  it being urged in the House of Commons , that , as the loss sustained by Mrs. Perceval was not only irreparable , but beyond all precedent , that loss ought to be made up to her in the magnitude of her pension -- an argument worthy of the sound sense and honourable principles of those by whom it was urged .
The best answer , however , to these hypocritical pleadings , was given by Mrs. Perceval herself  for , in a very few months after the decease of that best of all possible husbands , that nonpareil of married males  yes , in a few short months after her irreparable loss , his disconsolate widow concealed herself in the arms of another and a younger husband !


I had not long returned from Bristol before I repaired to London , and formally presented a petition to the House of Commons , against the return of Richard Hart Davis , Esq. , as Member for Bristol .
The petition charged him with bribery , intimidation , and the introduction of a military force during the election , contrary to the statute law of the land .
I also entered into the proper recognizances , and gave security for trying the merits of the election , before a committee of the House of Commons .


In the mean time Mr. Cobbett published a second letter , as follows : -- TO THE INDEPENDENT ELECTORS OF BRISTOL .


Gentlemen , -- If I have not to congratulate you upon the return of Mr. Hunt as your representative , I may well congratulate you upon the spirit which you have shown during the election , and upon the prospect of final success from the exertion of a similar spirit .
That another contest will take place in a few months , there can be no doubt  for , the law allows of no exceptions with regard to the use of soldiers .
The ancient common law of England forbade not only the use , but the very show of force of any kind , at elections  and , the Act of Parliament , made in the reign of King George the Second , is quite positive as to a case like yours .
That Act , after stating the principle of the Common Law as to soldiers in an election town , says , that , when an election is about to take place in any city or borough , wherein there are any soldiers stationed or quartered , the soldiers shall be removed out of the said city or borough  that they shall go out one day , at least , before the poll begins  that they shall not return till one day , at least , after the poll has closed  that the distance to which they shall be removed , shall be two miles at least .
There are a few exceptions , such as Westminster or any other place where the Royal Family may be , who are to have their guards about them whether there be an election going on or not  and also , in case of fortified towns , where , though there be an election going on , soldiers are to remain in sufficient number to take care of the works .


Now , then , as Bristol is neither a place of residence of the Royal Family , nor a fortified town , it is clear , that , if soldiers have been suffered to remain in , or to return to , your city within the periods above described , the election must be void  or , there is , at once , an end to the abovementioned Act of Parliament , and also to the ancient common law of England in this respect , and the very show of freedom of election is gone .
It has not only been stated to me from the best authority  but , it has been stated in print by your well-known enemies , that soldiers were not only brought within the precincts of your city , during the time that the poll was open , but that they actually were stationed , with bayonets fixed , in the very Guildhall  and , in short , after the first or second day of the election , the city was , under the control of military armed men .


This being the case , there can be no doubt of the election being declared void  or , if it be not , there will , at any rate , be no disguise  it will become openly declared , that soldiers , under the command of men appointed by the King , and removeable at his sole will , can be , at any time , brought into a place where an election is going on , and can be stationed in the very building where the poll is taken .
Whether , amongst the other strange things of our day , we are doomed to witness this , is more than I can say  but , at the least , it will be something decisive  something that will speak a plain language  something that will tend to fashion men 's minds to what is to come .
But , I have heard it asked : `` would you , then , in no case , have soldiers called in during an election ?
Would you rather see a city burnt down ? ''
Aye would I , and to the very ground  and , rather than belong to a city where soldiers were to be brought in to assist at elections , I would expire myself in the midst of the flames , or , at least , it would be my duty so to do , though I might fail in the courage to perform it .
But , why should a city be burnt down , unless protected by soldiers ?
Why suppose any such case ?
Really , to hear some men talk now-a-days , one would be almost tempted to think that they look upon soldiers as necessary to our very existence  or , at the least , that they are necessary to keep us in order , and that the people of England , so famed for their good sense , for their public spirit , and their obedience to the laws , are now a set of brutes , to be governed only by force .
If there are men who think thus of the people of England , let them speak out  and then we shall know them .
But , Gentlemen , it is curious enough , that the very persons , who , upon all occasions , are speaking of the people of England as being so happy , so contented , so much attached to their government , are the persons who represent soldiers as absolutely necessary to keep this same people in order !


To hear these men talk , one would suppose , that soldiers , as the means of keeping the peace , had always made a part of our government  and , that , as to elections , there always may have been cases when the calling in of soldiers was necessary .
But , the fact is , that soldiers were wholly unknown to the ancient law of England  and , that , as to an army , there never was any thing of an army established in England till within a hundred years .
How was the peace kept then ?
How were riots suppressed in those times ?
We do not hear of any cities having been burnt at elections in those days .
I will not cite the example of America , where there are elections going on every year , and where every man who pays a sixpence tax has a vote , and yet where there is not a single soldier in the space of hundreds and thousands of miles  I will not ask how the peace is kept in that country  I will not send our opponents across the Atlantic  I will confine myself to England  and , again I ask , how the peace was kept in the times when there were no soldiers in England ?
I put this questien to the friends of Corruption  I put this question to Mr. Mills , of the Bristol Gazette , whose paper applauds the act of introducing the troops , This is my question : how was the peace kept at elections , how were towns and cities preserved , how was the city of Bristol saved from destruction , in those days when there were no soldiers in England ?
I put this question to the apostles of tyranny and despotic sway  and , Gentlemen , we may wait long enough , I believe , before they will venture upon an answer .


I have heard it asked : `` What !
would you , then , make an election void , because soldiers were introduced , though one of the candidates would have been killed , perhaps , without the protection of the bayonet ?
Would you thus set an election aside , when it might be evident , that , without the aid of soldiers , the man who has been elected , would not , and could not , have been elected , on account of the violence exercised against him ?
If that be the case , there is nothing to do but to excite great popular violence against a man  for , that being done , you either drive him and his supporters from the polling place , or , if he call in soldiers , you make his election void . ''
This has a little plausibility in it  but , as you will see , it will not stand the test of examination .
Here is a talk about exciting of violent proceedings  here is a talk about burning the city : but , who , Gentlemen , were to be guilty of these violent proceedings ?
who were to burn the city ?
Not the horses or dogs of Bristol  not any banditti from a foreign land  not any pirates who had chanced to land upon the coast .
No , no  but `` the rabble , the mob  '' and what were they ?
Were they a species of monsters , unknown to our ancient laws and to the Act of George the Second ?
Or were they men and women ?
If the latter , they were , in fact , people of Bristol  and , the truth is , that if the people of Bristol abhorred a man to such a degree that it was unsafe for him or his advocates to appear on the hustings , or in the streets  if this was the case , it was improper that that man should be elected , since it must be clear , that , if elected , he must owe his election to undue , if not corrupt , influence .
What !
and do the advocates of corruption suppose , that our law-makers had not this in their view ?
Is it to be imagined , that they did not foresee , and , indeed , that they had not frequently seen , that elections produced fierce and bloody battles ?
They knew it well , and so did the legislators in America  but , still they allowed of no use of soldiers .
They reasoned thus , or , at least , thus they would have reasoned , if any one had talked to them of soldiers : ` No  we will have no soldiers .
The magistrate has full power to keep the peace at all times , not excepting times of election , when assaults and slanders are no more permitted by law than at any other time .
The magistrate has all the constables and other inferior peace officers at his command : he can , if he find it necessary , add to the number of these at his pleasure  and , if the emergency be such as not to allow time for this , he can , by his sole authority , and by virtue of his commission , which is at all times effective , call upon the whole of the people to aid and assist him in the execution of his duty , and for refusing to do which any man is liable to punishment .
Having endued the magistrate with these powers  having given him a chosen band of sworn officers , armed with staves  having given him unlimited power to add to that band  having given him , in case of emergency , the power of commanding every man , of whatever age or degree , to aid and assist him in the execution of his duty  having thus armed the magistrate , how can we suppose him to stand in need of the aid of soldiers , without first supposing the country in a state of rebellion , in which case it is nonsense to talk about elections .
To tell us about the popular prejudices excited against a candidate , is to tell us of an insufficient cause even for the calling out of the possé  but , if this prejudice be so very strong , so very general , and so deeply rooted , that the magistrate , with all his ordinary and special constables , and his power to call upon the whole of the people to aid and assist , is unable to protect him from violence , or , is unable to preserve the city against the rage excited by his presence and pretensions  if there be a prejudice like this against a candidate , we are sure that it would be an insult to the common sense of mankind to call such a man , if elected , the representative of that city  and , therefore , we will make no new law for favouring the election of such a man . '
Such , Gentlemen , would have been the reasoning of our ancestors , such would have been the reasoning of the legislators of America , if they had been called upon to make a law for the introduction of soldiers at an election  which , let the circumstances of the case be what they may , and let the sophistry of the advocates of corruption be what it may , is , after all , neither more nor less than the forcing of the people to suffer one candidate to be elected and another to be set aside .
The soldiers do , in fact , decide the contest , and cause the return of the sitting member  unless it be acknowledged , that his election could have been effected without them  and , then , where is the justification for calling them in ?
I have heard of nobody who has attempted to anticipate any other decision than that of a void election  and , indeed , who will dare to anticipate any other ?
For , if the return be allowed to stand good in favour of Hart Davis , does any man pretend that there can ever exist a case in which soldiers may not be brought in ?
They are brought in under the pretence of quelling a riot  under the pretence of their being necessary to preserve the peace , and where is the place where this pretence may not be hatched ?
It is in any body 's power to make a row and a fight during an election at Westminster , for instance  and , of course , according to the Bristol doctrine , it is in any body 's power to give the magistrate cause for calling in soldiers , and for posting them even upon the very hustings of Covent Garden .
In short , if Hart Davis , his return being petitioned against , be allowed to sit , we can never again expect to see a candidate of that description unsupported by soldiers  and , then , I repeat it , the very show , the mere semblance , of freedom of election will not exist .


It being , for these reasons , my opinion , that the return of Hart Davis will be set aside , and , of course , that another election for your city is at no great distance , I shall now take the liberty to offer you my advice as to the measures which you then ought to pursue  first adding to what I said in my last a few observations relative to Mr. Hunt .


At the close of my last letter I observed to you , that it was owing to this gentleman , and to him alone , that you had an election .
You now know this well , You have now seen what it is to have at your head a man of principle and courage .
With all the purses of almost all those in Bristol who have grown rich out of the taxes  with all the influence of all the corrupt  with all the Bristol newspapers and almost all the London newspapers  with all the Corporation of the City  with all the bigoted Clergy and all their next a-kin , the pettifogging Attorneys  with all the bigots , and all the hypocrites , and all alarmist fools  with all these against him , and with hundreds of bludgeon-men to boot  opposed to all this , and to thirty or forty hired barristers and attorneys , Mr. Hunt stood the poll for the thirteen days , in the face of horse and foot soldiers , and that , too , without the aid of advocate or attorney , and with no other assistance than what was rendered him by one single friend , who , at my suggestion , went down to him on the sixth or seventh day of the election .
Gentlemen , this is , as I verily believe , what no other man in England , whom I know , would have done .
There may be others capable of the same exertions  and , let us hope , that England does contain some other men able to undergo what he underwent  but , it falls to the lot of no country to produce many such men .
At any rate , he has proved himself to be the man for you  he has done for you what none of the milk-sop , miawling orators at Sir Samuel Romilly 's meetings would have dared even to think of .
They talk of freeing the city from the trammels of corruption  they talk of giving you freedom of election  they talk of making a stand for your rights .
What stand have they made ?
What have you had from them but talk ?
They saw the enemy within your walls  they saw him offer himself for the choice of the people of Bristol  they saw preparations making for chairing him as your representative on the first day of the election  and what did they do to rescue you from the disgrace of seeing him triumph over you , while you were silent ?
Nothing .
They did , in fact , sell you to him upon the implied condition , that he , as far as he was able , should sell his followers to them when the time came .
You have been saved from that disgrace  you have had 14 days of your lives wherein to tell your enemies and the enemies of your country your minds  you have had 14 days , during which corruption trembled under your bitter but just reproaches  you have had 14 days of political instruction and inquiry  you have had those who affect to listen to your voice 14 days before you , and in the hearing of that voice  there have been , in your city , 14 days of terror to the guilty part of it .
This is a great deal , and for this you are indebted to Mr. Hunt and to him alone .
Your own public virtues , your zeal , activity and courage , and your hatred of your country 's enemies did , indeed , enable Mr. Hunt to make the stand  but , still there wanted such a man as Mr. Hunt  without such a man the stand could not have been made  without such a man you could not have had an opportunity of giving utterance to the hatred which you so justly feel against the supporters of that corruption , the consequences of which you so sorely feel .


That a man , who was giving such annoyance to the corrupt , should pass without being calumniated , was not to be expected .
Every man , who attacks corruption , who makes war upon the vile herd that live upon the people 's labour , every such man must lay his account with being calumniated  he must expect to be the object of the bitterest and most persevering malice  and , unless he has made up his mind to the enduring of this , he had better , at once , quit the field .
One of the weapons which corruption employs against her adversaries is calumny , secret as well as open .
It is truly surprising to see how many ways she has of annoying her foes , and the artifices to which she stoops to arrive at her end .
No sooner does a man become in any degree formidable to her , than she sets to work against him in all the relationships of life .
In his profession , his trade , his family  amongst his friends , the companions of his sports , his neighbours , and his servants .
She eyes him all round , she feels him all over , and , if he has a vulnerable point , if he has a speck , however small , she is ready with her stab .
How many hundreds of men have been ruined by her without being hardly able to perceive , much less name , the cause  and how many thousands , seeing the fate of these hundreds , have withdrawn from the struggle , or have been deterred from taking part in it !


Mr. Hunt 's separation from his wife presented too fair a mark to be for a moment overlooked  but , it required the canting crew , with a Mr. Charles Elton at their head , to give to this fact that deformity which it has been made to receive .
Gentlemen , I wish to be clearly understood here .
I do not think lightly of such matters .
When a man separates from his wife there must always be ground for regret  it is a thing always to be lamented  and , if the fault , in this case , was on the side of Mr. Hunt , it is a fault , which , even in our admiration of his public conduct , we ought by no means to endeavour to palliate .
But , Gentlemen , I do not , and the public can not , know what was the real cause of the separation of which so much has been said .
Mr. Hunt has , upon no occasion that I have heard of , attempted to justify his conduct , in this respect , by stating the reasons of the separation  but , I am sure that you are too just to conclude from that circumstance , that the fault was wholly his .
It is impossible for the public to know the facts of such a case .
They can not enter into a man 's family affairs .
The tempers and humours of wives and of husbands nobody but those wives and husbands know .
They are , in many cases , unknown even to domestic servants and to children  and , is it not , then , the height of presumption for the public to pretend to any knowledge of the matter ?


But , be the facts of the case what they may , I am quite sure , that as a candidate for a seat in Parliament , they have nothing to do with the pretensions of Mr. Hunt , any more than they would have had to do with his claims to a title for having won the battle of Trafalgar .
There is a Mr. Walker , who , I think , is an Attorney at Bristol , who has written a pamphlet against Mr. Hunt , in which pamphlet he argues thus : ` Mr. Hunt has , by quitting his wife to live with another woman , broken his plighted vows to his own wife  a man who will break his promises in one case will break them in another case  and , therefore , as Mr. Hunt has broken his promises to his wife , he will break his promises to the people of Bristol . '
These are not Mr. Walker 's words , but you have here his reasoning , and from it you may judge of the shifts to which Mr. Hunt 's adversaries are driven .
As well might Mr. Walker tell you that you will break any promise that you may make to your neighbours , because you have not wholly renounced the Devil and all his works , and all the pomps and vanities of this wicked world , as you , in your baptism , promised and vowed to do .
If Mr. Walker 's argument were a good one , a man who lives in a state of separation from his wife ought to be regarded as a man dead in law  or , rather , as a man excommunicated by the Pope .
If his promises are good for nothing when made to electors , they are good for nothing when made to any body else .
He can not , therefore , be a proper man for any body to deal with , or to have any communication with  and , in short , he ought to be put out of the world , as being a burden and a nuisance in it .


There is something so absurd , so glaringly stupid , in this , that it is hardly worth while to attempt a further exposure of it , or I might ask the calumniating crew , who accuse Mr. Hunt of disloyalty , whether they are ready to push their reasoning and their rules up to peers and princes , and to assert that they ought to be put out of power if they cease to live with their wives .
They would say , no  and that their doctrine was intended to apply only to those who had the boldness to attack corruption .
The man who does that is to be as pure as snow  he is to have no faults at all .
He is to be a perfect Saint  nay , he is to be a great deal more , for he is to have no human being , not even his wife , to whisper a word to his disadvantage .
`` You talk of mending the constitution , '' said an Anti-jacobin to Dr. Jebb , when the latter was very ill , `` mend your own : '' and I have heard it seriously objected to a gentleman that he signed a petition for a Reform of Parliament while there needed a reformation amongst his servants , one of whom had assisted to burden the parish  just as if he had on that account less right to ask for a full and fair representation of the people !
After this , who need wonder if he were told not to talk against rotten boroughs while he himself had a rotten tooth , or endeavour to excite a clamour against corruption when his own flesh was every day liable to be corrupted to the bone ?


After this , Gentlemen , I trust that you are not to be cheated by such wretched cant .
With Mr. Hunt 's family affairs you and I have nothing to do , any more than he has with ours .
We are to look to his conduct as a public man , and , if he serve us in that capacity , he is entitled to our gratitude .
Suppose , for instance , the plague were in Bristol , and the only physician , who had skill and courage to put a stop to its ravages , was separated from his wife and living with the wife of another man  would you refuse his assistance ?
Would you fling his prescriptions into the kennel ?
Would the canting Messrs. Mills and Elton and Walker exclaim , `` no !
we will have none of your aid  we will die rather than be saved by you , who have broken your marriage vows ! ''
Would they say this ?
No  but would crawl to him , would supplicate him , with tears in their eyes .
And yet , suffer me to say , Gentlemen , that such a physician in a plague would not be more necessary in Bristol than such a man as Mr. Hunt now is  and that the family affairs of a Member of Parliament is no more a matter of concern with his constituents than are the family affairs of a physician a matter of concern with his patients .
When an important service had been received from either , it would be pleasanter for the benefited party to reflect that the party conferring the benefit was happy in his family  but , if the case were otherwise , to suppose the benefit less real , or the party conferring it entitled to less gratitude , is something too monstrously absurd to be entertained by any man of common sense .


The remainder of my subject I must reserve for another Letter , and in the mean while , I am , Gentlemen , your sincere friend , Wm. COBBETT .
Botley , July 27 , 1812 .


By the insertion of these letters , which were published at the time , I shall give the reader a pretty clear insight into the whole of my exertions at that period .
My doing this will show that I entertained and avowed exactly the same principles of politics at that moment which I do at this moment , and that I have not deviated to the right or to the left ever since  and thus I think I shall be enabled , by unquestionable documentary proof , to shew that I have been the consistent undeviating friend of universal liberty up to the present day .


It was generally imagined that the return of Mr. Davis would be rendered void by a committee of the House of Commons , and I was preparing my case and ready to attack him , as one of the most corrupt and unprincipled pillars of a corrupt administration , when the Parliament was dissolved , by proclamation , on the 29th of September , which at once put an end to my labours relating to that petition .
As soon as the Parliament was dissolved , I addressed a public letter to the Electors of Bristol , promising them to be at my post on the day of election  which promise , as will hereafter he seen , I scrupulously observed .


As a petitioner , who had given the proper securities to try the merit of his appeal , I was entitled to a seat below the Bar in the House of Commons , and I occasionally availed myself of this privilege .
During the latter part of this Parliament , an interesting discussion took place in the House of Commons , upon the subject of the treatment of prisoners in Lincoln Gaol , to which Mr. Finnerty and Mr. Drakard had been sentenced by the Judges of the Court of King 's Bench ( Lord Ellenborough , Judges Grose , Le Blanc , and Bayley , ) for the term of eighteen months each , for Libels .
Mr. Finnerty had previously sent up a petition , but this discussion arose upon Sir Samuel Romilly presenting a petition from Thomas Houlden late a prisoner for debt in the said Gaol of Lincoln .
Sir Samuel moved for a committee of the House , to inquire into the grounds of the complaint preferred by Mr. Houlden against MERRYWEATHER , the Gaoler and Dr. CALEY ILLINGWORTH , a Parson Justice , and Visiting Magistrate .
In the 22d volume of Cobbett 's Register , a full and ample account of this interesting debate is given , accompanied by some very just and most appropriate remarks .
In speaking of Mr. Finnerty 's conduct , in bringing this affair before the public , Mr. Cobbett says , `` By his courage and perseverance he has not only bettered his own condition , but that of others also  and is now , I hope , in a fair way of doing the public a still greater service .
The conduct of the Magistrates , as they are called , but of the Justices of the Peace , as they ought to be called , stands in need of investigation more than that of almost any other description of men in authority  the powers which they possess are , when one reflects on them , really terrific  if their conduct is not to be investigated , what responsibility is there ?
What check is there ?
And in what a state are the people who are so much within their power ? ''
This was Mr. Cobbett 's opinion in 1812 , but it appears that similar dreadful evils in 1821 and 1822 , are not worthy Mr. Cobbett 's attention , neither have they been thought of sufficient import to excite the interest of his readers , even although they have been grappled with and exposed in a much more efficient manner , within the walls of Ilchester Gaol .
I have not the least doubt in my own mind , from what I have heard from the most respectable authority , but that the Gaoler , MERRYWEATHER , and the Parson Justice , Dr. CALEY ILLINGWORTH , were at that time equally criminal with the Gaoler BRIDLE , and the Parson Justice Dr. HUNGERFORD COLSTON , at the present time .


I believe , through the exertions of Sir Samuel Romilly , a commission was sent down to Lincoln , to inquire into the conduct of the Gaoler , c. , and from that time forth the affair was completely hushed up , and the said worthy Gaoler was considered as a much injured calumniated man .
This gentleman Gaoler , it seems , has feathered his nest pretty handsomely .
With a handsome salary , besides pickings , `` cheese parings and candle-ends , '' c. he has an elegant garden of two acres , fitted up with hot-houses , c. equal to any nobleman 's , the finest wall fruit , c. c.  the fruit from which walls and hot-houses finds its way upon the table of the Visiting Justices .
By these and other means , Mr. MERRYWEATHER , I am told , contrives to lead the Worthies as completely by their noses as Bridle did some of the Somersetshire Worthies .
-- When , however , we call to mind who and what these said Magistrates are , and how they are appointed , this is not to be wondered at so much .
It should always be kept in recollection that ONE HUNDRED POUNDS a year qualifies any man for a Magistrate  and that they are all appointed by the Lord Chancellor , at the recommendation of the Lord Lieutenant of the County , who is appointed by the Ministers of the Crown  and that , therefore , the Lord Lieutenant take cares to recommend gentlemen whose principles and politics are well known .
In most counties they also take care to have a sufficient sprinkling of Parsons in the Commission of the Peace , a precious and over-whelming sample of which breed we have in this county .
I have frequently been admonished , by some very worthy men , for making use of the term PARSON so often , it being looked upon as rather derogatory to the CLOTH  but , really , gentlemen must excuse me .
If the Clergy do not degrade themselves , nothing that I can say will ever bring them into disrepute .
Why , it was only the other day that I saw , by the Police Report , published the 19th March , 1822 , I think it was , that a Clergyman of the Church of England was committed to one of the Prisons of the Metropolis , as a ROGUE and VAGABOND !
I have accidentally laid my hand upon it , and I will insert it as a proof of what a Parson can be .
GUILDHALL .
-- R.S -- , a clergyman who , we understand , once enjoyed considerable popularity , was brought before Alderman BROWN , on a charge of having committed an act of vagrancy .
Mr. Dunsley , hosier , Cheapside , stated , that on the previous night the prisoner came to his shop , and begged charity for himself and family .
Ha stated that he had not himself for a considerable time tasted bread , and that his wife and children were lying in a deplorable condition at some place in Ratcliffe-highway .
The prisoner was in a disgraceful state of intoxication .
The complainant , who knew him , remonstrated with him upon disgracing himself as an ordained clergyman , by presenting himself in such a condition .
The prisoner upon this changed his tone , said he would have relief before he quitted the shop , and became so violent in his abuse , and so outrageous in his conduct , that the complainant was under the necessity of availing himself of the protection of an officer , to whom he gave the prisoner in custody .
This , the prosecutor said , was the third time he had been so treated by the prisoner .
The prisoner , in an eloquent address , deprecated the wrath of the prosecutor , by admitting that his conduct had been most disgraceful .
But he declared it was done without the slightest reflection , and that his aberrations were occasioned by a contusion which he received on the brain whilst on service in Egypt .
His family , he admitted , were well provided for , and he promised if he were this time forgiven , to retire to the country , and endeavour to live upon his half-pay of fifty-four pounds per annum , in solitude and repentance .
All the eloquence of the unfortunate Divine on this occasion proved unavailing .
Mr. Dunsley pressed the execution of the law , stating that he had on former occasions received promises of this kind , which were never thought of by the prisoner after his release .
The Alderman expressed great pain at seeing a Clergyman in such a situation , but found himself compelled to put the law in force .
He committed the prisoner to the Compter for fourteen days , as a `` rogue and vagabond . ''


I could exhibit some living specimens of Clergymen of the Church of England , in this county , that would not only be a match for the worthy described in this police report , but would far surpass in infamy what is here held up as an example to the world .
I could produce an instance of a man , or at least a thing in the garb of a man , the opprobrium and scorn of human nature , dressed up on a Sunday in the robes of priesthood , mounted in the pulpit and defiling the very show of religion , by pretending to read and preach lessons of holiness and godliness to those who , the night before , had witnessed him in a state of beastly intoxication , at a common village alehouse , not only degrading the character of a clergyman , but even that of the lowest and most abandoned of the human species , by exhibitions of his person , most indecent and most revolting to humanity  nor am I alluding to this as a solitary instance of such conduct , but to his common practice in the presence of the lowest of his parishioners .
I am not drawing the picture of an imaginary monster , but of a living clergyman of this county  and I could describe others equally disgusting .
These are pretty examples of morality  these are pretty specimens of clerical purity !
There is seldom a week passes over my head that I do not receive some evidence of the abandoned behaviour of some of the clergy  and is not this a precious race of men out of which to select Magistrates !
In fact , I scarcely ever see a farmer , who has not some tale to tell me , of the rapacity , immorality , or injustice , of some one of these Parson Justices  one and all exclaiming against the tythe system , which does more to uphold infidelity than ever did all the works of Voltaire , Rousseau , Mirabaud , Paine , and all the theological writers that ever existed , put together .


Let it be always remembered , that I know many very honourable exceptions , even in this county , which appears to be notorious for profligate and time-serving parsons  for instance , there is the Rev. Dr. Shaw , of Chelvey , near Bristol  a better christian , both in principle and practice , does not exist .
A more honourable , upright , and public spirited man does not live  England can not boast a more pious and exemplary divine  in him is combined the gentleman , the scholar , the liberal and enlightened patriot , and real christian .
He is an honour to his country , and he does justice to that profession of which he forms one of the brightest ornaments .
Although labouring under the pressure of ill health , and approaching the age of eighty , this venerable divine has made two pilgrimages , a distance of nearly forty miles , to visit the `` Captive of Ilchester , '' during his incarceration , to console , to comfort , to cherish , and to cheer him in his dungeon .
What a contrast does this worthy and pious clergyman furnish , to the Clerical Parson Justice , Dr. Colston !
It would be dangerous for me to draw that contrast  a person who did not know the fact would scarcely believe that two dignified clergymen of the same diocese , that two doctors of divinity , could form two such opposite characters .
For the honour of the county of Somerset , and of the cloth also , I can boast the kindness and attention of many other clergymen , and to no one do I stand more indebted for repeated acts of that nature than to the patriotic and public spirited clergyman , the Rev. Henry Cresswell , the Vicar of Creech St. Michael .
I am proud to bear testimony to his zealous co-operation to assist me and the worthy Alderman Wood , to procure the liberation of poor old Mr. Charles Hill , who was falsely imprisoned and wrongfully detained in this Bastile for SIXTEEN YEARS .
I had the happiness to see him liberated , in spite of his remorseless persecutors , who have repeatedly sworn , ever since I have been here , that he should never leave Ilchester Gaol alive .
It will be recollected that it was this poor man 's sufferings that I made the ground-work of my charges against the monster of a gaoler and the Magistrates .
How much more delightful is the occupation to record the good , than the evil deeds of one 's fellow creatures  how much more gratifying is it to me , to write of a Dr. Shaw , than of a Dr. Colston !


When the Parliament was dissolved I was at Rowfant , in Sussex , attending to my farm , where Sir Francis Burdett and his brother Jones Burdett had recently been to pay me a visit , for a few days .
The Baronet wishing to purchase an estate in that county , I showed him over several that were to be sold , but he saw none that he liked , except the one which I occupied , Rowfant House , and the estate of a thousand acres of land attached to it .
This was certainly a most gentleman-like property , and just such an estate as would have suited the Baronet .
The party who had purchased it would also have been very happy to have disposed of it , if they could , to have got rid at once of the inconvenience of the lease which they had granted to me  and as the Baronet appeared to have set his mind upon it , and had got the ready cash , so that price did not appear to be an object to him , there seemed to be no obstacle  but , as I saw the danger of a disagreement between him and myself , in case he should purchase it , I made him fully acquainted with the nature of my lease , which empowered me to grub up and destroy six thousand thriving young oak trees  a measure of all others that would have been the most annoying to him , because , instead of grubbing up one tree , he would have planted thousands and encouraged the growth of timber , which was so congenial to the soil .
I perceived very clearly that , were he to purchase the estate , he would give me my own price for the lease , or any sum , to save the trees .
Instead , however , of thinking of my own interest , I was anxious to avoid every thing that could produce a quarrel or a shyness between us , and therefore I took care to put him fully upon his guard , and to conceal nothing from him , expecting , at all events , that he would consult me about the terms that I would take to give up the lease , or at least to give up that part of it which empowered me to destroy the timber .
It was obvious to me that I could make a handsome sum out of the Baronet , which would have been of no small importance to me , and yet would have been nothing to him who was so rich .
But I repeat , that I acted from the most disinterested motives , and far from planning how I could make the most of him , I was excessively anxious to avoid whatever might lead to any thing like a money transaction between us .
For this reason I unreservedly laid open the whole affair to him , informing him upon what terms I had offered to forbear to grub the timber , and almost urging him not to think of purchasing the estate , with such a lease upon it , till he had reflected whether he could approve of my conditions for giving up the lease .
I believe that there were few men in the kingdom who would have so acted as I did , but I valued the friendship of Sir Francis Burdett far above any pecuniary consideration .
The Baronet was a most delightful visitor , a gentleman-like , easy , unassuming , cheerful inmate  and as we had every comfort at Rowfant compatible with the residence of a country gentleman , both he and his brother , but particularly Sir Francis , expressed themselves as well pleased with their reception as we were with our visitors .


About a week after the Baronet left us , I received a letter from the persons who were concerned for the proprietors of Rowfant , to say that they had entered into a treaty with Sir Francis Burdett for the estate at Rowfant , which treaty they expected would be completed in a few days .
I was rather surprised at this intelligence  and although I concluded that Sir Francis Burdett had made up his mind to purchase the estate and comply with my terms  and although I knew that it would answer the purpose of Sir Francis to give me what I asked , even had it been double the sum , yet I had a sort of inherent dread of any money transaction between us , a sort of presentiment that it might be the cause of some disagreement , which might end in shyness .
I therefore wrote to him immediately , requesting him by all means not to purchase the estate till he and myself had settled definitively the terms upon which I was to give him up the lease , as I knew that he was also desirous at once to have the house as a residence .
I did this from the purest motives , and from a most anxious wish not to have the Baronet in my power  for fear that he might suspect me of having made a market of him .
I believe , nevertheless , that the very means that I took to prevent any chance of any thing of the sort , tended to create a suspicion on his part , and he suddenly broke off the bargain , and never mentioned the subject after except in a casual manner .
Thus did it happen , I have no doubt , that , from an over delicacy in striving to avoid every thing like the shew of over-reaching , or taking advantage of the Baronet 's liberality , I excited in him a suspicion which I by no means merited .
As it turned out afterwards that political disagreements occurred between us , I am , however , most happy that we never had any the slightest money transaction .
Some time after this , I disposed of the lease of this estate for five hundred pounds more than I should have demanded of him  a fact which proves at once that I acted towards him in the most honourable manner , and that I had no reason to regret his not having purchased the property .


On the 15th of August Mr. Cobbett published his Third Letter to the Independent Electors of Bristol , and , as these letters will give the reader a clear insight into the whole affair , I shall insert the whole of them in this work .
This Bristol election was a very important transaction of my history , and one to which , I have no doubt , I may fairly attribute some part of my sentence of TWO YEARS AND SIX MONTHS , and a very considerable portion of the persecution and ill-treatment which I have experienced from the local authorities and Magistrates of this county  and for this reason I wish to have the whole placed fairly upon record .


TO THE INDEPENDENT ELECTORS OF BRISTOL .


GENTLEMEN , -- Before I resume the subject , upon which I addressed you in my last , give me leave to explain to you what I mean by an independent elector .
I do not mean a man who has money or land enough to make him independent  for , I well know , that money and land have no such effect  as we see every day of our lives , very rich men , and men of what is called family too , amongst the meanest and most dirty dependents of the ministry or the court .
Independence is in the mind  and I call independent that man , who is , at all times , ready to sacrifice a part , at least , of what he has , and to brave the anger and resentment of those from whom he derives his living , rather than act , in his public capacity , contrary to the dictates of his own mind .
This is what I mean by an independent man .
The journeyman who carries all his fortune in a silk handkerchief is as likely to be an independent man as is a Lord or a ` Squire  and , indeed , we find him much oftener worthy of the name .


It is to men of this description that I address myself upon the present occasion , and to their attention I now beg leave to recall some of the circumstances of the late election at Bristol , or , rather , the late contest  for , according to my notion of the law , there can be no election where soldiers are present during any portion of the time , from the beginning to the end of the poll .


Of the two candidates , generally , I have spoken before  but , I now wish to draw your attention more particularly to the pledges tendered you , and given you , by Mr. Hunt .
He promised and vowed three things : 1st .
That he never would , as long as he lived , either directly or indirectly , pocket a single farthing of the public money .
This , Gentlemen , is , with me , and so , I trust , it is with you , a capital point .
Indeed , it always appears to me necessary to the safety of the electors , as far as the fidelity of their member goes .
If the man elected can take the public money , is not the temptation too great for most men ?
In short , what can be more absurd , what can be more revolting to reason , what more shocking to common sense , than the idea of a man 's being a guardian of the public purse , while , at the same time , he votes , in that capacity , part of the people 's money into his own pocket ?
In all the other situations of life we see the payer and the receiver a check upon each other  but , in the case of a Member of Parliament who receives part of the public money , there is no such check .


We are often asked , whether we would wish gentlemen of great talents to serve the country as Secretaries of State , Chancellors of the Exchequer , c. c. without any pay ?
To which I , for myself , answer no .
I would not only have them paid , but well paid  but I would not have them sit in parliament while they received the pay .
If we are told that this is impracticable , we point to the experience in its support  for , in the United States of America , there are no paid officers in the Legislature .
No man can be a member of either House who is in the receipt of a six-pence of the public money under the Executive  and , what is more , he can not receive any of the public money , in the shape of salary , during the time for which he has been elected , if the office from which the salary is derived has been created or its income increased since his election .
This is the case in America .
There are no chancellors of the exchequer , no secretaries of state , or of war , or of the admiralty , in either House of Congress  there is no Treasury Bench  there are no ministers and none of those other things of the same kind , and which I will not here name .
Yet is America now exceedingly well governed  the people are happy and free  there are about eight millions of them , and there are no paupers  in that country poor men do not , to be sure , crawl almost upon their bellies before the rich , but , there are very few murders .
I lived eight years in the largest city in the country , and there was no human being hanged , or otherwise put to death for a crime , while I lived there .
The country , therefore , must be pretty well governed , and yet there is no member of either House of the Legislature who is in any office whatever under the government .
The members are paid for their time , and paid their expenses to and from the place of sitting .
They are appointed by the people and paid by the people  they are the people 's representatives , and are not suffered to be the servants of , or to receive pay from , any body else .


Here , then , we have a proof , an experimental proof , of the practicability of conducting a government without giving placemen seats in the Legislature .
And , though the positive pledge may , in all cases , not be insisted on , the principle ought to be clearly understood  and , where the candidate is not very well known indeed , and has not had long trial , I am for insisting upon the positive pledge .
This pledge Mr. Hunt has given you , and you must be well assured , that , if he were disposed to break it , he would not dare to do it .
For this alone I should prefer him to either of the other candidates , both of whom , all three of whom , you may be assured , have in view either public money or title , both of which Mr. Hunt disclaims .
The 2nd pledge that Mr. Hunt has given you is , that he will endeavour , if elected , to do away all the sinecure places , and all the pensions not granted for real services .
This is a pledge which I deem of great importance .
The sum of money expended annually in this way has been stated by Sir Francis Burdett at nearly a million of pounds sterling , that is to say , a sum sufficient to maintain 125,000 poor people all the year round , supposing them not to labour at all I , for my part , should deem the abolition of these places and pensions of far greater importance to us than the gaining of a hundred battles , by land or sea .


The 3rd pledge of Mr. Hunt is , that he will , if elected , do all that in him lies to procure for the nation a peace and a Reform of Parliament .
Now , Gentlemen , look back for the last 20 years  reflect on what has passed during that time  and then say , whether you sincerely believe , that this nation can possibly continue in its present course much longer .
The finger of wisdom , of common sense , points to peace as the only possible means of rescuing ourselves from our dangers  but , Gentlemen , how are we to have peace ?
The terms offered by the Emperor of France are fair  they are , indeed , such as I never expected to see obtained at the close of a negociation  they would , if accepted of , leave us in possession of all our conquests , of all the Islands in the West Indies  of the exclusive fishery of Newfoundland  of the Cape of Good Hope and the French Settlements in Senegal  of the French and Dutch Settlements in the East Indies  of the Isles of France and Bourbon  in short , they would leave us in possession of about 40 millions of conquered people , while France herself would not possess above 17 or 18 millions of conquered people .
And , which is never to be forgotten , they would leave in our hands , the island of Malta itself , which , as you well know , was the avowed object of the war .


Why , then , have we not peace ?
Because we have not reform , it being absolutely impossible , in my opinion , for our present internal system to be continued during a peace which should be accompanied with the usual consequences of peace .
When the present war began , it was stated by the then Minister , Addington , that we were at war because we could not be at peace  and , I suppose , that the same reason would now be given  for , otherwise , it is , I think , impossible to account for the rejection of the late overtures of the Emperor Napoleon , which , as I have , I am persuaded , clearly shown in a former Register , were both honourable and advantageous to England .
Not only , therefore , will this country , in my opinion , never regain its former state of freedom and happiness without a reform of parliament  but , I am convinced , that , without such reform , it will never again have peace with France .


This being the case , it must be an inexcusable folly for you to elect any man who is not decidedly for a reform of the parliament  and , amongst all your candidates , Mr. Hunt is the only man who has declared for that reform .
The partisans of Sir Samuel Romilly say , that they doubt not that he will declare for reform .
I do not think that he ever will  at least , not till such men as Mr. Hunt shall have made it inconvenient to be against reform .
If Sir Samuel Romilly were for reform , why should he be so loath to make the declaration ?
He has told you , that those who promise most perform least  but , if this were to be taken as a rule without an exception , there would , at once , be an end of all promises and engagements between man and man .
In this case , however , the rule did not apply  for he might have expressed his wish to see reform take place without making any promise upon the subject .
This he did not do  and , during the whole time that he has been a candidate for Bristol , he has not once mentioned , in any way , the subject of parliamentary reform .


There is , besides , with regard to Sir Samuel Romilly , a most suspicious circumstance  and that is , that his leading partisans all belong to that corrupt faction , which has been designated under the name of Whigs , and which faction is , if possible , more hostile to reform than the followers of Pitt and Perceval themselves .
I have frequently asserted , that the two factions cordially unite upon all occasions , where an attack is made upon corruption in general , or where the interests of party are concerned .
We saw them join hand-in-hand and heart to heart when the late Perceval and Castlereagh were accused by Mr. Madocks , on the 11th of May , 1809 , on the anniversary of which day Perceval was shot , at the door of the very place where he had before triumphed .
We saw them join in rallying round that same Perceval when Sir Francis Burdett was sent to the Tower under the escort of thousands of soldiers .
We saw them join in reprobating the Address to the Prince Regent proposed by Sir Francis Burdett .
In short , upon all occasions when something was to be effected hostile , decidedly hostile , to the people , the two factions have cordially joined  they have , for the time , become one .
They hate one another  they would destroy one another  but , they love the public money more than they hate one another  and , therefore , when the system is in danger , they always unite .
They cordially unite also against every man who is hostile to the system .
They hate him even more than they hate each other  because he would destroy the very meat that they feed on .


Hence , Gentlemen , the united rancour of the factions against Mr. Hunt , and their united approbation of Mr. Bragge Bathurst .
But , of this latter we must take more particular notice .
There has appeared in the Bristol newspapers a publication respecting a Meeting for the purpose of uniting in a testimony of gratitude to Bragge Bathurst .
At this meeting the following resolutions were passed  but , I beg you to observe , first , the language and sentiments of the resolutions , and next , who were the principal actors in the scene .
The whole of the publication was as follows : -- `` At a General Meeting of the Merchants , Traders , and other Inhabitants of this City , convened by public advertisement , for the purpose of uniting in a testimony of gratitude to their late Representative , the Right Hon. Charles Bathurst , -- THOMAS DANIEL , Esq. in the Chair , -- the following Resolutions were moved by Michael Castle , Esq. and seconded by John Cave , Esq. and carried unanimously : -- 1st , That the conduct of the Right Hon. Charles Bathurst has been distinguished , during 18 years that he represented this City in Parliament , by a meritorious attention to its local interest , and an invariable zeal for the individual concerns of its inhabitants , entirely independent of every consideration of political party .
-- 2d , That in the retirement of the Right Hon. Charles Bathurst from that elevated situation which he so deservedly held amongst us , we feel desirous of testifying , in this public manner , the gratitude we entertain for services that have reflected so much honour upon his abilities and exertions .
-- 3d , That a Subscription be now entered into , for the purpose of presenting the Right Hon. Charles Bathurst with a permanent Token of our esteem and approbation of services that have been so frequently called upon , and attended to with so much advantage to the City at large .
-- 4th , That a Committee be appointed of those Gentlemen who signed the requisition for the call of this meeting , together with any of those who may be subscribers , for the purpose of carrying into execution the wishes and intentions of this meeting .
-- 5th , That the name of Mr. Robert Bruce be added to the twenty gentlemen who have signed the requisition , for the purpose of forming a Committee , with any other of the Subscribers .
-- 6th , That Mr. Thomas Hellicar be requested to take upon himself the office of Treasurer .
-- THOMAS DANIEL , Chairman . ''


Now , Gentlemen , you will observe , that here is as decided praise as men can bestow .
Mr. Bragge is praised for his eighteen years ' conduct , though , during that time , he has been doing every thing which the supporters of Sir Samuel Romilly affect to disapprove of .
To describe his conduct under three heads , it has been this : he has uniformly supported Pitt and the war  he has uniformly distinguished himself as an opponent of Parliamentary Reform , and was one of the foremost in reprobating Mr. Madocks 's motion  he has , during the 18 years of war and national misery , been a great part of the time a placeman , and he is now a placeman in possession of a rich sinecure , with immense patronage attached to it .
And , it is for conduct like this that these townsmen of yours are about to give a testimony of their gratitude !


If , however , this were confined to the friends of Bragge Bathurst , to those who profess his principles , all would be in its place , all would be natural enough .
But , you will bear in mind , Gentlemen , that the two factions have united here , and these resolutions , extolling to the skies a sinecure placeman , a Pittite , and a known and decided enemy of reform of parliament  you will bear in mind that these resolutions were moved by Mr. MICHAEL CASTLE , the very man who introduced Sir Samuel Romilly into your city  the very man in whose carriage Sir Samuel Romilly entered your city  the very man who filled the chair at Sir Samuel Romilly 's dinner .
This was the man selected to MOVE resolutions expressive of the gratitude of the people of Bristol for the conduct of Bragge Bathurst , the sinecure placeman , the supporter of Pitt and the war , and the decided and distinguished enemy of parliamentary reform .
This was the man , this Mr. Michael Castle , to tell the world in the most solemn manner , that the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly approved of the conduct of the very man , whom they , when canvassing you for your votes , represented as unfit to be your member .


Gentlemen , can you want any further proof of the political hypocrisy of such men as Mr. Charles Elton , and Mr. Mills , and Mr. Castle ?
Can you be made to believe that they are sincere when they tell you that they wish for a reform of any sort ?
The truth is , they wish to put in a member of their own , that they may enjoy the benefit of his patronage  but , in doing this , they must take care not to do any thing hostile to the system , for without the existence of that all their prospects are blasted .
You see , that they have in these resolutions , no scruple to declare the vile and abominable principle upon which they act .
They here most explicitly avow , that they are grateful to Bragge Bathurst for the zeal he has shown in the individual concerns of his constituents .
That is to say , in getting them places under the government  or , in other words , in enabling them to live upon the taxes  that is to say , upon the fruit of the people 's labour .
I told you , in my first letter , that they had no other object than this in view  that one part of them only wanted to put in Sir Samuel Romilly that he might give them more of the taxes than thev had been able to get from Bragge Bathurst .
Mr. Hunt had told you this before  and now you see the fact openly avowed .
The jobbers on both sides plainly tell whoever is to be their candidate , that he must take care of their individual concerns .


This , Gentlemen , is the real cause of the hatred , the rancour , the poisonous malice , of both factions towards Mr. Hunt , who makes open war upon the tax-eaters .
This is the reason why they hate him .
There are other reasons , but this is the great reason of all  and you may be well assured , that you will see both the factions always unite against any man , be he who he may , who is opposed to the system of places and pensions .
But , what , then , must be the extent of the hypocrisy of the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly !
They pretend that they wish for a reform of parliament , when they must well know , that such a reform would totally destroy the very root whence spring those individual benefits for which they express their gratitude to Bragge Bathurst .
Sir Samuel Romilly , as I had before the honour to observe to you , has never told you that he is for a reform of the parliament  and , after the publication of these Resolutions , moved by the man who introduced him into your city , there are very few amongst you , I trust , who will not be convinced , that his partisans are well convinced that he will not support such a reform as shall give us a chance of destroying that corruption which is now eating out the very vitals of the country .


Clear as it is , then , that both the factions are your enemies , I hope that you will stand firmly by each other in opposition to so detestable an union .
Both factions are hateful  but of the two the Whigs are the worst  because they disguise their hostility to the cause of freedom .
Take , however , only a little time to reflect , and you will not be deceived by the cant of Mr. Charles Elton and Mr. Mills , both of whom , I would venture my life , have bespoke places for themselves in case of success to their candidate .
They well know that the success of Mr. Hunt would defeat their scheme , and therefore they hate him .
They do not dislike him for his separation from his wife  they would not give his wife a bit of bread to save her life , if she was a beggar instead of being , as she is , well and liberally provided for  they would see her drop from their door dead in the street , rather than tender her a helping hand  but , to speak of the separation suits the turn of the hypocrites  by having recourse to it , they can cast calumny on their foe without letting their real motive appear .
They would , if they dared , tell him that he is a cruel savage for endeavouring to prevent them from pocketing the public money  but this would not suit their purpose  and they therefore resort to his separation from his wife .


Trusting now , Gentlemen , that you see clearly the motives of the two factions , and that their main object is to get a share of the public money , I shall not fear , that , at another election , you will resolutely endeavour to defeat that vile object .
The whole mystery lies here .
It is the public money that the factions want to get at .
They are not attached to any particular set of men or of means .
Whoever or whatever will give them the best chance of getting at the public money is the man or the thing for them  and Sir Samuel Romilly has been brought forward upon the recent occasion , only because there were a set of men , who found that they could not get so much of the public money as they wanted under any of the other candidates .
They found the old ground too thickly settled for them  they therefore resolved to get new ground of their own  and they chose Sir Samuel Romilly , because he was at once likely to be a placeman , and was a man of a good deal of deserved popularity .
They , if he were elected , would say as Falstaff did of the moon : `` the chaste Diana , under whose influence we steal . ''
They mean to make a passage of him through which to get at the people 's earnings  and , all this , too , under the guise of virtue and patriotism .
With me there wanted nothing to produce conviction of this fact before  and now , I trust , that there is no man who will affect to doubt it  now when we see them moving and signing resolutions , applauding the conduct of a member of parliament who has become a sinecure placeman , and who is notoriously a most decided enemy of reform of parliament .


With these facts before him , it is not to be believed , that any one amongst you will give his vote for this hypocritical faction .
If Sir Samuel Romilly will declare openly for reform of parliament , you will do well to vote for him and for Mr. Hunt  but , if he will not , it is your duty not only not to vote for him , but to do all that lies in your power to prevent his being elected  for , be you well assured , that , without a reform of parliament , no man living can save this country or render it any essential service .
There is no national evil that we feel , be it small or great , which may not be traced to the want of a parliamentary reform , and such a reform , too , as shall cut up corruption by the roots .


It is with great pleasure that I perceive Mr. Hunt has promised you to be a candidate at Bristol at every future election , as long as he has life and health , unless he should be a member when a vacancy takes place for your city .
This promise ensures you an election  it secures you against being sold like dumb creatures  it secures you the exercise of your right of voting , and the right of now and then openly reproaching and loading with just maledictions any of the wretches who may betray you .
To be a member for Bristol , in future , a man must stand an election of some days , at any rate  no one will be able to get in by a mere day 's parade  an election at Bristol will not in future be a ceremony like that of choosing a churchwarden  your voices will be heard , and , I hope , they will always carry terror to the hearts of the corrupt .
You have only to persevere .
To keep steadily on .
To suffer nothing to turn you aside .
Your enemies can not kill you , nor can they do you harm .
If they collect and publish lists of your names  you will do well to collect and publish lists of theirs , and then stand your chance for the final effect .
But , above all things , be upon your guard against the fraudulent dealings of the Whigs , who are the worst faction of the two , because they are the greatest hypocrites .
They make use of the name of Sir Samuel Romilly as the means of deceiving you , and of getting a share of the public money into their own pockets  and of this fact I beg you never to lose sight .


I am , Gentlemen , your friend ,


WM. COBBETT .
Botley , Tuesday , 11th August , 1812 .


These three letters will give a clear view of the state of politics at Bristol .
I offered myself as a candidate for that city , not with the expectation of being returned as one of the Members , but from a firm conviction , and , indeed , a thorough knowledge , that it was one of the most corrupt cities in the universe  that the people had been kept in total ignorance and darkness by the intrigues and cabals of the two factions , the Whigs and Tories , in which glorious and praiseworthy work those factions had been ably assisted by the local press of the city .
MATTHEW GUTCH , the Editor of Felix Farley 's Journal , the Ministerial or Tory hack editor , and JOHN MILLS , the Whig hack editor , two beings equally unprincipled in politics , had contributed mainly to assist in perpetuating the ignorance of the people  the whole of the patriotism of the citizens consisting in being devoted tools either to the Whig or Tory factions , blind supporters of the high or the low party .
It will be seen by these letters , that my great object was to rescue the people of Bristol from this deplorable state of ignorance and darkness , into which they had been plunged by the intrigues and unprincipled compromise of these two factions .
How far I was successful in this attempt , may be best deduced from the unwarrantable and villainous abuse that was poured out upon me by all the rascally editors of the public press of that day .
Gutch and Mills vied with each other which could be most scurrilous , and which could tell the greatest number of the most unprincipled and barefaced falsehoods .
It will be seen also , from these letters , that I was assailed by Mr. Charles Elton and Mr. Walker , both supporters of Sir Samuel Romilly  the former the son of Sir Abraham Elton , and the latter an attorney , who published a pamphlet at the time on purpose to abuse one .
When I say that these two gentlemen were the most liberal minded men in the City of Bristol , you may form some idea of the prejudice that was excited against me , and the pains that were taken to put me down .
As , however , Mr. Elton and Mr. Walker have made some amends , by expressing themselves in a very different manner of me since I have been here , I am by no means disposed to bear them any ill-will  on the contrary , I think them two of the very best men amongst the gentry of Bristol , and an exception to the sweeping character which , in my last number , I gave of the Bristol gentlemen , although at the period to which I allude they were two of the foremost to abuse and belie me .
If either of them should read this , I have not the least doubt but they will lament the injustice they did me  the names of both of them appear amongst those who have subscribed to remunerate me for some of my expenses  and I am informed that they liberally promoted the Bristol petition , that was presented to the House of Commons last week by Mr. Bright , one of the Members for that city .
This evidently shews that , if they still remain my political enemies , they are at any rate liberal and generous foes  but I would fain hope that they have by this time convinced themselves from observation , that I am more deserving of their support than their hatred and opposition .
They will have seen that I have , ever since they first saw me at Bristol , been the steady persevering friend of Radical Reform  they will see that I have always advocated the same principles  and they will acknowledge that the very principles and sentiments that I promulgated , during the first election for Bristol , are become almost universal now  that the very same language which I made use of upon the pedestal , in the front of the Exchange , has lately been made use of , and repeated almost verbatim , by Noblemen and Members of Parliament , at county meetings  that the very remedies which at Bristol I declared , in 1812 , to be necessary , to restore the country to freedom and happiness , are now almost universally allowed to be the only remedies in 1822 .
These letters , which were written by Mr. Cobbett , I do not publish for the sake of raking up any old grievances  far from it but I do it for the purpose of maintaining and proving my consistency , and also that , whatever I may have erred in , my errors have sprung from the head and not from the heart .


The reader has seen in these letters , that I promised the electors of Bristol that I would always be a candidate for Bristol , at all future elections  but this , of course , was conditional .
When the proper time comes I shall , I think , give a very satisfactory reason why I did not keep this promise , or at least why I was prevented from doing so  although perhaps , it would , as it turned out , have been much better for me , personally , if I had gone there again , under all the disadvantages which I had to anticipate , rather than have destroyed my health and wasted my property in opposing Sir Francis Burdett for the City of Westminster .
Still , however much I may have suffered upon that occasion , I must persist in thinking that a great public good was effected by it .
These things , however , I shall at least honestly account for , whether my explanation prove satisfactory or not , at the proper epoch of my history .


The general election was to take place in October .
The Bristol election was fixed to commence on the 6th of that month .
On the 5th I arrived once more in Bristol , and I was received , if possible , with more enthusiasm and greater demonstrations of respect than ever by the people .
A most dirty trick was played me by Mr. Protheroe , one of the Whig candidates .
He and his friends , by bribes and threats , got possession of my inn , the Talbot , which I had occupied upon the former occasion  and , as I had arranged to go there again , it created some disappointment to my friends , for these cunning fellows had taken possession of this inn only the day before I arrived in Bristol .
My friends , however , took me as usual to the Pedestal , at the Exchange , where , in addressing the multitude , I informed them of this trick that had been played me , which I had not been aware of till I came into the city .
But I soon convinced these gentry that I was not to be driven out of the city by such means , although I had been informed that all the inn-keepers had been threatened with the loss of their licenses , if they admitted me into their houses .
I declared my resolution to take up my residence upon the Pedestal , where I then stood , if I could procure no other accommodation .
This sort of mean persecution to which I was exposed , generally , however , brings with it its own remedy  and I soon had a message from the mistress of the Swan-inn , in Maryport-street , that she would furnish me with apartments .
It appeared that her husband was a partizan of the Whigs , and would fain have kept me out of his house , but the lady was resolute , and she discovered a degree of spirit and independence , in which the gentlemen of Bristol were lamentably deficient , and I was consequently received into very good quiet apartments , and received every accommodation and attention that I required .


There were four candidates -- Mr. Davis , the White Lion or Tory candidate , Mr. Protheroe , and Sir Samuel Romilly , both of whom stood upon the Whig interest , and myself , who contended upon true constitutional principles , to maintain the right of the people to free election .
The morning came , and I proceeded to the Exchange , where , while I was addressing my friends who had assembled in great numbers , intelligence was brought to me , that the Sheriffs , with the other three candidates and their friends , were gone to the Guildhall , which was filled almost to a state bordering upon suffocation .
Thus , by another trick , had these worthies stolen a march upon me , by filling the hall with their friends before the usual hour .
As no time was to be lost , I proceeded thither with as much speed as the density of the crowd would permit .
I believe that no man except myself would have been allowed to penetrate Broad-street  but I was cheered by friends and even foes , all anxious to assist me to the hustings .
When I came to the hall-door , the steps were so jammed with the people , that it was impossible to penetrate through the solid mass of human bodies , upon which one man , at the top of the stairs , hailed those at the bottom , as follows : -- `` Mount Mr. Hunt upon your shoulders , my friends , and let him pass over us , as he can not get through the crowd . ''
This plan was instantly adopted , and I marched along deliberately stepping upon the shoulders of those assembled , every individual endeavoring to assist me , as I passed amidst the cheers of the whole multitude  but when I sprung upon the hustings , the shout was such as made the old walls of the Guildhall shake , and it was actually so deafening that it was some time before I could hear again .
I found that the greatest confusion and uproar prevailed , in consequence of the Sheriffs having stopped up and barricadoed the Two Galleries with three-inch deal planks , lashed together with strong iron plates and hoops .
These galleries were the very best places for the people to see the election , as they completely overlooked the hustings and the whole court , which was calculated more than any other circumstance to secure fair play .
At any rate , every trick , quibble , and foul proceeding , every fraud and underhanded transaction , that had been attempted at the former election , by the agents of the factions who had combined against me , was detected and exposed , and the detection was exceedingly facilitated by my friends , and the friends of fair play and the freedom of election , some of whom took care to place themselves in these galleries every day  and they were sure to be so completely on the alert , that when any thing escaped my observation , it was sure to be instantly detected by these watchful lookers-on , who , from their peculiar situation , had the most commanding power of seeing every transaction that passed .
This was a most galling circumstance to those who wished to carry on their old pranks , as heretofore , unperceived and undetected .
-- Amongst this number was the worthy perpetual Under Sheriff , Mr. Arthur Palmer .
He appeared to be dreadfully annoyed by being thus rigidly scrutinized  and therefore , as deputy commanding officer over all the minutiæ of benches , tables , seats , c. c. he had , in conjunction with his friend Jerry Osbourn , proposed and planned this notable scheme , to get rid of what they considered as so intolerable a nuisance , by curtailing one-fourth of the space of the hall , which before was infinitely too small for the purpose of holding an election .


In consequence of this obstruction , the greatest uproar ensued , and a scene of tumult followed , such as , in all my previous attendance at public meetings , I had never witnessed before .
The people were highly exasperated at this wanton and daring encroachment upon their rights , as freemen , to the freedom of election  and every now and then we could discover a voice more powerful than the rest exclaiming , `` open the galleries !
down with the planks ! ''
c. c..
The pressure of the crowd towards the hustings now increased to such a degree , and the heat was so intolerable , that the Sheriffs ( the two young Mr. Hillhouses ) appeared greatly alarmed  all were grasping for breath , and I believe that some would have suffered from suffocation , if the Sheriffs had not resorted to the expedient of admitting a little fresh air , by dashing to pieces the large Gothic window , or at least the glass of it , at the back of the hustings , which they did with their swords .
I sat quietly down , and with my arms folded I calmly looked on in silence upon this tremendous scene of uproar and confusion .
Poor Sir Samuel Romilly !
I shall never forget his looks  he stood aghast , and I saw his eyes were frequently turned to me , with a sort of imploring expression .
The Sheriffs , after having in vain made repeated attempts to procure silence , appealed to me , and in the most supplicating manner requested me to address the multitude to obtain it .
I , however , sat firm upon my seat , and resolutely refused to interfere  saying , that I could have no influence , as the Sheriffs had , by a trick , shut out all my friends , and packed the hall with the friends of the other candidates .
I therefore begged them to apply to those candidates , to procure silence from their own partisans .
The Sheriffs did so  but Davis and Protheroe knew they should not be attended to , and consequently they declined to make the attempt .
At length Sir Samuel Romilly stood forward , but without the least possible chance of a single word that he uttered being heard : he retired , and then joined his intreaties to those of the Sheriffs , to request me to address the people to be silent while the Sheriffs read the writ for commencing the election .
For some time I declined to interfere  and urged the knight of the gown and wig to try again , repeating what I had before said , that I could not be expected to have any influence , as the greatest part of my friends were , by a petty trick of the Sheriffs , shut out and left upon the Exchange , while the hall was packed and crammed full by the friends of the other three candidates .
I observed that there were a great majority wearing the colours of Sir Samuel Romilly , and I entreated him to make another attempt to be heard  he did so , but it was all in vain .
They all now repeated their supplications to me , that I would rise and endeavour to gain silence , but for , I suppose , nearly half an hour , I remained immovable .
I thought this a proper opportunity to place the question of my popularity beyond all dispute .
The corrupt hirelings of the press , particularly the corrupt John Mills , the proprietor of the Bristol Gazette , had denied that I was the popular candidate , and claimed this honour for Sir Samuel Romilly  I was therefore determined to put this question at rest at once .
All the corrupt knaves of attorneys , petty-foggers and all , looked to me in the most humble and imploring manner , and they might have looked and implored till this hour , before I would have stirred an inch , or have uttered a word to have gratified them , had I not been loudly called for from all parts of the hall , and the call of the people I instantly obeyed .


The moment that I rose from my seat I was received with three cheers , upon which I gave a slight wave of my hand , and immediately , as if by magic , the most profound silence ensued .
I began as follows : `` In the name of the insulted freemen of Bristol , I demand of the Sheriffs to be publicly informed by whose authority it is that the galleries have been barricadoed ! ''
( loud cheers . )
`` I 'll wait for an answer '' !!!
The Sheriff , the elder Hillhouse , `` an unlicked cub , '' both of them being mere boys , totally incapable of performing the office of Sheriff with any degree of credit to themselves , or honour to the City , drawled out in a faultering voice , `` that the galleries had been examined by the city surveyor , and had been pronounced unsafe . ''
I knew this was a shuffle , as it was evident that the galleries were most substantial  for , being supported by large upright solid pillars , they were capable of sustaining ten times the weight required to fill them with people .
I therefore demanded if the surveyor was present to answer for himself ?
The answer was , no .
The name of the surveyor was demanded , but an abusive answer was given by Mr. Perpetual .
After a shower of hisses from the audience , I deliberately declared it to be an infamous shuffle , a premeditated insult to the citizens , and a step calculated to obstruct the freedom of election , and to promote and screen bribery and corruption .
I , therefore , desired the people to remove the nuisance , by taking down the planks and forcing an entrance into the galleries as usual , and I would be answerable for the consequences .
A sailor instantly scaled the height , and in about twenty minutes the immense barricado was removed , and the planks , iron and all , were handed over the people 's heads into the streets  and thus what had taken Mr. Arthur Palmer several days to erect , was now removed in a few minutes .
The galleries were soon filled with several hundred people , and complete silence was restored .
To accomplish this might altogether have taken up two hours .
Davis , Protheroe , Romilly , and Hunt , were duly and regularly proposed and seconded by their respective friends , and each having addressed the electors , the show of hands was taken by the Sheriffs , and declared by them `` to have fallen upon Mr. Hunt and Sir Samuel Romilly , by a very large majority  '' upon which Davis and Protheroe demanded a poll  and each candidate having polled a few electors , the election was adjourned till the next morning .


My friend Davenport had kindly consented to accompany me to Bristol , and I was surrounded and supported by all my former friends , who had given me their support during the recent contest , with the exception of a Mr. Webb , who did not appear amongst them .
It was soon found that he had openly joined the ranks of the enemy , as his secret intrigues and infamous treachery , during the former election , had been detected by my friends , who found out that every night , after he left my committee , he had proceeded to a secret committee of Mr. Davis , and communicated to them the whole of the plans of my supporters  and , in fact , through this treacherous caitiff they every night knew what we had done , and what we intended to do on the following day .
Although this was a most diabolical act on the part of Mr. Webb , and very unfair upon my committee , of whom he made one , and generally the chairman , yet as I had no secrets , it did not serve the purpose of my opponents much .
To be sure , it in a small degree enabled them to anticipate and frustrate the effect of the plans of my committee  but , as I took a straight forward course , it did not put me off my guard at all , and , besides , as I soon found that all the projects of my committee were known to the enemy , and was , of course , quite sure that we had a spy in our camp , I took good care to keep my order of battle to myself till it was about to be put in force .
I must , however , own that this viper did completely deceive me  as I had not the slightest suspicion of him till after the election , when he was detected , in fact , not till I had it from one of the White Lion Club , that Webb came every night to them , and frequently supped with them after he left my committee  and even then I was incredulous , till he related some particular facts , that put all doubt out of the question , by proving the truth of his information in the most unequivocal manner .


In my address to the electors , I put it fairly to Sir Samuel Romilly , to declare whether he would support a real Reform in Parliament or not  I meant such a Reform as Sir Francis Burdett at that time advocated  and I declared it to be my intention , in case he answered in the affirmative , to give him every aid in my power .
Sir Samuel candidly and honestly declared that he would vote for a reform of abuses , and also that he would always vote for a moderate Reform  but that he could not with consistency favour the kind of Reform for which Sir Francis Burdett was contending .
This reply was received with cheers by his immediate advocates , such as Mister Mills , and Mr. Winter Harris , who had declared to the citizens , upon their canvass , that the Knight was a staunch friend of Reform .
As , however , the Knight had never declared it himself , I thought this the proper time to put the question  the answer to which the great body of the people received , some with surprise and some with disgust .
I then stated my objections to a lawyer , and especially my particular objection to a King 's Counsel , being a Member of Parliament for an independent and populous city  which objection was this , that the moment a counsellor received a silk gown , he accepted a retaining fee from the Crown , to plead at all times against the people .
This assertion was received with cheers from the people , and a burst of indignation from the partizans of Sir Samuel Romilly .
I repeated the assertion , and added , that in case any one of Sir Samuel Romilly 's voters had an indictment preferred against him for a libel , for any offence under the excise laws , for high treason , or , indeed for any offence where the prosecution was in the name of the King , that the worthy counsellor could not plead for his constituent the subject , against his master the King , unless the subject would submit to the juggle of taking out a licence , for which he must pay ten or twelve pounds to the King , to enable the gentleman with the silk gown to plead against the Crown .
This caused a great sensation throughout the hall , and the truth of it was most vociferously denied by the Romillites , many of whom declared that it was a base and false assertion .
John Mills , always foremost at such times with his brazen face and stentorian lungs , roared out that it was a lie .
As this gentleman was remarkably deficient in sense and talent , he endeavoured to make amends by bluster and violence  this will sufficiently account for the vulgarity of his language .
An apology from him was , however , loudly insisted upon by his indignant hearers .
As soon as silence was restored , I turned round to Sir Samuel Romilly , and called upon him to say honestly and fairly whether I had not spoken the truth  and as I stated that I waited for an answer , the Knight came forward amidst the cheers of his partizans .
Knowing what would be the result , I did not fail to cheer also .
Sir Samuel Romilly said he had no hesitation in admitting that what Mr. Hunt bad stated was perfectly true , that a King 's Counsel could not plead for a subject in a criminal prosecution , without a licence from the Crown .
If Sir Samuel Romilly had not been present to admit the fact , these amiable Bristolians would have lied and sworn out of it , but they were now chop fallen , and I was allowed to proceed without any further interruption .


During the whole election afterwards , no statement of mine was contradicted .
I said nothing against Sir Samuel  on the contrary , I gave him full credit for being one of the very , best of the gown and wig gentry  not one offensive personal expression was used by me towards him throughout the whole election  neither did he throw out one insinuation against me  on the contrary , it was the fashion for us to compliment each other .
In fact , he followed my example , and after the poll was closed for the day , he every evening addressed the people upon the Exchange from the window of his Committee-room .
I always gave him the precedence to address them , so that had he been disposed to join his Committee , by endeavouring to practise delusion , I should have immediately detected and exposed any such sophistry upon the spot .
But I will repeat now what I unequivocally stated at the time , that , had the Committee and the friends of the Knight possessed half the liberality and honesty that he did , and practised one-tenth of the fairness that was shewn upon all occasions by Sir Samuel , I have no doubt but he would have been elected with myself , instead of Mr. Davis and Mr. Protheroe .
But the Romillites in Bristol were not a rush better or more liberal than the friends of Davis or Protheroe .
There was as much corruption , bribery , treating , intimidation , and undue influence , exercised on the part of these hypocritical , professed friends of freedom , as there was by the partizans of Davis , who was the avowed enemy of freedom , and the determined , unprincipled champion of tyranny and despotism .
By this conduct the real friends of Reform were disgusted , and the enthusiasm that was so visible during the former election was paralized : neither myself nor any one of my friends ever canvassed for a single vote  the electors had been all canvassed , over and over again , by the partizans of Davis , Protheroe , and Romilly .
I saw that the latter was most heartily sick of being made the tool of the Whig faction , without any chance of being elected .
Sir Samuel frequently told the people that they were indebted to Mr. Hunt for the little share of the freedom of election which they had left them , and although he got behind upon the poll every day , yet he solemnly declared that he would not resign as long as there was a man left to poll for him .
This declaration , however , proved to be a bravado , for he resigned on the eighth day , when there were a considerable number of voters left unpolled in the city , and one half of the out-voters had not been polled .
My friends , Williams , Pimm , Cranidge , Brownjohn , and others , stood firmly and staunchly by me , and Mr. Cossens , one of Sir Samuel Romilly 's committee , I found also to be a staunch friend  and I believe this was the only friend I had amongst them : almost all the freemen that he brought up to the hustings polled for Romilly and Hunt , but all those of Sir Samuel Romilly 's voters , who were under the influence of their masters , were ordered to give plumpers for Sir Samuel Romilly , and all of them were canvassed to do so .
Such , however , as had the spirit to follow the dictates of his conscience , voted for Hunt and Romilly  almost all the London voters did this , although they were urged to vote for Romilly alone .


During this contest , if it may be called one , the notorious Captain Gee was a very active partizan of Mr. Davis 's  he headed a gang of blackguards , a set of second-rate prize-fighters , amongst whom was the notorious Bob Watson .
This gang used to annoy the voters of Sir Samuel Romilly most infamously .
Watson used to come into the box , where ten or twelve of Sir Samuel Romilly 's voters were assembled waiting to poll , and with the assistance of two or three more of his gang , backed on by Captain Gee , he would hustle and drive them all out of the box , and prevent them from giving their votes .
At length , Sir Samuel was induced to snake a serious remonstrance to the Sheriff against such an unwarrantable violation of the freedom of election , and he called upon the Sheriff to have Watson taken into custody , who had actually been assaulting several of his voters in the presence of the Sheriff .
Although Mr. Sheriff had been an eyewitness of these proceedings several times before , yet he felt that , now his attention was thus publicly called to the subject , he could not connive at them any longer  and as Watson had been laying about him in the most outrageous manner , in which he had the audacity to persevere , although called upon by the Sheriff to desist , Mr. Sheriff ordered his constables to take Watson into custody .
Two or three of these guardians of the peace made a faint attempt to obey his orders , but Watson beat them all off , and set them at defiance .
Sir Samuel remonstrated again  the constables were called up , and they informed the Sheriff that , notwithstanding there were fifty of them in the Hall , yet they dared not seize Watson .
Mr. Sheriff , turning to Sir Samuel , said , `` there you hear , Sir , what the constables say , what can I do more than I have done ? ''
This pusillanimous speech made Watson ten times more violent than he was before .
I confess that my blood boiled at hearing such language from the Sheriff  and although I was not personally concerned , as Watson had not touched one man that had my colours in his hat , yet I felt disgusted and angered to see such partial and indecisive conduct on the part of the Sheriff , who actually turned round and appealed to me to know what he should do ?
I replied indignantly , `` why , commit the constables , and seize the daring violater of the law yourself , to be sure  you can not plead that you have not the means to put a stop to this brutal insolence , when you have the power of calling every man to aid and assist you . ''
The Sheriff did not like this advice , or at best he did not attempt to follow it  but made some paltry excuse , saying that it would be very dangerous to interfere with such desperate ruffians , and he could not do more than he had done .


All this time Watson was committing the most daring outrages upon every one who came within reach of his fist .
At length I said aloud to the Sheriff , `` Sir , as your constables have refused to obey your orders , will you authorise me to bring Watson before you ? ''
`` By all means , Mr. Hunt , and I shall really be much obliged to you if you will aid and as sist . ''
I sprang from the hustings upon the table appropriated for the inspectors , and from thence into the box where Watson was , and seized the ruffian by the collar , and almost in the twinkling of an eye I threw him out of the box upon the table .
In the effort I had stripped his coat , waistcoat and shirt , off his back , nearly down to his waist  there he stood riveted in my grasp , with his brawney shoulders naked and exposed to the whole assembly  and the Sheriff and Sir Samuel Romilly appeared to be thunderstruck for the moment .
The Sheriff ordered him into the custody of half a score of constables , and directed that he should be taken before the mayor , either to be committed or bound over to keep the peace , and Sir Samuel Romilly undertook to go and prefer the charges against him .
The fellow was led away thus guarded , and I received the warm thanks of Sir Samuel as well as the Sheriff  the former was very sincere , but the latter was most jesuitical .
Within five minutes the news was brought , that Watson had no sooner got into the street than he upset the ten constables , and made his escape .
However , my decisive conduct had the effect of keeping Mr. Watson out of the hall for the remainder of the election , and the very brave Captain Gee became much less troublesome afterwards .
Those who saw this transaction will never forget it .


Sir Samuel Romilly having resigned on the eighth day , the poll was continued open on the ninth , and the electors continued to offer their votes and poll , although but slowly  yet as it was expected that a considerable number of out-voters from London and other places would arrive on the following day , to vote for Sir Samuel Romilly , some of his friends wished to keep open the poll  but the Sheriff ordered it to be closed at four o'clock on the tenth day , at which time Messrs. Davis and Protheroe , whose forces had been united by a coalition , were declared to be duly elected .
The numbers who voted were stated to be , for Davis 2910 -- Protheroe 2435 -- Romilly 1685 -- Hunt 455 .
The only remarkable thing in these numbers is , that so many should have voted for me , who never spent a shilling , and who never canvassed a vote , and whose friends never spent a penny .
The fact was , that the city had been canvassed by all parties but myself , and every species of bribery , intimidation and corrupt practice had been resorted to by the partizans of the three candidates , by whom an immense sum had been squandered away .
The White Lion candidate and the Club , of course , according to their ancient and laudable custom , scattered their money profusely to purchase votes  they had an interest in doing so  but Mr. Protheroe 's and Sir Samuel Romilly 's appeared to be a bad speculation .
Mr. Protheroe and his friends could not have expended less than twenty thousand pounds .
It was , indeed , said to have cost the two successful candidates and their friends as much as thirty thousand each  and , when all things are taken into consideration , perhaps this is not over-rating it .
The expenses of Sir Samuel Romilly 's election could not have been less than twenty thousand pounds , it might have been more , for it will be recollected that eight thousand were subscribed in one day at the meeting held at the Crown and Anchor in London  so that for every vote given to Sir S. Romilly it cost at least ten pounds a man  and for every vote given to Davis and Protheroe , supposing the number to have been 3,000 and the expenses of each 30,000 l. every vote must have cost twenty pounds a man  while any whole expenses , thither and back , and while I retrained there , did not exceed twenty-five pounds , about a shilling for each vote .
Only look at the contrast , and no one will be surprised at the apparent smallness of the number which voted for me .
I believe almost every man who voted for me voted also for Sir Samuel Romilly  but his partizans evinced full as great an hostility to me as the myrmidons of the White Lion Club did .
Every vote was urged to poll plumpers for Romilly  and , in fact , when they answered that they should poll for Hunt and Romilly , they were frequently told that the friends of Romilly would not accept their votes on any such terms , they would rather lose the votes altogether than suffer them to vote for Hunt .
Between two and three thousand freedoms were taken up and paid for by the friends of the candidates , and all those taken up by the partizans of Romilly were paid for upon the express condition that they did not vote for Hunt , but give plumpers for Romilly .
It was this shameful conduct that palsied all public feeling , and filled the real patriotic friends of Liberty with disgust .
Many hundreds would not come forward at all , as they deemed it absolute folly to lay themselves open to the vindictive revenge of the agents of Government , merely to support such illiberal proceedings  and many hundreds , when they found what was the language of those who canvassed for Sir Samuel Romilly , actually went and voted for Davis and Protheroe , under the impression that , if they must support such a corrupt system , they had much better do it where they could do so with safety , and where they could benefit rather than injure themselves .
If the friends of Sir Samuel , or rather those who wished to make a tool of him to serve their own grovelling interests , had come forward manfully , and declared their readiness to support and vote for Hunt as well as for him , against the coalition of Tories and sham Whigs , the public enthusiasm would have been such that we should undoubtedly have been both elected , instead of Davis and Protheroe , in spite of all the money that the latter were spending to bribe the voters .
But the mean , selfish , temporising conduct of the friends of Romilly , lost him the election .
The fact was , that these hypocritical Whigs would rather have sacrificed Romilly a hundred times , and have elected the devil himself , than they would have voted for Hunt .
`` Take any shape but that ! ''
They knew that I should spoil their sport  they knew that I would not connive at the corruption of the Whigs , any more than I would at that of the Tories  and therefore I was no man for them  and the result was , that Romilly lost his election solely through this dastardly and corrupt feeling .


Sir Samuel took his departure for London immediately , and I went to a friend 's near Bath , whence I returned the next day , by appointment , to dine with my friends in Bristol .
The multitude that came out to receive me , the unsuccessful candidate , surpassed all former precedent .
I was taken as usual to the Exchange , where I pledged myself , if supported at all by the friends of Romilly , that I would present and prosecute a petition to Parliament against the return of Davis and Protheroe .
Upon this , I received the assurance of many of Romilly 's friends , that they would support the petition , by a pecuniary subscription  although they , snake-like , or rather Bristol-men-like , declined to be seen openly supporting it .
I own I did not rely much upon these promises , and it was fortunate that I did not , for , if I had , I should have been most wretchedly deceived .


I returned into the country , and as soon as the Parliament met , I presented the following Petition to the Honourable House : --


`` To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , in Parliament assembled .


`` The Petition of Henry Hunt , of Rowfant House , in the County of Sussex , Esquire  William Pimm , of the City of Bristol , salesman  Thomas Pimm , of the City of Bristol , currier  William Weetch , of the City of Bristol , clothier  and Thomas Gamage , of the City of Bristol , cabinet-maker ,


`` HUMBLY SHEWETH ,


`` That your petitioners , William Pimm , Thomas Pimm , William Weetch , and Thomas Gamage , now are , and at the time of the last election of two Members to serve in the present Parliament for the City of Bristol , were electors of the said City , and claim to have a right to vote , and did vote , at the said election  and at the said election your petitioner Henry Hunt , together with Richard Hart Davis , Esquire , Edward Protheroe , Esquire , and Sir Samuel Romilly , Knight , were candidates to represent the said City , as citizens of the same , in this present Parliament .


`` That the said Richard Hart Davis , Esquire , and Edward Protheroe , Esquire , by themselves , their agents , friends , managers , committees , partizans , and others on his and their behalf , previous to and at the said election , were guilty of gross and notorious bribery and corruption  and at and during the said electron , and previous thereto , the said Richard Hart Davis and the said Edward Protheroe , by themselves , their agents , friends , managers , committees , partizans , and others on their behalf , by gifts and rewards , and promises and agreements , and securities for gifts and rewards , did corrupt and procure divers persons , as well those who were qualified to vote , as those who claimed or pretended to have a right to vote , at the said election , to give their votes for them the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe , Esquires  and did also , by gifts and rewards , and promises , agreements , and securities for gifts and rewards , corrupt and procure divers other persons , being qualified to vote at the said election , to refuse and forbear to give their votes at the same , for your petitioner the said Henry Hunt , or the other candidate , contrary to the laws and statutes enacted for the prevention of such corrupt practices .


`` That the said Richard Hart Davis and the said Edward Protheroe , by themselves , their agents , friends , managers , committees , partizans , and others on their behalf , were guilty of the most flagrant and notorious acts of intimidation , thereby basely and unlawfully procuring by threats , divers other persons , being qualified to vote at the said election , through the fear of being persecuted , ruined , imprisoned , and otherwise ill-used and punished , to forbear to give their votes to your petitioner the said Henry Hunt , or the other candidate , in violation of the rights of the electors , the privileges of Parliament , and the freedom of election .


`` That the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe , by themselves , their agents , friends , managers , committees , partizans , and others on their behalf , after the test of the writ for the said election , and before the election of the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe to serve in the Parliament for the said City of Bristol , did give , present and allow to divers persons , who had votes , or claimed or pretended to have a right to vote at such election , money , meat , drink , entertainment and provision , and make presents , gifts , rewards and entertainments , and make promises , agreements , obligations , to give and allow money , meat , drink , provision , presents , rewards and entertainments , to and for such persons having or claiming or pretending to have a right to vote at the said election  and to and for the use , advantage , benefit , emolument , profit and preferment of such person and persons , in order to their the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe being elected , and to procure the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe to be returned to serve in the present Parliament for the said City of Bristol , in violation of the standing orders and regulations of your Honourable House , and in defiance of the laws and statutes of the realm enacted for preventing charge and expense in the election of Members to serve in Parliament .


`` That a large body of military , consisting of the Middlesex militia , were quartered within two miles of the said City , and many of whom were actually stationed within the walls of the said City of Bristol  and that Colonel Gore , commandant of the Bristol Volunteers , gave orders , the day before the election commenced , to have two pieces of brass ordnance , six pounders , removed from the Grove , where they had been kept for the last two years , and had them placed upon the Exchange , where they remained during the whole of the said election , to the terror of the electors and peaceable inhabitants of the said City of Bristol , regardless of the privileges of your Hon. House , and contrary to the statute of the 8th of George the Second , chap .
30th , in that case made and provided .


`` That a great number of freemen were employed by the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe , or their agents , under the denomination of bludgeon men , or pretended constables , and that various sums of money were paid by the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe , or by their agents , committees , friends , managers or others on their behalf , to influence such of them as were entitled to vote , or pretend to have a right to vote , at the said election , and to induce them to give their votes for the said Richard Hart Davis and Edward Protheroe , Esqrs .


`` That the poll was closed by the Sheriffs , the returning officers , two days sooner than by law directed , notwithstanding your petitioner , the said Henry Hunt , openly protested against it  several freemen at the time having offered to poll for the said Henry Hunt , which votes were refused to be taken and entered on the poll , and notwithstanding the Sheriffs were publicly informed that many other votes were on the road , who were coming with the intent to poll at the said election .


`` Your petitioners therefore humbly pray , that the Honourable House will take the premises into their most serious consideration , and that the election and return of the said Richard Hart Davis , Esquire , and Edward Protheroe , Esquire , maybe declared to be null and void  and that such further relief may be granted to your petitioners as the justice of the case may require . ''
`` HENRY HUNT .
`` WILLIAM WEETCH .
`` WILLIAM PIMM .
`` THOMAS GAMAGE .
`` THOMAS PIMM . ''


Having done this , I entered into the usual securities for the prosecution of the inquiry before a Committee of the Honourable House , which Committee was appointed to be ballotted for on the 24th of February following .


A very extraordinary and unexpected change had in the mean time taken place in Russia  namely , the defeat of the French army , the recovery of Moscow by the Russians , and the rapid retreat of the French amidst a Russian winter .
When Napoleon entered Moscow , the Governor Rochtopchin had , as we have before seen , caused great part of the capital to be destroyed by fire  and as the Emperor saw that it was destruction to attempt to remain there with his army during the winter , he resolved upon a retreat  but he remained too long before he began it .
He first proposed an armistice , which was rejected , and he began his retreat on the ninth of November .
The frost sat in severely nearly a month earlier than usual that year , and the ground was covered with a deep snow .
The Russian armies pursued the retiring invaders  and the sufferings of the French and their allies were indescribable .
The men and horses perished from cold upon the road by hundreds , and their carriages and artillery were broken to pieces and abandoned .
Having accompanied the remains of his army back to Poland , Napoleon set off to Paris , where the Senate shewed him every mark of respect and attachment  but great discontent was very evident amongst the people .
The loss sustained by the French , in men , and what is called the materiel of the army , was immense and incalculable .
Thus was the finest , the bravest , the best disciplined , and the best equipped army that in all probability ever took the field -- an army that , under such a leader , would have been victorious against a world in arms , was overthrown , defeated , routed , and destroyed by the horrid climate , by the artillery of a Russian winter .


Lord Liverpool had been appointed First Lord of the Treasury , and Mr. Vansittart Chancellor of the Exchequer , before the dissolution of the old Parliament .
A number of naval actions took place , which answered no other good purpose but to establish the bravery of our seamen , which was and had been for a long time established beyond the possibility of a doubt  so these expeditions only added to the waste of human blood , and of the treasures of the country .
The new Parliament met on the 24th of November , but very little business was done before Christmas , except granting a sum of 200,000 l. of John Gull 's money to the Russians , as a compensation for the losses which they had suffered by the invasion of the French !


Thus ended the year 1812  the supplies voted out of John Gull 's pocket being sixty-two millions , three hundred and seventy-six thousand , three hundred and fifty-eight pounds .
The average price of wheat , per quarter , was six pounds four shillings and eight-pence , and of the quartern loaf , one and sixpence .
The return of the notes of the Bank of England in circulation was twenty-three millions .
By a return made to Parliament it was ascertained that out of ten thousand two hundred and sixty-one incumbents in England and Wales , only 4421 were residents : the remaining 5840 were of course non-residents  yet this precious priesthood of the established Church is receiving yearly upwards of five millions of pounds out of the earnings of John Gull !
So much for politics , and so much for religion !


All my time was now occupied in preparing my evidence , to prove the allegations in my petition , the hearing of which was to come on in February .
I found it necessary to take lodgings in London , as I meant to conduct the whole of the proceedings in person , on the part of myself and the petitioners .
I had to apply to the Speaker for his warrants , to summon witnesses , and , amongst others , Mr. Perpetual Under Sheriff , to produce the poll , and other witnesses to produce books , papers , c. c..


In all these applications I found no difficulty in procuring warrants to make the parties produce whatever I applied for .
At last it occurred to me , that this would be an excellent opportunity to get hold of the books of the Corporation , which were kept in the Chamberlain 's office  which office was held so sacred , and the books therein contained were considered as such rare and valuable matter , that even the Members of the Corporation themselves were excluded , and could not gain access to the books , without a particular order from the Court of Aldermen .
I was , however , determined at least to make an attempt to get into this sanctum sanctorum , by means of a Speaker 's warrant .
I never communicated my intention to a living soul  but I at length decided upon a copy of a warrant , that I thought would answer the purpose , which was to be directed to the Mayor , the Town Clerk , and the Chamberlain of the City , summoning them to appear before the Committee of the House of Commons , ordering them to permit myself and the other petitioners to have access to all the deeds , books , papers , and accounts , belonging to the Corporation , whether in the Chamberlain 's office or elsewhere , and to allow us to take copies or extracts from such deeds , books , papers , or accounts , and to produce before the Committee any part of the said books and papers , that the said petitioners might require , on their giving due notice of the same , c. c. c..


Having settled all this in my mind , I went to the Speaker 's clerk , and desired him to draw me up a warrant to the above effect , and to get it signed by the Speaker .
When he read it over he stared , and observed that it was a most sweeping warrant , and such a one as he had never before known applied for or granted .
I told him it was not possible for me to complete my case before the Committee , unless I could produce some of these books , and that it was much more rational to give me power to go down and examine them upon the spot , than it would be to direct the Chamberlain to bring up a waggon load of books , to lay before the Committee , when , perhaps , three or four of them would be all that I might require .
He concurred in the propriety of this remark , and appeared extremely ready to assist me in procuring the Speaker 's signature , and said he would lay it upon his table the moment he had eaten his dinner .
But , as it was very important for me to get this document signed , I suggested to him the advantage that might arise from his laying the warrant , with several others , before the Speaker just as he was going to sit down to dinner , as in that case he might sign it with the others , as a matter of course .
This hint was made a proper use of .
At half-past seven , on the same evening , I received the much-longed-for warrant from the Clerk of the Speaker , at his house in Palace-yard  at half-past eight on the same evening , ( Saturday ) I was safely seated in the Bristol Mail at the Gloucester Coffee-house  and , on the Monday morning following , I contrived that the Mayor , the Town Clerk , and the Chamberlain should be all served with the warrants at one and the same time !
I myself delivered that which was addressed to Mr. Winter Harris , the Chamberlain .


The warrant was peremptory , but the Chamberlain required a short time to consult his brother officers of the Corporation , which I readily granted , and appointed to return at the end of two hours , to commence my examinations .
I attended with my friends , at the time appointed , and found that the Mayor and the Chamberlain had got a good fire prepared in the adjoining Council Chamber , with pens , ink , and stationary .
This room , they said , should be appropriated to our use , and we could have as many of the books at a time from the Chamberlain 's office , as I might require .
Both parties were very well satisfied with this arrangement , and we immediately sat to work , and continued at it for seven or eight hours in the day , till I had looked over all the books , papers , and deeds , belonging to the said Corporation , and taken what copies and extracts I thought proper .
In this labour I was incessantly occupied for several days  I think nearly a week .
I took copies of some most curious and valuable documents , many of which were published , by my old and worthy friend Cranidge , in the year 1818 , I having made him a present of the manuscript for that purpose .
I will here insert as specimens , two or three items which I transcribed from the cash-book


1793 .
Oct. 12 .
-- Paid Lord Viscount Bateman , to reimburse him and the Officers and Men of the Herefordshire Militia , the extra expenses they have lately been put to , in providing accommodation for the said Militia at the time of the late Riots in this City , viz .
-- THE BRIDGE ... # 105 0 0


This is an item worthy to be recorded in every publication relating to the city of Bristol , Lord Bateman was Col. Commandant of the Herefordshire Militia , at the time when they fired upon , and massacred the citizens of Bristol , at the memorable slaughter at the Bridge , in the year 1793 .
Was this hundred guineas the price of that slaughter ?
This curious fact would never have been known , had it not been for our famous all-powerful Speaker 's warrant .
I understand that many of the Corporation were astonished , when this fact was published  they never having heard of it , or dreamed that 105l .
of the citizens own money was paid to this Lord , for ordering his troops to fire upon them !


1793 .
# .
s. d. Oct. -- Paid George Daubeny , Esq. for rais - ing Bristol volunteers ... ... .
300 0 0 1801 .
-- Paid expenses during the Market Riots , c. on account of the dear - ness of Provisions , in the month of April , 1801 ... ... ... ... 117 7 4 N. B .
The Chamberlain 's Salary was this year raised from 62l .
10s .
per quarter , to 125l .
per quarter , making the annual amount ... .
500 0 0 1806 .
-- Paid GEORGE WEBB HALL , at sun - dry times , towards passing the Bristol Paving Bill ... ... .
1,000 0 0 1810 .
-- Paid commemorating the National Jubilee on the 25th October , 1809 337 11 4 1811 .
-- Paid John Noble , Esq. for Wine sent to the Lord High Steward , the Recorder , and the two Members of Parliament ... ... ... ... 315 0 0 N. B .
This is an annual gift from the freemen .
1811 .
-- Paid on account of the expenses of the invitation and the visit of


Lord Grenville , to an entertainment # .
s. d. given him by the Citizens , as High Steward , in May , 1811 ... 1,393 11 0


1812 .
July 14 .
-- Paid John H. Wilcocks , Mayor , the monies expended by him in entertaining the MILITARY , viz .
( the East Middlesex Militia and Scots Greys ) at the Mayoralty House  and for Beer for GUARDS MOUNTED IN THE CITY DURING THE ELECTION , VIZ ... ... ... ... 437 O 4 1812 .
Sept. -- Paid J. M. Gutch , for printing Advertisements for calling a Public Meeting of the Citizens to address the Prince Regent on the Death of the Right Hon. Spencer Perceval , Chancellor of the Exchequer ... ... ... ... .
52 18 0


Only let the reader cast his eye over the foregoing items , extracted from amongst some thousands of a similar nature  few as they are , they will serve as a specimen of the manner in which the Corporation of the city of Bristol spend the monies of the citizens  for whom , be it remembered , they only act as trustees .
Lord Bateman was the Colonel of the Herefordshire Militia , who fired upon the citizens , and slaughtered a number of them  and his Lordship received one hundred guineas for this valiant and humane feat !!
The Chamberlain 's salary is raised , is doubled , in the year 1801 , in consequence of the high price of provisions .
Quere , has it been lowered again , now that the price of provisions is fallen ?
The item of July the 14th , 1812 , is such as I do not believe disgraces the books of any other Corporation in England  between four and five hundred pounds paid to the military , by the civil power , for services performed during the election , some of which services I have before noticed .
Four hundred and thirty-seven pounds paid to the military , for preventing the election of HENRY HUNT for the city of Bristol , in the year 1812 .
The item of 52l .
18s .
for advertising a public meeting of the citizens of Bristol , to address the Prince Regent on the death of Spencer Perceval , is another precious proof of shameful , or rather shameless , expenditure .
Why , five pounds would have been ample , to have informed every inhabitant of the city of it .
But here , however , is 52l .
18s .
paid to one corrupt knave of an editor , merely for calling a meeting !
No wonder these caitiff editors are such time-serving tools , when they can get so profusely paid for their mercenary loyalty .
This is a pretty bill of goggle-eyed Gutch , and for a pretty purpose too .
This shews the expense of getting up a loyal meeting !
During the whole time that I was taking the above extracts , and all those which have been published by Mr. John Cranidge , not only the Chamberlain , but the whole Corporation , were in a state of fever and the greatest agitation .
This , however , did not prevent my steadily persevering in my purpose .
These impudent fellows of Bristol city , who were the greatest tyrants in Christendom over those whose fate it is to be placed in their power , were quite tame , were civil , and even polite for Bristol chaps !
So it is always  a subdued tyrant is the most tame , time-serving , abject slave in the world .


Perhaps there never before was such a mass of fraud and chicanery discovered and exposed .
There might be seen charities upon charities , vast estates left for charitable purposes , producing a large annual income , and which , if fairly let , would produce an enormous increase , at least three times the sum  but one and all of these , with their immense revenue and patronage , were misapplied and perverted to corrupt electioneering purposes !
In fact , whenever I could come at the truth , there did not appear to be a single charity in the whole city , whether vested in the Corporation or not , and great numbers there are , but what was perverted to electioneering purposes .
Hospitals , schools , alms-houses , charities for apprenticeing freemen 's sons -- charities for setting up young freemen in business -- charities for lying-in women -- charities for widows -- charities for orphans , in fact , all sorts of charities , all were rendered subservient to the accursed purpose of rivetting the fetters of the people , by being made instruments of bribery .
In the first place , the original property is in most instances granted out upon long leases , or upon lives , for a mere nominal premium and nominal rent , to the tools and dependents of the Corporation .
In truth , almost all the Corporation , all their dirty instruments , and the major part of the parsons and lawyers , are tenants .
Large sums of money are lent by the Corporation , to the members of the Corporation , at mere nominal interest .
Almost all the merchants and tradesmen of the city hold something under the Corporation , and at the time of the elections are their abject tools  -- but to give a full and faithful account of these , would be to write the history of Bristol , and , as that is not my purpose , I shall proceed to other matters , not , however , till I have strongly recommended to every one , who is in any way connected with that city , to read the book published by John Cranidge , A.M. in the year 1818 , entitled , `` A Mirror for the Burgesses and Commonalty of the City of Bristol  in which is exhibited to their view , a part of the great and many interesting benefactions and endowments , of which the city has to boast , and for which the CORPORATION are responsible , as the stewards and trustees thereof : correctly transcribed from authentic documents , by John Cranidge , A.M. ''


It is very true , as Mr. Cranidge asserts , that the Corporation are the trustees for the freemen and burgesses , to whom they are , or rather ought to be , responsible .
Having made myself complete master of this subject , I had resolved in my own mind , in case I had been elected the member for the city of Bristol , to make these worthies , the Corporation , really and not nominally responsible  and , with the blessing of God , I would have made them account for and refund those enormous sums and immense funds which they had so disgracefully , so infamously , misapplied .
The charities are so numerous and so ample , that I firmly believe , if the property belonging to them were fairly let and made the most of , there would not be a citizen of Bristol that would not be handsomely provided for out of these funds .
No city in the world ever produced more philanthropists , or more misanthropists , than the city of Bristol .
No city of its size in the world can boast more charitable institutions -- no city is more degraded by poverty and wretchedness amongst its inhabitants , mainly created by the corrupt misapplication of those very charities .


On the 24th or the 25th of February , 1813 , the Committee was ballotted for in the House of Commons  the petitioners and the sitting members each striking out a certain number till they were reduced to thirteen , which , together with the nominee for each party , made fifteen , as follows --


Michael Angelo Taylor , Esq. .
Member for Poole , Chairman .
P. Grenfell , Esq. .
Great Marlow .
Philip Gell , Esq. .
Penryn .
Hon. R. Neville , Berkshire .
H. Pierce , Esq. .
Northampton .
Abel Smith .
Esq. .
Wendover .
Lord G. Russell , Bedford .
C. Harvey , Esq. .
Norwich .
T. Whitmore , Esq. .
Bridgenorth .
G. Shiffner , Esq. .
Lewes .
D.S. Dugdale , Esq. .
Warwick .
J. Daley , Esq. .
Galway .
B. Lester Lester , Esq. .
Poole .


NOMINEES .


Sir Francis Burdett , Bart .
Westminster  for the Petitioners .
Sir James Graham , Bart .
Carlisle  for the Sitting Members .


SITTING MEMBERS .


Richard Hart Davis , Esq -- Edward Protheroe , Esq. .


PETITIONERS .


1st .
Henry Hunt , Esq. -- 2nd .
Wm. Pimm , T. Pimm , Wm. Weech , T. Gamage , Electors .


Counsel for Mr. Davis , Mr. Warren and Mr. Harrison .
Counsel for Mr. Protheroe , Mr. Adam  Mr. Randle Jackson .


Mr. Hunt appeared in person for himself and other petitioners .


The parties were all called to the bar of the House , when the names of the Committee were called over , and the 26th was appointed for commencing the proceedings .


On the 26th of February , 1813 , the Committee assembled at twelve o'clock , and I opened the proceedings by an address of about two hours in length , in which I laid before them my case  a case containing a detail of the evidence by which I meant to substantiate the charges and allegations contained in the petition .
The hearing of this petition lasted fourteen days , and it concluded by the Committee deciding `` that the Sitting Members were duly elected , but that the petition was not frivolous or vexatious . ''
So each party had the pleasure of paying his own costs .
My expenses I estimated at about six hundred pounds .
The whole of the mighty subscriptions which I was to have received from the friends of Sir Samuel Romilly , amounted to the amazing sum of TWENTY-FIVE POUNDS , and no more  which sum exactly paid one of my witnesses , Mr. Alderman Vaughan .
I have heard since that there was a much larger sum subscribed  but , if it was so , somebody else took care of that .
I can only say that was the whole amount that ever came to my hands , or was ever appropriated to pay any part of the expenses that I incurred , Many of my friends paid their own expenses to London and back , as witnesses , and raised a subscription to pay the expenses of other friendly witnesses  and I believe some of the petitioners were sued for some expenses afterwards .
It was calculated that the sum expended by the sitting members in resisting the petition , was not less than four thousand pounds .
All that I can say is , I am quite confident that had the Committee been chosen from a House of Commons fairly elected by the people of England , or had they been the honest representatives of the people of England , instead of being , as they were , the representatives of corrupt and rotten boroughs , and corrupt and rotten influence , I repeat , I am quite sure that I proved abundantly sufficient to have rendered it a void election .
But it must be borne in mind , that this Committee was chosen from as corrupt and profligate a Boroughmongering Parliament as ever disgraced the Parliamentary annals of once free and happy England .


I now retired once more to my farm , at Rowfant , in Sussex  and although pretty much minus in pocket , I had yet the gratification of being conscious that I had done my duty to the people of Bristol , and had effected a great national good , by the exposures which I had made of the corrupt state of the representation , even in what was called a popular representation of a populous and free city .
So satisfied were the people of Bristol with my exertions , that they invited me down to a public dinner , as a testimony that , although I was unsuccessful , still the Citizens of Bristol were not insensible of the services which I had rendered them , by making an effort in their behalf , and fighting so gallantly their battle and the battle of Reform .
I was received with every demonstration of respect  and indeed with increased enthusiasm and attention by all classes of the citizens , except the corrupt factions and their corrupt and time-serving dependants and tools .
These testimonials of respect and attachment to me , as the avowed champion of Radical Reform , were excessively galling to the Corporation , and to the corrupt knaves of attorneys , parsons , merchants , and pettyfoggers of all sorts , who lived on the taxes , and battened on the distresses of the people  those , in short , who were gorging upon the vitals of the poor , rioting in luxury , and wallowing in wealth , wrung from the sweat of the labourers ' and mechanics ' brows .


During these public exertions I had not been inattentive to the management of my farm .
As I had made up my mind not to remain at Rowfant  first , because it was not a profitable farm to occupy  and , second , because the situation of the country being low , and damp in the winter , did not agree with me , and had caused me to suffer very considerable ill health from rheumatism , I was induced to improve the estate , more with an idea of disposing of the lease , than with the intention of making any immediate profit from the cultivation of the soil .
In this object I completely succeeded .
I so effectually on my own principles drained a great part of arable , as well as of the pasture land , that it paid me an hundred-fold  for , during the spring and summer of 1813 , no farm in the kingdom had a more flourishing appearance , or bid fairer for better crops .
Every thing was beautiful and luxuriant , and put on such a face as would have done credit to the cultivation of the very best land , much more to a poor , hungry , deceitful and barren soil , which a great portion of this farm at Rowfant really was .
I advertised the lease to be sold , and very soon had some customers , with one of whom I quickly struck a bargain , and disposed of my lease and crops , the whole of which the purchaser undertook to take off my hands at a valuation , as soon as it could be made .
Some of my speculations upon this estate completely failed .
I had sunk a considerable sum in endeavouring to keep a flock of sheep , for which the farm was by no means congenial  added to this , my flock became infected with the foot rot , having been contaminated by the few half Southdown half Merinos which I had purchased of Mr. Dean , of Chard , of which unfortunate deal I have before spoken .
In calculating the loss which I sustained by purchasing these sheep , which were unsound , and infected with that incurable disorder ( at least incurable upon a wet soil ) , I then placed it as before , much below the mark  for I sincerely believe I was ultimately two hundred pounds out of pocket by the bargain , notwithstanding the infamous falsehoods of the infamous editor of the Taunton Courier .


Another speculation , in which I was very unfortunate , was the making of charcoal .
I had a very fine lot of wood , which I could not dispose of , and I was therefore advised to make it into charcoal , as other farmers in that neighbourhood were accustomed to do .
In fact , there did not appear any other rational method of disposing of my wood , which I had been obliged to take at a valuation when I took the estate .
Well , I hired a man to make this charcoal  so far the business succeeded , for as it was very fine wood , so it produced a large quantity of very nice charcoal , as good as ever was seen .
But then the next thing was to procure sacks to put it in , that it might be sent to the London market for sale .
It required two-hundred and forty sacks , of about two bushels each , to make a load  these were ordered from a manufacturer at East Grinstead .
The charcoal was loaded and sent off to London , altogether as good a set-out as ever passed over Blackfriars Bridge .
A customer was soon found , but I never touched the cash , nor ever saw my 240 sacks again , so that the whole was a dead loss of about fifty pounds .
Thus ended my speculations in charcoal , as I was determined that I would never cut any more wood as long as I kept the estate , but that I would let it grow for the next person who should follow me , to try , if he pleased , his hand at dealing in charcoal  it appeared to me to be wise to put up with the first loss , and quit the concern .


I had , in the whole , expended six thousand pounds in the purchase of what I took to when I entered upon this farm , and in the improvement which I had made in cultivation , stock , c. I sold my lease for two thousand pounds , and the valuations were to the amount of six thousand more  the whole sum being eight thousand pounds , which was paid me on the nail , by Richard Crawshaw , Esq. the present proprietor  and I took my leave of Rowfant , bearing away with me two thousand pounds more than I carried thither .
This was such an occurrence as had never been known , in the memory of man , to have happened to any stranger that had come to reside in the parish of Worth -- that of leaving the parish richer than he entered it .


On the same morning that I received this money , which was paid me in one thousand pounds ' Bank notes , I called at the Bank of England , to change one of the thousand pound notes .
I was desired to present it to the inspector , which I did , and he made his mark upon it as good , and tore off at the lower corner the name of the person who had entered it .
He then desired me to carry it back to the clerk , to whom I had first presented it for payment  I did so , and presented it again .
The gentleman inquired in what notes I should like to have the change ?
I replied , one five hundred , and five of one hundred each .
Drawing the pen from behind his ear , and dipping it in the ink , he handed it to me , together with the note , saying , `` write your name and address on the back of the note , I will give you the change immediately . ''
I stared the jockey full in the face for a short time , which stare he returned  and then exclaimed , `` come , Sir , write your name and address . ''
`` Not I , indeed , '' was the answer .
`` What , '' said he , in a loud voice , `` what , refuse to sign your name ? ''
`` Yes , '' said I , `` I do refuse to sign my name . ''
This was said in about two keys higher than Mr. Clerk 's interrogatory .
`` Well , then , '' said he , `` I shall not give you the change , till you do sign your name and address upon the back of the note . ''
`` What , '' said I , raising my voice still higher , `` back one of your notes for a thousand pounds ?
Indeed , I shall do no such thing !
I have not confidence enough in your firm to back one of your one pound notes , and much less one of your notes for a thousand pounds . ''


By this time I had a mob collected round me , some professing to be astonished at my impudence , but others unequivocally expressing their approbation of my conduct  adding , that they were very happy to hear me take these impudent , all-sufficient gentlemen clerks to task a little .
The former set , who expressed their astonishment , seemed , from the cut of their coats , and the turn of their phizzes , to be bankers ' and merchants ' clerks  but many of the latter seemed to be gentlemen .
I continued boldly to demand any change , or my note .
The latter was instantly handed to me  but , as it was mutilated , and the name of the person , by whom it had been entered , had been torn off by the inspector , I declined to take it .
Mr. Clerk as resolutely refused to give me the change , saying , that they had positive orders not to take any notes of that description , above 50l .
from a stranger , without his name and address were endorsed on the note .
I demanded what law there was for such a proceeding , but I could get no answer .
I then demanded to see the Governor  but I was told that he was engaged , and could not be spoken with .
I asked if it was not a good note ?
They replied `` yes , it was admitted to be so by the inspector . ''
`` Then , '' said I , `` as you have mutilated the note , and refuse to give me change  and as you also refuse to admit me to the Governor , I will swear the debt of 1000l .
against the Governor and Company of the Bank of England  and if there is an independent attorney in London , I will instantly strike a docket against them .
On hearing this they all started  all the clerks stood with their pens behind their ears  all business was at an end  and , as I spoke loud , every man in the Rotunda heard what I said .
Two or three gentlemen present gave me their cards of address , promising to come forward , to prove that the clerk refused payment , and denied the Governor of the Bank , which , as I said , was evidently an act of bankruptcy  and they offered me numerous thanks for calling these impudent gentry to account , and checking their usual insolence , which , many of them said , was unpardonable .
I repeated my declaration , and walked out of the Bank , leaving my note in their hands , and all the clerks half petrified and gazing on each other in utter astonishment .


I tried three or four attorneys , to induce them to strike a docket against the Governor and Company of the Bank of England , and offered to make an affidavit of the debt , the refusal of payment , and the denial of the Governor .
But I could not get one of these worthies to move a peg in the affair  so I left the note where it was , and went into the country for three or four days .


Upon my return to my inn in London , Cooper 's Hotel , in Bouverie-street , I found a letter from Mr. Henry Hase , the cashier of the Bank of England .
It seems that , on my quitting the Bank , they sent some one to dog me to the inn , and by these means they found out who I was .
The letter was couched in very civil language , requesting me to call for the thousand pounds , or offering to send it to me to the inn , in any notes I pleased .
The next day I called at the Bank , with my son , who was then about fourteen years of age , being determined , one way or another , to set at rest this question of giving names .
I gave to my son a five hundred pound note , to put in his pocket , that he might , at a proper time demand it to be exchanged  for it was a mockery to call it payment , it being only exchanging one PROMISE TO PAY for another PROMISE TO PAY .
On my arrival at the Bank , I demanded to see Mr. Hase .
Business was at an end the moment that I entered the Rotunda , the clerks all having their eyes fixed upon me .
I was immediately introduced to Mr. Hase , in his private room , and I expostulated with him against such illegal conduct as I had experienced .
I was introduced by him to the Governor , who , together with Mr. Hase , admitted that there was no law to compel any person to sign his name or give his address  but they said it was , nevertheless , their invariable practice not to exchange a note above fifty pounds for any stranger , without first obtaining his name and address , and they pleaded the necessity of this , to enable them to trace forgeries or robberies  and they proceeded to say , that they did so for the benefit of the public .
I contended , on the contrary , that it was not only illegal , but an insult upon the public , and a particular insult to the person presenting the note to be exchanged ( I always calling it exchanged , they always calling it payment )  for , after their inspector had admitted the note to be a good one , they had no legal or moral right to refuse to exchange it for other notes .
I candidly told them that I had kept my promise , and that I had seriously endeavoured to get a DOCKET struck against thein , for an act of bankruptcy .
The Governor smiled , but Mr. Hase looked very grave .
They , however , apologised for the trouble which I had experienced  Mr. Hase adding , `` it will not happen again , Mr. Hunt .
As you are now so well known to the clerks , they will not require your name in future .
We certainly ought , ( continued he ) to have known you , as we recollect that you brought an action against Messrs. Hobhouse , Clutterbuck and Co. bankers , of Bath , because they would not pay you their notes in cash  you having refused to take Bank of England notes in exchange .
We know that you are an enemy to our paper system  but we recognise you as an honourable and open enemy . ''


A good deal of such conversation passed between us , and it ended by a polite offer , on the part of the Governor , to shew me and my son over the establishment .
As I was rather in a hurry , and had other business to do , I declined on that account to accept the offer .
Mr. Hase then said , with a smile , that he would feel pleasure in taking another opportunity to shew me over their whole establishment , when he had no doubt but he should convince me of their solvency .


I now took my leave of the Governor , and Mr. Hase accompanied me out to the clerk , and desired him to give Mr. Hunt change for his note , in any sums which he might choose .
He then made his bow , and quitted me .
When this was arranged , my son , whose name was unknown , produced his note for five hundred pounds .
It was , as usual , handed to the inspector , amidst the inquiring eyes of all the clerks .
It was marked as a good one , and my son returned to the clerk , and demanded five hundred pound notes .
Mr. Clerk handed him the pen , and desired him to write his name and address  to which he replied , that he should certainly do neither , but that he insisted on the change .
The clerk refused , saying it was as much as his situation was worth to comply .
I was , meanwhile , taking down notes with a pencil in my pocket-book , without saying one word , except that I would be a witness for him .
The whole place was again in a state of uproar , but my young friend was immovable , and acted his part like a hero .
At length Mr. Hase was called out again , and the clerk informed him that the youth refused to give his name , and he wished to know if he must pay him the five one hundred pound notes without it .
For a moment Mr. Hase lost his temper , and positively ordered the clerk not to pay it unless the usual custom was complied with  and he began in a pettish manner to question my son , and in a peremptory tone demanded his name .
The younker , however , as peremptorily and as sturdily refused to comply .
Mr. Hase was just going away in dudgeon , when he happened to cast his eye upon me , and perceived that I was deliberately taking down all that passed without saying a word  upon which , instantly recollecting himself , he turned back , and laughing , said to the clerk , `` pay him the notes  as he is with Mr. Hunt we can call upon him to give us his name , if ever it should be found necessary . ''
Then , patting my son upon the shoulder , he added , `` recollect , young gentleman , that you are the first who ever left the Bank with such a sum without giving his name . ''
He then turned to me , and said , `` You have carried your point , Mr. Hunt  good morning . ''
I answered sarcastically , `` good morning , Mr. Cashier . ''
The clerk having paid my son the notes , I bade him good morning , telling him , at the same time , that I was very sorry he should have given himself and his master so much unnecessary trouble .
My son also significantly nodding his head , and patting his pocket , added his `` good morning , Mr. Clerk  '' and off we marched , amidst the cheers of a very considerable multitude , who had collected and listened to this curious dialogue .
Amongst the number was one of the gentlemen who had given me his address on the previous day , when I left my thousand pounds  and he heartily thanked me for having brought these Jacks-in-office for once to their senses , and compelled them to act agreeably to the law , which they had so long been in the habit of setting at defiance .


I now went to reside at Middleton Cottage , in Hampshire , situated on the London-road , about three miles from Andover , which I rented of James Widmore , Esq. together with the manor of Longparish , extending over a very fine sporting country , of eight or ten thousand acres , well stocked with game , particularly partridges and pheasants .
As I found that farming was become a very expensive amusement , and that in consequence of the great increase of poor 's rates and king 's taxes , the profits attending the best managed farm were very precarious , I had made up my mind to remain out of business rather than run the risk of sinking my capital without any corresponding chance of making it pay common interest  and , therefore , for a while I lived at Middleton Cottage , enjoying domestic happiness , combined with the sports of the field .
I soon , however , found that I was not formed for an idle life .
Although I took more exercise , in shooting and fishing , than most men in business are in the habit of taking , yet some more serious occupation was required to fill up the measure of my time .
An opportunity having also offered for me to resume my agricultural pursuits , by the lease of Cold Hanly Farm , near the Borough of Whitchurch , being sold by auction , I was induced , from the representations of my attorney ( who I afterwards discovered to have been interested in the sale of this lease ) , to purchase it , and I entered upon the farm early in the year 1814 .
This certainly was a bad speculation , as the lease had only three years to run .
I bought in the stock upon this farm at a very high price .
Many of my horses cost me upwards of fifty pounds each , and all the other farming stock a proportionably high price .
My principal inducement to take this farm , which contained about four hundred acres of land , was my wish to try the experiment of raising large crops of corn in the manner recommended in Tull 's Husbandry  which work I had been reading with great pleasure , on the recommendation of Mr. Cobbett , who had begun partially to adopt the system of drilling at wide intervals , as practised by the late Mr. Jetheroe Tull , of Shalbourn , near Hungerford , Berks .
There is something very captivating in the language of Mr. Tull 's writings upon cultivation .
It is so clear and so reasonable , that , when combined with the facts which he lays before the reader , as to the nature and the amount of the crops raised by him , every line almost carries conviction with it .
Unfortunately , both Mr. Cobbett and myself placed too great reliance on the opinions and assertions of Mr. Tull .
We both suffered severely in pocket , by persevering too long in , and acting too extensively upon , the plan of drilling wheat at wide intervals , as laid down by Tull .
I do not mean to insinuate that Mr. Tull ever stated the amount of his crops to be better in quality , or more in quantity , than they really were  but I have no hesitation in saying , that the climate of England must have been very different in the time of Mr. Tull from what it was in the days of Mr. Cobbett and Mr. Hunt , to have produced either the quantity or the quality of wheat which Mr. Tull says was produced per acre upon his farm , according to his system .
When I found the practice fail , and that wheat was blighted upon the high hills and cold soil of Hampshire , I took a farm into my own hands at Upavon , in Wiltshire , for the purpose of giving the system a fair trial .
Nay , so convinced was I of the truth of the principles laid down by Tull , respecting the food of plants , and such reliance did I place upon the truth of his assertions , that I persevered one or two years after Mr. Cobbett had given the thing up as a hopeless and losing speculation .
I mean to be understood only as far as relates to the drilling of wheat at four feet intervals , to plough between the rows  for the practice certainly succeeds with turnips , to the full description of any thing given by Tull .
Mr. Cobbett , I see , has lately republished the work of Tull , and I therefore caution such of my friends as may read that work , not to be led away with the beautiful theory of Mr. Tull , so as to adopt the plan of drilling wheat to any extent .
In certain soils it may succeed with barley  but in these times it is too expensive a system for any one to pursue with advantage to any extent .
Those who have good light ploughing sandy , or sandy loam soils , will find it answer their most sanguine expectations , in turnips of any sort , and particularly in the cultivation of Swedish turnips .
Of course , I only address myself to those farmers who superintend the whole progress of drilling , transplanting , hoeing and ploughing  for Tull 's is not a system to answer if trusted to servants .
I can only say for myself , that I adhered to the system so long , that I believe I was minus by it , first and last , above a thousand pounds , and I believe Mr. Cobbett was a loser to an equal degree .


We must now turn our attention again to politics .
The immense losses sustained by the French in their retreat from Moscow to the Russian frontier , compelled them to continue their retreat , and from Wilna Napoleon set off for Paris .
The treacherous Prussians now betrayed him  their General led the way by entering into a convention , and the King followed by joining the coalition .
Many places fell , and the victorious Russians entered Warsaw , and advanced to the Elbe .
Jaded and dispirited , the French troops were defeated in almost every battle  in fact they had never recovered the effect of the dreadful ravages committed upon their ranks by the horrors of a Russian winter .
Russia , Prussia , and Sweden now all leagued together , and supported by the treasures of England , the wealth of the British nation , wrung from the sweat of John Gull 's brow , was lavished to maintain the armies of the Northern hordes , which were advancing against France .
John Gull was stark mad with joy at the news of the defeat of the French  and the general cry amongst the shopkeepers and farmers was , `` down with Buonaparte , cost what it will ! ''
They not only were willing to advance large sums in taxes , but the Parliament was encouraged and hallooed on , by what are called the middle classes , to borrow and spend without controul .
O how drunk the farmers used to get at every account that reached England of the ill success and the defeat of the French !
John would at this time not only have spent his last shilling , but he was ready to pawn even his breeches off his rump , to support the Ministers in their extravagance .


Upon Napoleon 's return to Paris he laid the state of his affairs candidly before the Senate , and they immediately voted him 350,000 men to repair his losses .
Having accomplished this point , he was not disposed , like some of his Royal enemies , to waste his time in the lap of luxury and slothful , inglorious idleness  he therefore set off and joined his army again at Mentz , on the 20th of April .
He opened the campaign by the battle of Leitzen , in which the French arms were once more victorious .
This was followed up by two successful battles at Baultzen and Wiertzen , which compelled the Allies to repass the Oder .
Napoleon then proposed an armistice , which was accepted  but , as the terms of peace could not be settled , the war re-commenced , and with great disadvantage to the French .
The Crown Prince of Sweden , who had deserted his benefactor , and joined the Allies against him in the North of Germany , now took the field with a formidable army .
But the fatal blow to Napoleon was the defection of Austria , which never joined the coalition on the 12th of August .
The Allies having united all their forces , to the number of 180,000 men , the French army now took up a position on the river Elbe , and attacked Napoleon in his position near Dresden  but they were foiled , and compelled to retire into Bohemia by the superiority of his military skill .
This advantage was , however , rendered of no avail by the loss of a division of 12,000 men under Vandamme , who had imprudently entangled himself in the defiles of Bohemia , where he was surrounded and compelled to surrender .
Macdonald was also defeated , with heavy loss , in Silesia  and Marshal Ney at Dennewitz .
Bavaria , which owed so much to Napoleon , now not only abandoned him , but also united its forces with those of Austria , its natural enemy .
Napoleon had by this time taken up a position in the neighbourhood of Leipsic , and to that spot the combined forces , consisting of 330,000 men , advanced to give him battle .
The French army was not more than 175,000 strong .
The battle , or rather succession of battles , lasted from the 16th to the 19th of October , and was sanguinary beyond example .
The scale was , at length , decisively turned against the French by the desertion of the Saxons , who went over to the Allies , and turned their cannon against their recent comrades at the critical period of the contest .
The French were compelled to commence their retreat , and by the destruction of a bridge their rear-guard was cut off , and made prisoners .
They fell back towards the Rhine , and found the Bavarian army posted at Hanau to intercept them .
The Bavarians were , however , defeated , and the French army reached the Rhine .


Napoleon now hasted to Paris , and having assembled the Senate , he laid before them the full particulars of his disastrous campaign , upon which they immediately ordered out 300,000 conscripts .
At this time the news reached the French capital of the counter-revolution that had taken place in Holland -- that Dresden had surrendered to the enemy with 23,000 men -- that Westphalia was lost , and that the Dalmatian coast was occupied by the Austrians  in fact , that misfortune and defeat attended the French arms in every quarter .
The arms of England meanwhile were victorious in Spain , and under Wellington gained a decisive victory at Vittoria .
Wellington having stormed St. Sebastian , entered France without any interruption , and easily defeated the French at St. Jean de Leu and on the Nive .
As , by the advance of Wellington into France , they had got rid of what were always considered by the Spanish people as equally troublesome intruders , namely , both the French and English armies , the Cortes began to act with some vigour  the Regency was dimissed , and a new one formed .
The extraordinary Cortes were dissolved , and the ordinary Cortes summoned .


In America , Mr. Madison was elected President in the room of Mr. Jefferson .
The Congress assembled , and a paper was laid before them that justified the war which they had entered into against England .
One of their armies made an attempt upon Niagara , but it was repulsed .
Dearborn was also obliged to retire from Lake Champlain .
In the mean time the ports were declared to be in a state of blockade by the English .
The Americans took York town , in Canada , and Mobille , in West Florida .
The Emperor of Russia offered himself as mediator , and the President appointed three citizens to treat with England .
On Lake Ontario the British fleet was successful  but on Lake Erie the Americans defeated the English fleet , and took the whole of her naval force in that quarter .


When the Parliament met , the British Ministers also laid papers upon the table to justify themselves from being in fault in making war upon America .
The great cause of this war with America , be it remembered , was this : The English had always claimed a right to search all American vessels , and even ships of war , for English seamen , which , if found on board an American ship , were seized and forcibly removed on board English ships of war .
This had been always complained of by the Americans as an unjust and arbitrary proceeding .
But the English fleets being always masters of the ocean , the British claimed and enforced this right of search , which the Americans , not being able to resist , reluctantly submitted to , no doubt with a determination to throw off the galling yoke as soon as they thought themselves able to offer a successful resistance .
They now believed that time to be arrived , and they resolved to make the attempt  and wherever they were strong enough they resisted all attempts to search .
On the part of the Americans I may say that this was the only substantial cause of the war  all the other aggressions and insults that were offered by the English , ( and they were many ) might have been , and would , for some time at least , have been endured without an open rupture  the right of search by the English was therefore the grand matter in dispute .


Some debates took place in the House of Commons respecting the Princess of Wales , but nothing definite was agreed upon .
At length , however , her conduct was inquired into , and as it was approved of , the public could no longer be restrained , by the intrigues of petty and interested politicians , from openly expressing their sentiments upon the subject of her ill-treatment .
A Common Hall was called , on the suggestion of Alderman Wood , who got a requisition signed , and who moved the Resolutions and an Address to her Royal Highness , all which were strenuously opposed by Mr. Waithman , who was backed by the `` well weighed opinion '' of Mr. Sturch , of Westminster , so well known as having taken a very active part in the election of Sir F. Burdett .
This was the first and the last time I ever knew Daddy Sturch , ( as he is called in Westminster ) appear upon the hustings at Guildhall , to address the Livery at a Common Hall .
Nevertheless , in spite of the violent opposition of Mr. Waithman , and `` the well weighed opinion '' of Mr. Sturch , to which Mr. Waithman earnestly recommended the Livery to attend , the Address was carried by an overwhelming majority .
Notwithstanding Mr. Waithman 's objections to voting the Address , yet he fell in with the stream , and went up in his carriage with the procession , to present the Address to her Royal Highness , who then resided at Kensington Palace , and he received with great sang froid the sarcastic thanks and polite attention of the Princess .


I do not know that the circumstances attending the management of the various parties , who took a lead in this affair , have ever been placed in a clear light before the public , and possibly some of them may never be made known  but , as I am acquainted with many of the secret springs by which the parties were worked upon and moved , I will relate one of the intrigues of the City plotters , which delayed for a whole year the expression of the public opinion .
While Mr. Cobbett was in Newgate , in the year 1812 , Mr. Alderman Wood was very anxious to procure a Common Hall , to address her Royal Highness , and I was present when a requisition was drawn up , which he took away with him , for the purpose of getting it signed by a number of the Livery , that it might be presented to the Lord Mayor .
On the next day , he came back , and said that he had found it almost impossible to succeed  that when they became acquainted with his object , the friends of Mr. Waithman had so actively exerted themselves to prevent the calling a Common Hall , that he was induced to decline proceeding at that time , he being fully convinced that , even if he procured a meeting , there would be such an opposition to the Address that it would be imprudent for him at this moment to persevere .
Thus it will be seen that the worthy Alderman was anxious to exert himself in favour of an Address to her Royal Highness , a full year before he could bring it to bear  and that the very same party in the city who , by dint of intrigue , contrived at that period to prevent the Common Hall , likewise strained every nerve to prevent the Address being carried , when the worthy Alderman did at length get a Hall of the Livery convened .
Mr. Waithman , who found that there was a great public feeling in favour of the Princess of Wales , brought forward Mr. Sturch , ( who had acquired a considerable degree of popularity in Westminster ) to assist him at the Common Hall inputting down and neutralizing that honest feeling .
He urged the Livery , if he had lost their confidence , and they did not choose to rely upon his advice , at least to listen with attention to the `` well weighed opinion of his respectable and intelligent friend , Mr. STURCH . ''
But all would not do !
The City Cock was left in a contemptible minority , the honest efforts of the worthy Alderman Wood were crowned with complete success , the Address was carried by acclamation , and it was agreed that the Lord Mayor , Sheriffs , and Livery , dressed in their gowns , should carry up their Address , and present it to her Royal Highness at Kensington Palace  and , to crown the whole , Mr. Waithman , who had so pertinaciously opposed the Address , was one of the most conspicuous in the procession to carry it up to her Royal Highness , to whom this fact of his opposition was well known !
There are some other curious circumstances , connected with this support of her Royal Highness at that epoch , which it may be necessary at a future time to lay before the public  and although , after what we have seen , they will not create any great surprise as to the conduct of the party concerned , yet they will doubtless excite the indignation of every honest man and woman in the country .


In consequence of this sort of conduct in Mr. Waithman , in his frequent opposition to the honest , straight-forward proceedings of Mr. Alderman Wood , I was induced to accept the invitation that had been often given me by Mr. Samuel Millar , as well as by many others , to become a Liveryman of the city , the expenses attending which , I was always told , should be discharged for me as soon as I would give my assent .
At length I agreed to the proposal , solely with a view to endeavour to counteract the tricks and intrigues of the Whig or Waithmanite faction in the city , when assembled in Common Hall .
Well , the time came , I obtained my freedom , and I was sworn a Liveryman in the Lorimer 's Company .
This was managed by Mr. Millar , through the instrumentality of Mr. Ireland , of Holborn-bridge  but instead of having the expenses paid for me , I had to pay the whole myself , which I believe were about fifty pounds .
I shall not easily forget , when I appeared for the first time upon the hustings in Guildhall , what long faces were exhibited , and what surprise it created .
On my stepping forward to address that Livery , the Lord Mayor , Scholey , jumped up out of his chair , and exclaimed , `` is he a liveryman ? ''
Mr. Millar answered significantly , `` YES  '' and I proceeded .
At this period I found Mr. Millar , Mr. Thompson , the spirit-merchant , of Holborn-hill , and Mr. Alexander Galloway , with a few others , decidedly hostile to the measures of Mr. Waithman , but wanting the resolution and the confidence to oppose him openly .


I have been frequently reminded of particular events of my life that I have omitted in my Memoirs , many of which had for years been banished from my memory , and if I were to record every little incident which might occur to me I should extend my volumes to an unwieldy size .
I have therefore been compelled to pass over many occurrences which some might think of importance , but I have been careful not to omit any part of my political history which I could recollect .
One circumstance I shall notice , which has been recalled to my memory by the publication of a virulent although impotent attack upon my public and private character , by one of those mushroom politicians , of which class I have seen hundreds , who spring up in a day and are gone in an hour , and we hear no more of them .
I have been reminded of the imprisonment of Mr. White , the proprietor and editor of the Independent Whig , a London weekly newspaper , which was published by him for many years with great public spirit and patriotic talent .
As a public writer , I consider Mr. White to be a man of the most inflexible integrity , and although from the very title of his paper it may easily be conceived that Mr. White and myself were of opposite sentiments as to the course that ought to be followed to recover our lost rights and violated liberties , yet we never were at variance on that account .
I always believed Mr. White to be a real friend to Liberty , and I believe that he considered me to be the same  consequently we never quarrelled about shades of difference in opinion how that liberty was to be obtained and secured .
The Editor of the Independent Whig was also a zealous guardian of the right conferred by real , undisguised , and honest trial by jury .
He was the lynx-eyed scrutinizer of the conduct of the Judges  the honest censor of the Courts of Justice  therefore , of all men he was the most likely to fall under the displeasure of the dispensers of the laws .
To criticise fairly the conduct of the Judges , though it is one of the most necessary and the most honourable of occupations , is likewise one of the most dangerous .
There is always plenty of room for severe animadversion , and the harpies of the Courts are always upon the look-out , to pounce upon and make victims of those who venture to animadvert on them .
Having been justly strong in his censures upon the arbitrary and corrupt conduct of Lord Ellenborough , the Chief Justice of the Court of King 's Bench , who was as violent and intemperate a political Judge that ever disgraced the Bench , Mr. White was prosecuted by the Attorney-General for a libel , and was sentenced to be imprisoned in Dorchester Gaol for three years .
Mr. Hart , the printer of the Independent Whig , was imprisoned in Gloucester Gaol at the same time , for the same libel .
I was not then personally acquainted with either of them  but in some newspaper , ( most likely the Independent Whig ) I read that Mr. Hart was subject to very great privations in Gloucester Gaol , and , amongst other things , that he was deprived of seeing his family and friends in private , he being obliged , even with his wife , to converse in the presence and hearing of a turnkey , through the iron bars of his dungeon door  and that he was very much restricted for room to walk in to procure fresh air .
I was then living at Clifton , and had as yet entered but very little into politics  but from my earliest age I had been taught to hate oppression and practice humanity .
I was told that the readers of the Independent Whig had met in Bristol , and in London also , I think , and passed some strong resolutions , and made some excellent speeches , condemning such inhuman and barbarous conduct  but still the restrictions remained the same , and these worthy men might have met and passed resolutions till the imprisonment of Mr. Hart had been at an end , without the slightest chance of rendering him any real service .
As mere pity and speech-making could be of no use , I drove over in my curricle to Gloucester , a distance of nearly forty miles , to see what could be done for the aggrieved prisoner .
I called at the prison , and asked to see Mr. Hart , but I was too late in the evening .
I slept at the Bell , and called again the next morning , as soon as I could gain admittance , having employed the intermediate time in endeavouring to obtain information relating to the Gaol , the Visiting Magistrates , and other necessary particulars .
As , however , I was a perfect stranger at Gloucester , I made but little progress  for every one I met appeared as shy of having any thing to say about the gaol , as if he were himself afraid of becoming an inmate in the horrid place .
At length , I found a person of the name of Wittick , a hair-dresser , the genuine Dickey Gossip of the city , who was exactly what I wanted .
Having told him my name and my business , he `` let loose his tongue , '' and gave me such a history of some of the revolting scenes that occurred within the walls of their city bastile , as harrowed up my soul with horror .
The victims of oppression and tyranny , as Wittick had described them , flitted before my imagination during the whole night , and I rose in the morning but little refreshed with my night 's rest .


On my repairing to the Gaol I was admitted to the door of Mr. Hart 's dungeon , and there I ascertained from his own mouth , and indeed from my own observation , the truth of the statements which I had seen in the paper .
All that passed was in the presence of a turn-key , Mr. Hart standing in the inside , and I on the outside , of a door composed of iron bars .
He said his wife was come from London , in hopes of being permitted to administer to his comforts , and to alleviate the horrors of his imprisonment  but she was nearly heart-broken , and was going to return the next day , as she had been refused by the Visiting Magistrates any further admission to him than to see him through the iron door  he added also , that his health was impaired by the want of fresh air , as he was only permitted to walk certain hours in the day , in a small court , surrounded with high walls , which excluded a free circulation of air and the genial influence of the sun .
I told him who and what I was  and , as I had come from Clifton on purpose to endeavour to render him some assistance , I desired him to delay for a few days the departure of his wife , while in the interval I would do my best to procure her admission to him .
As I was quite a stranger to the Magistrates , I could not answer for my success , but I would at any rate make the attempt .
He thanked me , but with a deep sigh said , he feared my kindness would be in vain , though his wife should certainly not leave the place till I had tried the experiment .


I took leave of Mr. Hart , and repaired to the Visiting Magistrates  one of them was from home  the second , a parson , I think , heard what I had to say , was exceedingly civil and polite , but preached a good deal about good order and the necessity of keeping up a strict prison discipline .
He , nevertheless , promised that he would do all that was in his power at the next meeting of the Magistrates , which would take place in a fortnight  but he emphatically observed , `` you know I am but one , Mr. Hunt . ''
`` A fortnight ! ''
I exclaimed , `` why , Sir , the poor woman will leave Gloucester broken-hearted long before half that time arrives . ''
`` Come , come , Sir , '' replied he , `` these things can not be accomplished so easily as you imagine  and after all I must say , that although I promise to do every thing that lies in my power to serve the unfortunate prisoner , you must allow that his crime is a most heinous one .
I can not give you any great encouragement to hope that I shall succeed with Sir George Paull and the other Magistrates . ''
This chap was a thorough Dr. Colston in his heart , and I left him with a determination not to trust my case in his hands .
I next ordered my curricle and drove to Sir George Paull 's .
I was introduced to him immediately , and I communicated the object of my visit .
He had received me very politely , but the moment that I mentioned my business , he drew up , and began to hesitate and make excuses .
Before I left him , however , he admitted that Mr. Hart 's case was a very hard one , and he promised most faithfully that he would do whatever was in his power to comply with my request , which was , that his wife might have free access to him , and that he might have the liberty of walking in a larger yard .
But I found this could not be done under a fortnight , and he politely assured me that he would write me the result of the meeting of Magistrates .


Though in the manner of this gentleman , who I believe was chairman of the quarter sessions , there was something much more honest and open than in that of his brother justices , yet when I left him , to return to Gloucester , I was not satisfied that I had done all that I could do , and therefore I drove on to Bromsgrove , in Herefordshire , to call on Mr. Honeywood Yate , of whom I had heard as an independent Magistrate , as well as a friend of Reform .
I soon enlisted him in the service  but he was very much engaged with other business , which , after awhile , as Mr. Yate was a very humane man , was made subservient to the cause of the oppressed and persecuted captive .
Mr. Yate went to Gloucester the next day .
Before I returned to Clifton I had the satisfaction of hearing that there was an order made for Mrs. Hart to visit her husband in his room , and for him to walk in the garden , I think , of the Governor .
To the kindness and humanity of Mr. Yate was Mr. Hart greatly indebted for this indulgence .
Without his assistance it might never have been granted  at any rate it would have been protracted to a cruel distance .


Since that period I have never seen Mr. Hart except once , and that was in London , after the term of his imprisonment had expired  and for the trouble which I had taken in his behalf , I was amply rewarded by the manner in which he expressed his sense of the accommodation that I had been so instrumental in procuring for him .
If he read this , it will recall the whole to his recollection .
Mr. White laboured under an asthmatic complaint , and suffered greatly from his confinement  but I understood that he was treated with proper respect and attention by the Magistrates .
Pittman , who was then the head turnkey of Dorchester Gaol , called upon me the other day , and almost the first words he uttered were , that the apartments allotted to Mr. White and his family , in Dorchester Gaol , were quite a palace compared to the room in which he found me .
He said that Mr. White had two airy rooms over the Chapel , which commanded a view of the circumjacent country , and that he had the liberty of walking round the large open area of the Gaol , which was composed of a beautiful gravel walk  that his was , in short , altogether a very comfortable situation compared to that which I occupy in Ilchester Bastile .
He was here before the walls were lowered , and consequently , he saw the place in all its native wretchedness .


Before I proceed with my narrative , I must mention a few circumstances , which it will not be improper to record .
At the latter end of this year , 1813 , there was a most remarkable fog , which extended fifty or sixty miles round London , accompanied by a severe frost , which lasted six weeks without intermission .
The average price of wheat this year was one hundred and seven shillings and ten-pence halfpenny , and the quartern loaf was one shilling and five-pence : these were glorious times for the farmers , whose antipathy to jacobins and levellers , or rather reformers , increased in proportion to the high price of corn and bread .
To be sure John Gull was taxed pretty handsomely , but the farmers , at least such of them as looked only to self , always contrived to squeeze their taxes out of the earnings of the labourer .
Those , on the contrary , who thought that the labourer had a right to something more than what would barely keep life and soul together , could not cultivate the soil to the same advantage .
The supplies voted this year were SEVENTY-SEVEN MILLIONS , FIVE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVEN THOUSAND , FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIVE POUNDS .


While the British arms were crowned with complete success in Spain , the Government was carrying on , both by sea and land , a ruinous and disastrous war in America .
The American frigate Chesapeake was taken by the Shannon  but , in return , the Americans captured the Java frigate .
The British troops were compelled to evacuate Fort Erie and Fort George , which were taken possession of by the Americans , and ultimately the American fleet took , burnt , sunk , or destroyed the whole of the English fleet on Lake Erie .
Every real lover of liberty in England deprecated this war with our brethren of America  but the enemies of liberty now began to boast that they would put down and destroy the principles of Republicanism throughout the world .
I always considered the war with America to be a most unjust war  and , although I lamented to hear of the destruction of human lives , and the spilling of human blood , and particularly that of my own countrymen , yet I always wished success to the Americans , who were fighting for their rights and liberties against an invader , who would gladly have reduced them to that state of slavery from which they had emancipated themselves by a glorious and successful struggle .
The late harvest was very fine , and the crops were good  corn , therefore , began to fall , and of course the landed interest caught the alarm , and set about sounding the tocsin for a corn bill , to keep up the price of the grain .
In consequence of this , the subject was frequently discussed in Parliament .
The Ministers professed to disclaim the proposition , but they set their friends , the Country Gentlemen , forward to propose the measure .
It was at length settled , that corn should not be imported unless the price of wheat was above eighty shillings per quarter .
Although a farmer myself , I always exclaimed against this measure , notwithstanding it did not appear likely that the country would be immediately affected by it , as there was no probability of the price of wheat being much below eighty shillings a quarter during that season .


At this period I was fully occupied in a most laborious and uprofitable speculation .
I had taken a farm of nearly four hundred acres .
This farm had been occupied by a Major Andrews , a retired militia officer , who had commenced farmer , a business of which he was totally ignorant , and in the pursuit of which he sunk a good fortune  yet when he quitted this farm , or rather when his property and stock were seized and sold under an execution , perhaps the county of Hants could not have produced its equal for foulness and bad condition .
I had occupied three thousand acres of land in Wiltshire , and I will venture to say , that there was not half the quantity of couch grass upon the whole of it that I now found upon the cleanest acre on Cold Henly Farm .
Couch grass is the most injurious of all weeds , and , in some parts of Wiltshire , it is very appropriately called `` the farmer 's devil . ''
This farm of Cold Henly was about seven miles from my residence at Middleton Cottage , and therefore I had ample exercise in riding to and fro , and attending all day to the cleaning of the land .
The proprietor of the farm was a clergyman , and , as he professed to be very friendly with me , and gave me to understand that he should be happy to continue me as a tenant after my lease was out , I spared neither pains nor expense in cultivating the land , in hopes of hereafter reaping a reward for my labour .
In fact , it was absolutely necessary to have the soil perfectly clean and free from all sorts of weeds and grass , to be enabled to cultivate it upon the drill system , as laid down by Tull .
I believe that in the course of the first summer I burned forty thousand cart loads of couch , which made as many bushels of ashes for manure .
Almost all the land required to be ploughed five or six times , by means of which , and of innumerable draggings and harrowings , and incessant and persevering labour , the farm became , in my hands , altogether as clean as it was foul and overrun with every description of weeds and grass , before I came to it .
I was induced to expend a large sum of money in improving this farm , from the promises of the cunning , artful , and deceitful old clergyman , who was the proprietor of it .
The buildings , which were very extensive , and miserably dilapidated , I put into complete repair  and , perhaps , altogether I expended on the land and offices three times as much as a common rack-renting farmer would have done .
Being fully satisfied that I was greatly benefiting his estate , the parson not only gave his consent to any alteration that I thought proper in the course of husbandry , which the old tenant was bound in his lease to pursue , but he took all occasions to encourage me to do so  and , as my proceedings were so extremely beneficial to his farm , which he never failed to acknowledge , I did not once dream that he would hereafter , for the sake of litigation , pretend to object to it .
As this farm was a manor of itself , and was well stocked with game , I had plenty of shooting of all sorts upon it , as well as over the manor of Longparish , over which I also held the deputation .


This year , 1814 , was one of the most eventful periods in the history of the world .
The first week in January , Dantzic was occupied by the allies , whose grand army passed the Rhine , and occupied Coblentz .
The treacherous and dastardly Murat , King of Naples , basely betrayed and deserted his patron , his friend , his benefactor , and his relation , Napoleon , by concluding a treaty with England  and on the 17th he openly joined the allies against France .
Of all the despicable , base , and treacherous conduct of the base and dastardly crowned heads , during the whole war , this desertion of Napoleon , by his brother-in-law , Murat , was the most base and dastardly .
To be sure , during the whole of this long and bloody war , carried on by the despots and tyrants of the earth , their conduct was one continued exhibition of treachery , falsehood , selfishness , and deception .
This abandoned race of Sovereigns , Kings and Emperors , who assume a divine origin , and set up a claim of divine rights , have , by their acts , unequivocally proclaimed to the whole world that no reliance can be placed in their words , their bonds , or their oaths .
They have all of them broken the most solemn treaties , and violated the most sacred and binding obligations , without the least regard to truth , to honour , or to honesty .
At the very time that the Governments of the different states of Europe have , in high-sounding language , been preaching about national faith , national honour , and national credit  the favoured Ministers of each of them , in conjunction with their masters , have , wherever it suited their interested and corrupt purposes , without the least regard to precept or principle , unblushingly violated and abandoned all national credit , honour , and faith  and have rendered faith , honour , and credit , mere bye-words among nations .
If a man in common life were to act in the same unprincipled and dastardly manner as these Sovereign Princes have done , he would be shunned and spurned out of all society .
If one of the `` lower orders '' were to conduct himself in a similar manner , he would be kicked out of the company of the most abandoned frequenters of the lowest brothels and tap-rooms  no man would employ him or have any transaction with him  he would be driven from amongst even the lowest of mankind , and deservedly left to starve , to perish , and to rot upon a dunghill .


The moment that the fortune of war turned against Napoleon , all the royal , mean , cringing , timid , time-serving , contemptible wretches , who had filled up the measure of his glory , and almost worshipped him when he was victorious  those who had partaken of his bounty , and whose whole existence had depended on his smiles  all those that he had elevated to power , and who had reigned by his sufferance , now joined the tide and swelled the torrent that was collected to overwhelm him .
Sweden and Denmark having , like others , been bribed by English gold , drawn from the sweat of John Gull 's brows , had now joined the allies against France , and the first action upon the territory of Old France took place on the 24th of January , when Mortier was defeated  and on the 27th the army commanded by Napoleon in person , at St. Dizier , in Champagne , was overpowered by numbers , and repulsed with considerable loss .
The tyrants of Russia , Austria , and Prussia met at Basil , and soon after all their armies advanced .
Blucher and Bernadotte , Crown Prince of Sweden , crossed the Rhine with their numerous hordes , and the armies of France gave way .
Nancy , Troyes , Vitry , and Chalons were taken by the allies .
But Napoleon having rallied his divisions , defeated first the Russians , and then Blucher , who led his army on to attack Marmont , but he was defeated a second time .
Prince Schwartzenburg advanced with the troops under his command direct for Paris , but Napoleon attacked him with an inferior force , beat him , and obliged him to retreat .
The battles were now so numerous , and the success was so equally balanced , that it would require a history of itself to recount them .
With an army which was never one third as strong as that of the invaders , Napoleon contested every inch of the ground , and fought so bravely and so skilfully , that the issue was for some time doubtful .
At length the numerous hordes of the confederated nations of Russia , Austria , Prussia , Germany , Denmark , Sweden , and Bavaria , flushed with their success , pushed on to Paris , to defend which Marshals Marmont and Mortier had but very inadequate means .
The assailants , two hundred thousand in number , reached the northern side of Paris on the 29th of March , and on the following day a desperate battle took place .
It was not till they had sacrificed fifteen thousand men that the allies could make themselves masters of the posts which the French held in the neighbourhood of Paris .
Not disposed to run the risk of another engagement , and especially of the arrival of Napoleon , who was hastening back by forced marches , the coalesced despots were glad to obtain the surrender of the capital , by granting honourable terms to Marmont , who accordingly withdrew with his troops from Paris , which Maria Louisa had already quitted .
On the 1st of April all the allied Sovereigns entered that city as conquerors .
The Emperors of Russia and Austria , and the King of Prussia , all of whom had been so repeatedly conquered by Napoleon , who had generously , although foolishly , restored two of them , after having conquered them and taken their capitals , now , in return for his generous conduct to them , had the meanness and the cowardice to declare that Napoleon was the only obstacle to the establishment of a peace  upon which he magnanimously , to save the effusion of human blood , did not hesitate to offer his resignation .
This was accepted  the French Senate met , and agreed to a provisional Government , till a Constitution could be formed , and they passed a decree on the 2d of April , declaring Napoleon Buonaparte and his family to have forfeited the Imperial Crown .
It was agreed to by all the allied Sovereigns that Napoleon should retire to the Isle of Elba , which he was to possess in full sovereignty -- that he and Maria Louisa should , for life , retain the titles of Emperor and Empress -- that a large revenue should be granted to both of them , and to the Empress the Duchies of Parma , Placentia , and Guastalla , which were to descend to her son .
The treaty being thus arranged , on the 4th day of April , 1814 , the brave Napoleon signed his abdication of the Crowns of France and Italy .
On the 13th the treaty between the allied Powers and Napoleon received the signatures of the contracting parties , and on the 28th of April he embarked at Frejus , in Provence , for the Isle of Elba , in the British frigate the Undaunted .


In the meantime the English army under Lord Wellington had advanced from Spain , invested Bayonne , and passed the Odour .
A division under Marshal Beresford entered Bourdeaux .
At Toulouse Wellington had a battle , and the dispirited skeleton of an army under Soult was defeated about the time that the news arrived of a cessation of arms .


Although Napoleon had retired , it yet required very considerable address to replace on the Throne of France the Bourbons -- a race that was deservedly despised and execrated by the whole French nation , with the exception of the lazy , indolent , rapacious , and profligate priesthood , and a few of the old bigotted nobility .
The provisional Government presented to the Conservative Senate a CONSTITUTION , and proposed that Louis , the brother of Louis the Sixteenth , should , on the acceptance of that constitution , be declared King of France .
It is time now to turn our eyes towards England , from the affairs of which the reader will remember that I broke off at the period when the Parliament had settled that corn should not be imported , unless the price was above eighty shillings a quarter .
Motions were now made to address the Prince Regent , to seize the favourable opportunity to procure from the allied Powers some salutary regulations respecting the slave trade .
The country , both in and out of Parliament , was mad drunk with GLORY .
The House manifested its intoxication by a profligate and extravagant grant of the public money to Wellington , who was also created a Duke .
While this was going on within the walls of Parliament , the farmers were drunk and mad without , and were amusing themselves by burning and hanging Napoleon in effigy .
Deputies had already arrived in England , to invite Louis the Eighteenth to return to France .
He entered London on the 20th of April , with great pomp and state  he came from his retreat at Hartwell , attended by the Life Guards and many of the King 's carriages , and accompanied by our magnanimous conqueror , the Prince Regent .
He took up his residence at Grillon 's hotel , in Albemarle-street , where be held his Court , and was congratulated by the Lord Mayor ( Sir William Domville ) , and the citizens of London , and also by many of the nobility , all of whom would no doubt have as readily paid their devoirs to a mastiff dog , if he had been called a King .
Louis left London in great state , to embark for France , on the 23d of April , and he set sail from Dover on the 24th , in the Royal yacht , and landed at Calais in four hours .
His public entry into Paris took place on the 3d of May , and on the 14th of the same month a grand farce , or funeral service , was performed in France for the Kings Louis the Sixteenth and Seventeenth , the Queen and the Princess Elizabeth .
Louis was no sooner in possession of power , than he discovered that the Constitution which had been framed , and on his presumed acceptance of which he had been restored , was NOT PRACTICABLE , and that the people of France must submit to receive as a boon , one of his own manufacture .
`` Put not your trust in Princes . ''
The Marshals had been brought over one by one , and peace was at length settled upon the terms which the Allies dictated .
By this treaty France was to keep her ancient boundary , with some additions  the navigation of the Rhine was to be free  the territory of Holland and the Netherlands were to be incorporated and governed by the Stadtholder  Germany was to form a federal Government  and Switzerland to be independent .


While these things were going on in France , the Ministers were not inactive in England .
They caused Lord Cochrane , and Colonel Cochrane Johnson , his uncle , to be expelled the House of Commons , for what was called a conspiracy to defraud the Stock Exchange .
To punish men for defrauding , or rather playing off a hoax upon a set of swindlers and gamblers in the stocks , was curious enough !
The Emperor of Russia and King of Prussia arrived in London on the 7th of June , and the town was illuminated .
The Emperor of Russia took up his residence at the Imperial Hotel , in Piccadilly , and the King of Prussia in St. James 's Palace .
They were received in state at Court , which was held at Carlton House , and the Emperor of Russia and King of Prussia were invested with the Order of the Garter .
All the Tom and Molly fools in the country were flocking to London , to see these mighty Sovereigns  they spent their money , and most of them returned disappointed , the fools having expected to see something more than man in a King and an Emperor , and something more than a brute in the dirty old animal Blucher .
Nothing else but our new visitors was talked of in town or country .
Whatever company you went into , the first question was , `` Well , what do you think of the Emperor Alexander ?
what do you think of Blucher ?
What !
not seen the Emperor , and not seen Marshal Blucher 's whiskers ? ''
To hear the females of England , my fair countrywomen , talk of shaking hands with this filthy old beast , and some of them even boasted of his having kissed them , not only disgusted but quite sickened me  and I must own that the scenes I have heard described , which took place at Portsmouth , when they were all there at the great naval fete , made such an unfavourable impression upon my mind , that I have always thought with the utmost contempt of those who participated in these disgusting , revolting orgies .
It was all very natural that the time-serving , corrupt , vain , purse-proud Aldermen of London should act as they did  it was very natural that they and their wives and daughters should disgrace themselves as they did  but that my good , handsome , wholesome country-women , should have suffered such a disgusting monster as old Blucher to have slobbered them over and mouselled them with his dirty , stinking whiskers and mustachios , is something so extraordinary and so abhorrent to the character of English women , or , in fact , of any modest woman , that I , as an Englishman , was horror-struck every time I heard the filthy accounts of it .
Thank God , none of my family or connections ever disgraced themselves , even by going to see any of these German , Russian , Prussian , or Cossack animals .
I had business in London , but I put it off , nay neglected it , because I would not make one of the throng of fools who flocked to grace the triumph of these tyrants , who had been so long waging war against the liberties of mankind , and who had caused the shedding of oceans of human blood , for the sole purpose of gratifying their own malignant desire , to destroy every vestige of liberty and rational freedom upon the face of the globe .
During the whole time that these fiends in human form , these enemies and destroyers of the human race , remained in England , I stayed at home  I never spoke of them but with abhorrence and disgust  and as my family felt towards them as I did , they were seldom mentioned at all .
I even , as much as possible , avoided having any company at my house , that their blood-stained names might never be introduced .
I shall , perhaps , be told by some who read this , that I am inconsistent to express such a horror at blood-stained tyrants , and yet take every opportunity of extolling Napoleon , who was as great a tyrant as any of those whom I condemn .
To the unthinking , an explanation is certainly necessary from me  for I fully concur in the opinion that CONSISTENCY is absolutely necessary to form the character of a useful and honourable public man  that amongst the dangerous failings in a public character , inconsistency is the most dangerous .
A vacillating , weathercock , changeable being , in the common pursuits , in any pursuits of life , is , to say the least of him , a contemptible creature , one who is generally despised by all classes  but a weathercock in politics , which is the same as a weathercock in principle , is a being not only despicable but most mischievous .
To blow hot and to blow cold , in the same breath , or to maintain one opinion to-day and another opinion tomorrow , and the next day to revert to the former opinion , is not so much a proof of a weak head , as a sure proof of a profligate , an abandoned , and a dishonest heart .
I do not mean to say that a man can not alter his opinion without being dishonest  far from it  to maintain this proposition would be to deny the possibility of improvement in the human understanding .
But that man is to be dreaded and avoided , who can change his principles , or desert his public duty , from private pique , or selfish , interested motives  such a man would sacrifice not only his principles , but he would sacrifice his dearest friends , nay , a whole nation , to gratify his malignant and selfish passion for revenge  such a passion springs wholly from cowardice  and as a coward is always the most cruel of mortals , such a man , from mere cowardice , is always the most revengeful and remorseless  and he would wade up to his knees in human blood to accomplish his private and selfish ends .
Therefore , of all the deadly sins with which public men are accused , oh !
save me and protect me , from the misfortune , from the indelible disgrace , of being deservedly pronounced AN INCONSISTENT CHARACTER !
I have never praised Napoleon , or at least I have never intended to eulogise him , as a friend of freedom .
I have characterised him as a brave and noble-minded man  and the reason why I have been led away sometimes , perhaps , to be too general in my praises and admiration of the man is , not because he was not a tyrant himself , but because I always found him more disposed to tyrannize over mighty tyrants than he was to crush the weak and the unprotected .
Possibly all mankind are by nature tyrannical .
Take , for instance , the most humane , the most generous , the most sincere lover of liberty , and one who has been the most steady practiser of it -- to such a man even as this only give an unlimited , uncontrouled , and unrestricted sway over his fellow-creatures , and ten to one but he becomes an arbitrary tyrant  when , on the other hand , if he had been restrained within due bounds , by means of the proper checks and guards prescribed by a free constitution , he would have been one of freedom 's brightest ornaments , one of liberty 's safest , staunchest , guardians and protectors .
So it was with Napoleon .
If the tyrants of Europe had suffered him to remain First Consul of France , surrounded by such men as Carnot , to guard the liberties and rights of Frenchmen , and to controul their ruler 's actions , Napoleon possessed all the qualifications for making a mild , liberal , and patriotic , as well as a brave and brilliant ruler .
But the despots and tyrants of Europe dreaded such an example  they dreaded the example of freedom which the then constitution conferred upon the people of France .
It was not Napoleon 's political influence , great as it was , that excited their hatred , but they dreaded the little remaining liberty that the French people possessed , and it was their combined efforts , supported , maintained , and cherished , by the wealth of the people of England , that drove the French nation to submit to the hard and cruel necessity of placing unlimited authority in his hands , and consequently preparing the way for a great tyranny , and compelling him to be a tyrant .
My sincere and unchangeable opinion is , that few men ever lived , who , if they had been masters of the same boundless power that Napoleon was , would not have made much more cruel and more arbitrary tyrants than he ever did , and have exercised it more vindictively against the liberties of mankind than he did .
My admiration of Napoleon has , therefore , been always by comparison , as contrasted with the sanguinary and remorseless tyrants who were opposed to him  men who had sworn eternal abhorrence of liberty , eternal war against it  men , who , at the time that they professed a hatred of the tyranny of Napoleon , were themselves the greatest tyrants in the universe , and whose sole aim in destroying Napoleon 's power was to rivet the chains of slavery upon the inhabitants of the whole civilized world , and who have since sworn upon the altar of the Holy Alliance to maintain an indissoluble union , for the purpose of extinguishing every spark of freedom , wherever it may arise .
Napoleon was the enemy , the successful enemy of these tyrants  and under his sway , despotic as it might apparently be , and governed by the excellent code of laws that bears the name of its author , the people of France enjoyed a tenfold greater portion of liberty than any of the people who lived under the protection , or rather who groaned under the pretended forms of law and justice exercised by the hypocritical tyrants who were opposed to him .
All these tyrants had made war upon France , because the French had the spirit to overthrow the most execrable tyranny that ever cursed mankind  they made war against French liberty and French principles , before Napoleon was known  he was the child of fortune , who sprung up during the Revolution , and his talent and bravery pointed him out to the people of France as the most likely man successfully to oppose her enemies .
He was elevated to unlimited power through the rancour and the malice of those who had sworn in their hearts to restore the hated Bourbons , the Pope , the Devil , and the Inquisition .
While he exercised that power he subdued all those who resisted him , and his greatest fault , his greatest crime , was his generosity to the Austrian , Russian , and Prussian despots : having had those enemies to liberty and humanity in his power , it was a crime , an offence , in the eye of God and man , not to annihilate them , and thus secure the human race from the continuance of their arbitrary and brutal domination .
Napoleon having conquered them all , restored them all to power , and when they got him into their clutches , the return whichthey made him was , to banish him , to linger out the remainder of his life upon a barren rock , in a noxious and pestilential climate , cut off from the society even of his wife and son .
Peace to his manes , for he beat , he humbled , and he subdued , the greatest of tyrants , and he was the author of the Napoleon code , which restrained the power of infamous Judges , and established a real , instead of a mock trial by jury .
These are the traits of Napoleon 's character , which , as an Englishman , I admire  had I been a Frenchman , I should have adored him .
He is dead and gone , and John Gull is beginning to reap the bitter fruits that were sown to procure Napoleon 's destruction .
John is now grumbling , because he is called upon by the despots to pay the bill , to discharge the expenses which they incurred in dethroning and destroying NAPOLEON , and restoring Louis to the throne of France .
I hope and I believe these is not a man in the world who hates and detests tyrants and tyranny more than I do  yet I trust that I may , nevertheless , be permitted to admire certain traits in the character of the brave and murdered Napoleon , without being justly accused of inconsistency .
If I am asked whether I should like to live under such a tyrant and such a tyranny as existed in France , during the latter days of Napoleon 's reign , I answer NO .
But if I must submit to a tyrant , let it be to one that I can look up to , and whose superior qualities I can admire , rather than to a despicable wretch , who has not one noble quality , but , on the contrary , is deserving of contempt , derision , and execration .
I have been led into this digression by the recollection of hearing a very pretty little girl say , that she had been kissed by the filthy old beast Blucher , at Portsmouth , where the sceptered tyrants and their whole train had been to view the English fleet and the naval arsenal .
This young lady , who was really a very pretty delicate girl , I had always before considered as also a very amiable and a very modest girl  but , after hearing her boast of having been kissed by that dirty old animal , I could never look upon her but with pity , mingled with disgust .


On the 20th of June , peace was proclaimed in London .
The country was still intoxicated , or rather insane , with the idea of the GLORY that had been obtained by the downfall of one man , against whom all the despots in Europe had been united , and all the wealth of nations had been squandered during fourteen years .
On the 25th , there was a naval review at Portsmouth , to amuse the Royal tyrants  and on the 27th they all departed for Dover , where they embarked on the 28th .
On the 7th of July , a mockery or thanksgiving for peace was offered up in these churches , where the tocsin of war had for so many years been sounded by the pious preachers of the Gospel , the servants of the meek and lowly Jesus .
On this occasion the Prince Regent went in state to St. Paul 's .
On the 21st he gave a superb fete to two thousand five hundred persons , and on the 1st of August there was a pompous celebration , on account of the peace , held in Hyde and St. James 's Parks , in the latter of which there was a grand display of fireworks  while , still further to amuse the John and Jenny Gulls of the cities of London and Westminster , there was a sham naval engagement got up on the Serpentine River , representing a battle between the British and American fleets .
Of course the British fleet was victorious , and the Americans struck their colours , amidst the huzzas and shouts of the family of the Gulls , who , having for nearly a quarter of a century been gulled out of their money to pay the expenses of a sanguinary war , were now gulled out of an additional sum of their money to pay the expenses of a mock naval engagement with the Americans , who were in reality beating the British navy out of their lakes and seas .
This was the way in which the peace was celebrated , and at the same time the jubilee to commemorate the accession of the House of Brunswick .
It was a considerable drawback upon the pleasure to some of the Royal party , that , at the drawing-room which was held at Court , to receive the Royal visitors , the PRINCESS OF WALES WAS EXCLUDED  and as soon as the rejoicings were concluded , her Royal Highness quitted England , and embarked from Worthing for the Continent .


All this time the old King was confined at Windsor Castle , in some apartments which were padded six feet high  in these , blind and mad , he was suffered to wander about , a melancholy and disgusting object .
It is confidently affirmed , however , that he had frequent intervals of reason , in which he was perfectly sensible of his forlorn and wretched fate .
During one of these lucid intervals it is said that one of the domestics about his person informed him of the abdication of Napoleon  upon which he put himself in a great passion , and swore `` it was a lie . ''
This wretched old man was reduced from the highest pinnacle of grandeur to the most pitiable condition  none of his subjects were admitted to see him for many years  even his children were excluded , except upon particular occasions , and then they were admitted only in the presence of certain individuals .
The old Queen had the care of his person , and it is currently reported that she governed his gracious Majesty ( it being of course necessary to do so ) with considerable harshness .


When one reflects upon the bloody reign of George the Third , and calls to mind the rivers of human gore that were shed during that reign  when one looks back to the period of the American war , which was generally understood to be a war of the King 's , more than of his Ministers  when one calls to recollection the commencement of the French war , which , it has been asserted , was waged at his Majesty 's particular instance , in opposition to the private opinion of Mr. Pitt  when one looks back on the numerous sanguinary penal statutes that were passed during this King 's reign , and the thousands of victims that fell a sacrifice to them  when one contemplates the myriads upon myriads of brave Britons whose lives were offered up as a sacrifice to these Moloch wars , it may well and truly be called the UNFORTUNATE REIGN of King George the Third -- which reign was concluded by the King himself being locked up , for many years , in his own castle , a solitary captive , suffering under the complicated and melancholy visitation of blindness and madness : and when one thinks of all this , one may , without being very superstitious , consider the catastrophe as an awful instance of the Divine vengeance levelled at the ruler of a sinful nation .


The story goes that a mouse had contracted a sort of friendly sympathy for the hoary-headed , sightless Royal maniac , and paid him such frequent visits , during his long captivity , that it was at length become quite tame , and would submit to be handled by the unfortunate shadow of a great monarch .
The King was very much delighted with this friendly little visitant , and its little antics and gambols assisted him to pass away many a wearisome , sorrowful hour .
Unfortunately , the Queen came into the room one day , before the little trembling animal had time to escape to its hiding place .
The Queen eyed it before it had yet left the King 's hand , and when she quitted the apartment she ordered the attendant to take care and kill that `` nausty mose , '' before she came again .
The attendant ventured to state that the poor old King was so exceedingly partial to the mouse , and appeared so much entertained with it , that he was fearful his Majesty would miss it very much , and that the loss of it might make him unhappy .
The answer was `` kill the nausty mose before I come again ! ''
It was as much as the servant 's situation was worth to disobey , and the poor little tame animal , too confident of its former protection , was easily caught and killed !
The King , of course , soon missed the little solitary companion of his adversity , and for along time inquired the cause of its absence with the greatest earnestness  and when he found that it never came again , he grieved incessantly , more so than he did for any thing that happened to him during his long and cruel captivity .


So goes the tale , and I , for one , believe it .
What a subject this for reflection , what a picture of misery , what an awful monument of fallen greatness !
If the King had those lucid intervals of reason which it is said he had , his situation must have been , if possible , infinitely more deplorable than that of the captive of St. Helena  it must have been a thousand times more hopeless than that of the latter  shut up and confined for life in his own palace , by his own family , he must have soon lost all hope : while Napoleon , till he found that his dissolution was approaching , must have always been cheered by the hope , arising from ten thousand chances which could not fail to present themselves to his mind , of his being at length relieved from his iron bondage .


George the Third was the only King I ever saw , and I never wish to see another King .
The last time I saw him was when he was getting out of his carriage at the Star , at Andover , on his return from Weymouth  which place he never after visited .
His eyesight was then nearly gone , and his attendants were obliged to guide his feet , and to lead him like a child into the Inn .
I had known him in his prime , and had frequently hunted with him .
At the time when I saw him at Andover , he had indeed sadly fallen off , and his signature to all documents was effected by a stamp , some one directing his hand .
All Acts of Parliament , all Commissions , all Death-warrants , and all Pardons , were for a long time signed in this manner .
He who had signed more death-warrants than any mortal that ever breathed , and who could spare or kill human beings by the mere dash of his pen  alas !
alas !
he , once so powerful , could not now even save the life of a poor mouse .
He who , as a mere matter of course , and perhaps without giving the subject a thought , had put his fiat on the black scrolls which ordered hundreds upon hundreds of his fellow creatures to be sent to their long homes , and executed in cold blood  he now grieved and lamented , and cried like a child , at the death of a mouse .
I would have had the Emperor Alexander , the King of Prussia , and all the Royal Visitors , go down to Windsor , to be eye-witnesses of the `` ills that ( Royal ) flesh is heir to : '' they should have been reminded , by a personal interview with this poor old maniac , to what a wretched state it was possible even for the greatest monarch to be reduced , by the hand of Providence .
That all-wise and just Providence , the same Power that permitted the Emperor NAPOLEON to be sent a prisoner to St. Helena  the same Power that permitted HENRY HUNT to remain a captive in Ilchester Bastile , for TWO YEARS AND SIX MONTHS , commanded also that GEORGE THE THIRD should , after having LOST HIS SIGHT , and been DEPRIVED OF HIS REASON , be confined as a solitary prisoner in his own palace , for many of the latter years of his existence .
The Lord 's will be done !


During the whole time that these ridiculous freaks were going on in London , and that John Gull and his family were running stark mad with joy and glory , each bellowing out , whenever or wherever you met him , have you not seen the Emperor ?
have you not seen the King ?
have you not seen Blucher with his whiskers ?
surely you have seen the Don Cossack ?
c. c. c.  during this time I remained quietly and snugly at Middleton Cottage , occupied in fishing or looking after my farm , and most sincerely lamenting the folly of my countrymen and countrywomen  and whenever I had an opportunity , I did not fail to remonstrate with them on their ridiculous and preposterous conduct , and to assure them that the hour would come when they would be heartily ashamed of it , and would have cause and leisure for bitter repentance .
With many this time has arrived , with others it is fast approaching .
So far was I from ever making one of the number of fools who ran after these sceptred despots , that , when some of them were travelling post by the house where I was staying , I retired into a back room , in order to avoid the possibility of seeing them  always saying , when the question was put to me , that `` I thanked God I had seen one King , and was so well satisfied , that I never wished to see another . ''
A single sample was quite enough for me .
One of my great political friends had expressed the same sort of disgust at the idea of running after these foreign Sovereigns , and he swore most roundly and lustily , that none of his family should stir an inch to see them .
It turned out , however , that he did not keep his word -- but whether his breach of it arose from `` the grey mare being the better horse , '' or from his being himself overcome by a childish curiosity , I can not tell  perhaps a little of both prevailed  at any rate I heard that my friend and all his family went to Portsmouth , to see the Royal sight , and get a squint at Blucher 's whiskers and mustachios .
My friend and his family swelled the number of those who suffered at Portsmouth -- `` ninny nanny , one fool makes many ! ''
It was now all glory , all joy , and all seeming prosperity with John Gull , every thing was military !
As a proof that it could not well be otherwise , let us look to a return , which was presented to the House of Commons , of the number of officers in the British army in the pay of John , which return was as follows : Field Marshals , 5 -- Generals , 81 -- Lieutenant Generals , 157 -- Major Generals , 221 -- Colonels , 152 -- Lieutenant-Colonels , 618 -- Majors , 612 -- Captains , 2960 -- Lieutenants , 4725 -- Ensigns , 2522 -- amounting in the whole to the enormous number of TWELVE THOUSAND AND FIFTY-FOUR officers !
What think you of this , John Gull ?
Here is a larger army of officers than the whole number of military that was thought sufficient by our ancestors to be kept up during the time of peace .
Yes , the officers alone , at the time to which I allude , actually out-numbered the whole of what our peace establishment used to be .


One of the precious effects of the downfall of Napoleon was the restoration of the bigotted , despicable tyrant , Ferdinand the Seventh , to the throne of Spain  and one of his first acts was to restore the hellish Inquisition , with all its horrors , which had been abolished during the sway of the French , and which had also been suppressed by the Cortes .
The amiable Pope Pius the Seventh being restored to the see of Rome , he performed his part in the scene of mummery and tyranny , by issuing a Bull for the restoration of the order of the Jesuits .
So it will be clearly seen that the canting Boroughmongering Protestant Parliament of England , while it pertinaciously refused to grant emancipation to the Catholics in Ireland , contrived to restore the Pope , Popery , the Inquisition , the Jesuits , and every species of superstition and intolerance upon the Continent !


About this time two fanatics , of the names of Johanna Southcote and Hannah More , were much followed in the West of England .
Somersetshire could boast of possessing two female saints , Mrs. Hannah More and Mrs. Johanna Southcote , at the same time  which of the two was the greatest imposter it would be very difficult to decide , although the former appears to have borne off the palm of successful fraud and imposition .
Miss Hannah , who , in her younger days , had been a very frolicsome lass , became all at once converted into a saint , and set up for a severe and rigid moralist  and she had the merit of establishing the gang generally known by the title of the SAINTS , amongst our politicians .
In her train she had the Sidmouths , the Wilberforces , the Babingtons , the Dickensons , and others of that puritannical cast  although it has been whispered , but that , of course , must be a calumny , that , from the well-known character of some of these gentry , who were very frequent in their visits , the buxom dame ( who had now assumed the title of Mrs. ) contrived , like the friars of old , to indulge in the gratification of those passions to which it is said real saints are not prone .
Some of her neighbours were in consequence so ill-natured as to say , that her conversion was not sincere , but that it was a mere cloak to cover certain practices .
But my readers are aware that we must not believe all that the world says .
Mrs. Johanna was an illiterate woman , whose fanaticism was carried to full as high a pitch as that of Mrs. More  but as her doctrine did not suit `` the powers that be '' quite so well as the doctrine of the other did , she could not boast of having Ministers of State and many of the Nobility as her disciples , although amongst her numerous followers she did not want for men of talent and education .
Dr. Ash , under whose care the VERY VENERABLE JUDGE BEST received his education , was a staunch disciple of Johanna 's , and it is said the venerable Judge himself at times discovered a little hankering after the prophetess  but whether his attachment was to her person or her principles , is not clearly decided .


During this period the British troops were carrying on a marauding , petty warfare in America , and on the 24th of August they burnt the newly-built , half-finished city of Washington , and magnanimously destroyed the city printing-press , and threw the types into the streets , that they might be trampled under the horses feet .
England being at peace with all the rest of the world , the Government had nothing else to do but to direct its whole force against the Americans , both by sea and land , and I believe it was Mr. Charles Yorke , the First Lord of the Admiralty , who put forth a speech in his place in Parliament , to the following effect : -- `` That now Napoleon was deposed there was another example of democratic revolution , and it was necessary to depose James Madison , the President of the United States of America . ''
This speech was hailed and cheered by a great number of the Members of the Honourable House , many of whom seemed to think that it was no very difficult matter to carry it into effect .
But they reckoned without their host  for the news having arrived of the total defeat of the British fleet , on Lake Champlain , matters began to wear a different aspect , and the boasters were compelled to draw in their horns a little .
Sir James Yeo had the command of the English fleet upon the Lakes , and Commodore Downie , in the Confiance , of 38 guns , had the command of the British squadron upon Lake Champlain , supported by Captain Pring , in the Linnet , of 16 guns  Lieutenant M'Ghee , in the Chub , of 11 guns  and Lieutenant Hix , in the Finch , of 11 guns .
Lieutenant Raynham and Lieutenant Dual had the command of twelve gun-boats .
The American squadron was commanded by Commodore M'Donough , in the Saratoga , of 26 guns  Captain Harley , in the Eagle , of 22 guns  and Captain -- , in the Ticonderoga , of 18 guns , with 1 sloop , and 10 gun-boats .
The English fleet had 90 guns and 12 gun-boats  the American fleet had 83 guns and 10 gun-boats -- so that the British fleet had the superiority in number of guns and weight of metal .
The American fleet was anchored opposite an American battery , commanded by General M'Coomb , at the head of 800 men .
The British troops , under the command of Sir George Prevost , amounting to thirteen thousand men , were all drawn up on shore ready to take the battery , if the English fleet had succeeded in beating the Americans .
It was communicated to Sir George Prevost that the English fleet would attack the Americans that day .
Commodore Downie called all his officers on board , and communicated to each the order of battle , and his last words were , `` Lieutenant M'Ghee will lead into action  let it be close quarters , MUZZLE to MUZZLE . ''
He doubled a point of the American coast with a fair wind , and came in full view of the enemy lying at anchor  the signal was then given to bear up , and commence the action .
Mr. M'Ghee carried in the Chub , of 11 guns , and placed her gallantly close alongside of the Eagle , of 22 guns , agreeable to orders , having sustained the fire of the gun-boats as he passed  he blazed away at the enemy and received their fire in return , till he himself was wounded in three places , and every man out of his complement of sixty was either killed or wounded , with the exception of six .
In fact , the Chub was made into a cullender , and completely disabled , before he struck her colours .
The same fate attended the Confiance , the Linnet , and the Finch , the latter of which grounded on a reef of rocks about the middle of the engagement .
The gun-boats appear absolutely to have run away .
Thus was the British fleet captured by an inferior fleet of the Americans .
Commodore Downie was killed by a ball from the American gun-boats very early in the contest , and the Confiance is said to have struck her colours without coming fairly into action  the result was , the British fleet was lost , and the officers were tried by a Court Martial .
All the others were promoted , and the gallant Lieutenant M'Ghee was reprimanded for taking his ship prematurely into action .
This is a pretty specimen of British justice in the naval department , and a melancholy example of the reward bestowed upon the gallant officers and men who fought our battles and maintained the British character .


On the 1st of November was opened the Congress at Vienna , where Lord Castlereagh , as the representative of the King of England , attended , and where it is generally believed he played second fiddle to Prince Metternich .


In consequence of the peace , and the Bank of England having drawn in a considerable quantity of its paper , preparatory to the payment in specie , which , as the law stood , they were compelled to at the end of six months after the peace had been proclaimed  in consequence of this , and there having been a good crop of wheat and a fair harvest , the average price of wheat during the year was seventy-four shillings per quarter , and the price of the quartern loaf was reduced to one shilling .
Notwithstanding this , many riots took place in Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire , by the Luddites , who continued to set the laws at defiance , and to break the frames in the most lawless and unwarrantable manner .
Their hostility was directed against all sorts of machinery , but particularly against the looms and frames used for weaving and knitting in the stocking trade .


The supplies voted this year amounted to seventy-five millions six hundred and twenty-four thousand five hundred and seventy-two pounds .
By a return , it appeared that the amount of Bank of England notes in circulation was between twenty-eight and twenty-nine millions , and that the number of private banks was seven hundred and twenty-four .


The Parliament had met late in the fall of 1814 , but little was done of importance , except passing the address , and a Bill called `` the Preservation of Peace Bill , '' to put down by force the disturbances in Ireland .
The state of Ireland had become very alarming , as the poor Irish were suffering the greatest privations from bad government and severe laws  which laws were exercised with the greatest severity , to support an infamous tithe system and a national church , the most profligate , the most expensive and rapacious that ever existed  a church in every respect hostile to the religion of four-fifths of the inhabitants , and a priesthood proud , overbearing , and intolerant .


In the higher circles it was now confidently given out that the Princess Charlotte , the heir apparent to the throne of England , was to be married to the hereditary Prince of Orange  but the disposition of her Royal Highness had been greatly soured by the infamous treatment of her poor mother , and , conceiving that this said young Dutch upstart had not paid her mother proper respect and attention , but that he was more disposed to fawn and cringe to the will of her father , it is said that she dismissed him from her presence , and peremptorily refused to marry him .
This drove her Royal Papa into a great passion , and our magnanimous Prince Regent went suddenly to Warwick House , the residence of his daughter , and discharged all her servants .
She , however , proved herself a legitimate Guelph , in obstinacy , at any rate  for she refused to see the young Orange afterwards .
This young lady had secured the affections of every honourable and unprejudiced person in the kingdom , by her undeviating attachment to her mother , and she gained the hearts of thousands by her firm and undaunted opposition to the arbitrary mandates of her father , with respect to that mother .


The Parliament met very early after the adjournment , and the first Act they passed was to renew the restriction of cash payments by the Bank of England  another violation of a positive pledge of the Honourable House , another gross breach of faith committed upon the people by a corrupt Parliament , which had solemnly declared by an act that the Bank should be compelled to pay their notes in specie at the end of six months after peace was made .


Accounts were now brought to England that Napoleon was reigning in full sovereignty at Elba , and all the corrupt writers in the Ministerial and daily press were sneering at the idea of his fancied sovereignty .
But by the solemn treaty of Paris , Napoleon was as much an Emperor as he ever had been as much a Sovereign as the Emperor of Russia  and , by the law of nations , quite as much entitled to make war or peace with other powers as was the King of England , the King of France , or any other Sovereign .
But these writers , as I have before said , were daily ridiculing his sovereignty , and holding his power in derision .
But it will be seen hereafter , that it is a very dangerous thing to treat with contempt the hostility of an enemy , however weak that enemy may be .
In the meantime Louis the Desired , the contemptible King of France , decreed that the property of the Buonaparte family should be sequestred  the old Bourbon tyranny was making the most rapid strides  the press was much more enslaved than under the reign of Napoleon  disturbances had broken out in many parts of France  yet such was the dreadful , enthralled state of the press , that no one dared to mention them , nor were they ever known but by the proclamations of the King , to restrain and repress them .
The finances of France were , nevertheless , in a flourishing state  their trade was fast reviving , and every means that ingenuity could devise were resorted to , to induce the people to feel for royalty  and , amongst other things , a solemn funeral for the late King and Queen of France took place , which was conducted with great pomp and ceremony .


In America , the English were routed at New Orleans , by General Jackson , who , with an undisciplined militia , and very inferior numbers , caused great slaughter amongst the British troops  in fact , the number killed in the English ranks amounted to more than the whole number of the American troops , so expert were the riflemen , and so superior were the abilities of the American General Jackson .
This was a death-blow to the hopes of the English , for the bravery of the Americans appeared to be invincible  they were in truth fighting for Liberty , for themselves and their country , and not for any despot or any despotism .
This fine spirit gained them a peace , which it may fairly be said they fought for , bled for , and ultimately obtained by conquest  and James Madison remained , in spite of all the threats of deposing him , President of the only free people upon the habitable globe .
Thus , as I hope and trust , have they secured and placed upon an imperishable basis , the liberties and just rights of their people .
They had a right to be proud of their success .
England , at peace with all the rest of the world , carried on a war with America  yet the latter , single-handed , not only met and contended with , but repelled the mighty power of her adversary , and by the equity of her cause , and the bravery of her citizens , she conquered a peace , in spite of the threats of England 's haughty , bullying , ignorant , and intolerant Ministers , who had declared that the right of search was a sine qua non which must form the basis of any negotiation .
Ultimately , however , these very Ministers were glad to make peace with the Americans , by saying nothing about the sine qua non , the right of search , for which they had gone to war .
England went to war almost solely to maintain the right of search  the Americans went to war to resist that right  and England having made peace , and suffered the right of search to be passed over in silence , the Americans have gained their object , and the English have lost the point which was the cause of the war .


On the 17th of January in this year , 1815 , a Catholic meeting was held in Dublin , at which it was determined to petition Parliament for an unqualified emancipation .


The price of wheat and all sorts of grain having been reduced , the great landholders had been for some time raising a cry , that the landed interest was in danger , and that the farmers would be ruined unless some law was made to keep up the price of grain to the war standard , which , on an average , was from twelve to fifteen shillings a bushel .
The Ministers had been pressed hard by the great landholders , in both Houses of Parliament , to bring forward such a measure  but , knowing and feeling the unpopularity to which it would expose them , they had , from time to time , put them off , and they appeared to discountenance any such proposition , whenever it was mentioned in the House .
At length , however , the Ministers gave way to the urgent demands of the landholders , although apparently with great reluctance and considerable doubts .
In several districts the landholders urged the farmers and their tenants to petition the House for a Corn Bill .
Amongst the number of these landholders , the most active and the most forward to promote such petitions in Wiltshire and the West of England , was Mr. John Benett , of Pyt-House , near Shaftesbury , the present Member for that county .
Committees of both Houses of Parliament were appointed to inquire into the state of agriculture , for the purpose of ascertaining what measures it were necessary to take , or what Act to pass to keep up the price of corn , or rather to keep up the price of the quartern loaf to the war standard .
Mr. John Benett was one of the witnesses who volunteered to be examined at great length before both of these Committees , that of the House of Lords as well as that of the House of Commons .


As soon as the evidence given before these Committees was published , I rode over to Botley , to my friend Cobbett , to urge him to take a more decided part against the measure  for I thought I discovered in his Register a leaning towards a Corn Bill , or rather the doctrine was maintained that it was necessary to protect the farmer as well as the merchants and other trades .
When I arrived , I found him endeavouring , by arguments the most powerful , to shew the injustice of leaving the farmer open to the competition of foreign growers , who could raise the grain at half the expense which must be incurred by the native growers .
Perhaps this was said to ascertain my sentiments upon the subject , which I immediately , and in the most unequivocal manner , stated to be in direct opposition to the measure .
I argued against the injustice of making the mechanic and the labourer pay a war price for his bread in time of peace , and I maintained that it was the duty of the farmer and the landholder to petition for a reduction of taxation , so as to enable him to compete with the foreign farmer , instead of petitioning for a monopoly by his exclusion .
In five minutes my friend Cobbett was either convinced of the propriety and justice of my remarks , or at any rate he professed to be so  and he concurred with me in the necessity of calling upon the public to come forward to oppose so injurious and ruinous a measure as that which was contemplated .
I pointed out to him the fallacy and the hypocrisy of those who pretended to be anxious for the good of the farmer , and we both very soon came to this conclusion , that a Corn Bill would be ultimately injurious to the farmer , and that the only result of it would be , to raise the price of the staff of life , and to grind the face of the poor , to enable the farmer to continue to pay high taxes , for the support of an unconstitutional large standing army in the time of peace , and to enable the lazy sinecurist and the unmerited pensioner to wallow in wealth and riot in luxury , drawn from the sweat of the poor man 's labour .
From this time forward Mr. Cobbett took the most decisive part in opposition to every movement of the Corn Bill gentry .


Sir Henry Parnell , an Irish Member , ONE OF THE OPPOSITION , brought forward the measure in the House of Commons , and I believe he was Chairman of the Committee .
I will now put upon record a few questions and answers , extracted from the evidence of the aforesaid John Benett , Esq. of Pyt-House , voluntarily given before the Committee of the House of Lords , in favour of a Corn Bill , which evidence was printed by order of the Right Honourable House :


The Evidence of JOHN BENETT , Esq. of Pyt-House , voluntarily given lefore the Committee of the House of Lords , in favour of the Corn Bill .


You hold a considerable quantity of land in your own hands ?
-- I do .


What number of acres ?
-- I believe upwards of 2000 acres , in various parishes in the western part of Wiltshire , about twelve miles from Warminster .
-- My residence is Pyt-House , in Wiltshire .


Have you any general information about the state of that quarter of the country , or can you speak only to the particular district in which you reside ?
-- I can speak to the county of Wilts  for I am in the habit of riding through it very often , and am in the habit of meeting with the farmers in the county , from having been for some years a farmer , and am now President of the Agricultural Society of that county .
Can you give the Committee any account of the increase and alterations that have taken place in the value and prices of the different articles of produce from land , and the expenses of cultivation , and from what period ?
-- I can speak to nearly twenty years .
The price of wheat has varied so very materially , it is more easily ascertained from the returns of the markets than from recollection .


In the present state of the improved cultivation of those parts of the county of Wilts with which you are acquainted , can you state the various prices which it will be necessary for the farmer to receive for the different species of grain he rears , in order to remunerate him for his expenses ?
-- Taking the taxes , the price of labour , and all outgoing expenses of the farmer as they now stand , and the rents at which land has lately been let , I do not conceive the farmer can possibly raise wheat , and remunerate himself with ten per cent .
interest upon his capital , under 12s .
a bushel , or 96s .
per quarter .


If the farmer was to receive only 75s .
per quarter , would he be capable of paying any rent at all ?
-- No , he certainly would not be able to pay his rent , and get his ten per cent .
upon his capital .


Is land generally let in Wiltshire upon the supposition that wheat will stand at 96s .
and barley at half the price of wheat ?
-- I believe that lands have been let even at a higher calculation than that  I am in the habit of valuing estates of my own as well as of others , and of giving opinions to my friends  and I have always calculated upon 12s .
a bushel , and I believe surveyors do the same  many of the estates let by survey let at a much greater calculation , or rather , I believe , without any .


Do you believe there is any surveyor who practises the surveying of estates for the purpose of fixing rents , who proceeds on the calculation of wheat being at a higher price than 12s .
per bushel , or 96s .
a quarter ?
-- I believe no estates have been let in Wiltshire , by our first-rate surveyors , on a calculation of more than 12s .
per bushel , or 96s .
per quarter , for the last eight years , since the high price of corn and the competition for estates .


If wheat should be at 80s .
and other grains at a proportionate price , do you believe the farmers would continue in the cultivation of their land at the expense of the present mode of culture ?
-- Certainly not  I think less wheat would be sown , and less money would be expended in the cultivation of land .
From your knowledge of the general ideas of farmers , do you believe that the same opinion you have expressed to the Committee upon this subject is generally entertained ?
-- With respect to renting farmers I believe the same opinion prevails with those who have leases they can not get rid of  but where they have not leases , or their landlords will permit them to surrender them , they are not under the same alarm , because they will quit their farms altogether , unless they can get a reduction in their rent in proportion to the price of corn  but no reduction of rent will answer as it stands now , it will exhaust the whole rent .


Do you know of any farmers who have actually withdrawn their capital from agriculture ?
-- No , I do not  but a tenant of my own surrendered a beneficial agreement , of which there were seven years to come .
I gave my tenants notice that I would not promise to sink their rents , but that they might surrender their leases altogether .


At what value of wheat did you compute the rent which the tenant paid you under the lease , of which only one year has run ?
-- I made no particular computation for that  I have been in the habit of making valuations of my own farms  I have generally taken it at 12s.  I could have got more for this estate , it being a particularly valuable farm  I made no particular calculation as to this farm .
I have another tenant , whose term of seven years only has expired  I expected to have raised his rent nearly 400l .
per annum , upon a rent of 870l.  I have not raised him a farthing  I dare not propose to raise him  I think he would quit me if I should attempt it  and I doubt my power of letting it , if he should quit me .
I directed my surveyor to look over his farm , and let me know the price he thought I might put upon it , and if he thought it would bear raising , to let me know  and I have not heard from him , though he looked over it about two months ago .


How long had he possessed it at the rent of 870l . ?
-- Only seven years .


At what rate did you calculate the value of wheat at that time ?
-- At 12s .
a bushel .


At what would you have calculated the price of wheat if you had raised it ?
-- It is proper I should explain that  I did not in fact fix the rent  I agreed he should take it at the Commissioners ' valuation , it being then just laid in under the act of inclosure .


Do you know whether the Commissioners fixed the rent , calculating wheat at 12s .
a bushel ?
-- I do not  but I told him at the time I considered the Commissioners ' valuation would be a certain price  that if the valuation was lower than the price , he should have it at the lower rate  the Commissioners ' valuation exceeded my price , therefore he has it at the price named by me , though I thought it too little .


Is it a farm which requires the application of much capital to render it productive ?
-- Yes , it does .


When you had in your own mind settled that you would get an advanced rent of 400l .
a year , what did you take the price of wheat at in forming that calculation ?
-- I conceived wheat was higher than 12s .
a bushel , not more than 13s .
a bushel .
I have not valued this farm particularly at 400l .
a year more , but I felt that the farm was worth 400l .
a year more than I had let it at .


You have said that at the time the Commissioners valued it , you believe they proceeded on the idea that wheat was worth 12s .
a bushel ?
-- No , I do not know what calculation the Commissioners made  they were three eminent surveyors .


When it passed in your mind that you would get 400l .
a year more , was not that in consequence of your having an opinion that the Commissioners had fixed the land at a lower rent than if wheat were calculated at 12s .
a bushel ?
-- Certainly it was .


And your idea of getting 1270l .
was in consequence of what passed in your mind as to wheats being fairly to be valued at 12s .
a bushel ?
-- Certainly it was .


Having stated your knowledge to be general over the county of Wilts , and having stated your calculation of wheat to be at 12s .
for the last seven years , do you apply that to the farms within your own immediate knowledge , or over the county of Wilts generally ?
-- I believe that generally over the county of Wilts , 12s .
is the lowest calculation which has been made by surveyors in letting land .


If a free importation should take place , how many rents do you think the farmer will be able to make then ?
-- It depends entirely upon what effect the free importation may have upon the price of corn  taking wheat at 8s .
a bushel , and taking all agricultural expenses to stand as they now do , I conceive the farmer with an average crop  can not pay any rent at all .
You conceive a proprietor farming his own estate , with a competent share of skill and capital , would be a loser if the price of wheat was 8s .
a bushel ?
-- Yes , I do .


Has any proportion of the value of daily labour been made up to the labourers out of the poor 's rates ?
-- Yes , it has  the weekly income of every family is made up to the gallon loaf and three-pence per head .
Supposing the father to earn 9s .
one of the children 3s .
another 2s .
and another 1s .
od .
the magistrate conceiving they are able to earn that , or the overseer being willing to give them the money for their labour , whatever the deficiency is , is made up to the amount I have stated .
I must explain , that I give this evidence as a magistrate more than as a farmer  for I act for a very large district , and am in the habit of making this order .
The gallon loaf per head per week is what we suppose sufficient for the maintenance of every person in the family for the week  and the 3d .
is for clothes  and if the parish think proper to find clothes , the 3d .
is deducted .
This practice goes through all the western parts of Wiltshire , and I believe throughout the county .


Have you , from your situation as a Magistrate , any connexion and knowledge of the condition of the lower class of manufacturers ?
-- I have  I live within nine miles of a great number of them , and act for several manufacturing parishes as a Magistrate .


Can you state the average consumption of a family ?
-- The manufacturers live better than the farming labourers , but they need not live better  when they come to the parishes they have only the same allowance from us as paupers of every class .


Do you expect the labouring manufacturers will consume a greater proportion of farm produce than they have hitherto done ?
-- I conceive greater waste will be made of farm produce when it is at a low price than when it is at a high price , and , in fact , they must consume more : they live upon wheat instead of barley  they lived upon barley formerly , and now they live upon wheat , and eat fewer potatoes probably .


Do you think it would be possible for landlords to reduce their rents so as to enable the tenant to make a fair profit , according to the present price of corn ?
-- No  I do not think it is in the power of landlords , it must depend upon the riches of the landlord  but if he reduces the whole rent upon some farms , it would not be sufficient according to the present price of corn  taking the present price of wheat at eight shillings a bushel , and all other grain following the same scale .


The price is high abroad at present ?
-- It is .


The case of a peace with America , and of our receiving corn from thence , do not you conceive , in case of a great influx of corn from the continent , the price must fall considerably ?
-- Certainly , as the price falls upon the continent , it will fall here , if free importation is permitted  but I would wish to be understood here as to the price of corn , it must very much depend upon the crop of the year , because I do not believe it possible to import sufficient to feed the people of Great Britain , and very much must depend upon the quantity of corn grown  and my own belief is , that the price of corn will be very high indeed in three years , higher than it has probably been known for the last ten years .
I think the importation is an uncertain sort of supply  there may be a bad crop upon the continent , or a thousand interruptions may stop the importation .


On what is your opinion founded , that it will be at a high price ?
-- Because a great deal less wheat will be sown in consequence of the low prices  I believe the defalcation in the number of acres sown will be very great indeed .


Do you think that the present rents are the cause of the tenants not being able to obtain a fair profit , corn being at eight shillings a bushel  or does it arise from the price of labour , the amount of poors ' rates , taxes , and other expenses ?
-- I do not myself think the rents are too high , taking them at a general average  in fact , I do not think the gentlemen of landed property can now live at the present rents with the same comforts their forefathers have done on the same estates  that if the rents are to be lowered , the gentlemen of landed property must be sunk in their scale in society .


Do you conceive that the existing rents bear a greater proportion to the produce than formerly ?
-- No  not so great by a great deal  I conceive that rents have not risen in the same proportion that all the articles of life , which we are compelled to have as country gentlemen , have risen .


The following requisition was published in the Salisbury and Winchester Journal , on the 2d of January , 1815 , calling a public meeting of the landholders and farmers of the county of Wilts , to be held at Warminster , on the 6th day of January following : --


WE , the undersigned Land-Owners and Occupiers of Land , in the county of Wilts , conceiving it to be impossible that the British farmers should ever contend on fair or equal terms with foreign growers of corn , even in British markets , as long as the former shall have to bear such heavy charges of rates , taxes , assessments , and other expenses attendant on their cultivation , of which the latter know nothing : Being also convinced that the farmers of this kingdom have already suffered severely , even to the ruin of many of those who have had small capitals  and also that the evil is fast approaching to the land-owners  and must ( if no relief be given to the agriculturists ) evidently fall on the country at large : Feeling it also to be a duty incumbent on as many of us as are landlords , to exert ourselves for the protection of our tenants , and on us all jointly to exert ourselves , for our mutual protection : -- Do hereby give Notice , That we intend to meet at the Lord 's Arms Inn , at Warminster , in the county of Wilts , on Friday the 6th day of January next , at 12 o'clock at noon , for the purpose of considering of the propriety of preparing Petitions to the two Houses of Parliament , on behalf of ourselves and others  and we invite all Land-Owners , and Occupiers of Land , in the county of Wilts , who may wish to unite with us in forwarding this our object , to meet us on that day , and to co-operate with us , in adopting such measures as may then and there be thought necessary , for our mutual relief and preservation .


Dated this 30th of December , 1814 .
( Signed . )


Thomas Grove .
John Benett .
James Everard Arundel .
George South .
J.H. Penruddocke .
Alexander Powell .
H. Linton .
T. Davis , Jun. .
S. Card .
John Davis .
J.E. Strickland .
G.J. Kneller .
John Gordon .
H. Biggs .
J. Slade .
William Smith .
Robert Smith .
Richard Rickword .
Henry Hubbard .
Robert Candy .
John Neat .
John Pearce .
George Young .
James Burges .
Richard Pocock .
James Pearce .
William Glass .
Robert Payne .
J. Howel .
John Folliott .
William Marsh .
Thomas Chandler .
Thomas Burfitt .
John Barter .
John Phillips .
Henry Phillips .
Thomas Burge .
John Mitchell .
J.C. Burbidge .
John Willis .
Robert Rumsey .
James Chaiman .
E.F. Seagram .
James Goddard .
John Goddard .


This was short notice , as many people of the county of Wilts did not get the Salisbury paper till the 3d or 4th of January .
In fact , I myself , who was living in Hampshire , did not get it till the 4th in the evening , nor should I have seen it at all , if a friend had not sent it to me .
As I had a small freehold in the county of Wilts , and also occupied a considerable farm at Upavon , in that county , I made up my mind , within five minutes after I saw the above advertisement , that , although I was living at a distance of nearly forty miles from the scene of action , I would make one at this intended snug meeting .
I mounted my gig the next day ( the 5th ) , and drove as far as Deptford Inn .
I had heard of a Mr. Gourley , who lived at Deptford , upon an estate of the Duke of Somerset 's  and , as he had acquired the character of being at least an eccentric , if not an independent man , I called at his house with the intent to have some conversation with him upon the proposed meeting .
Fortunately , however , he was from home , or I might have been hampered with a very troublesome and a very disagreeable companion  for I afterwards found that Mr. Gourley , though perhaps a very well-meaning person , was so flighty , so confused , and so opinionated in his wild and visionary notions , that he was a very dangerous man to have any thing to do with  at any rate , he was a person that it was impossible to go hand in hand with .
I slept at Deptford Inn , and proceeded through Heytesbury to Warminster in the morning , calling upon my old friend Cousens in my way thither  I knew that he was staunch to the back-bone , and that , in case he was at home , I should be sure of his support to second any amendment that I might find it necessary to propose .
When I drove up to his door at Heytesbury , I was surprised to find all the window-shutters closed , although it was nearly ten o'clock .
Upon hailing him , he popped his head out of the chamber window with a night-cap on , in one of the severest hoar frosty mornings I ever beheld .
I told him where I was going , and he promised to follow me instantly , without fail  and he kept his word , for he overtook me upon his grey poney before I reached the town .


When I drove into Warminster , the town was as still and as quiet as possible , without any of those bustling indications which I had been accustomed to witness at a public meeting .
While I was taking my breakfast at the Lord 's Arms Inn , some of the requisitionists made their appearance , and they were soon followed by the remainder , and a considerable number of the landholders of the county , amongst whom , as I sat at an up-stair window , I recognised Mr. Wyndham , of Dinton , the High Sheriff  Paul Methuen , Esq. one of the Members for the county  and the said John Benett , surrounded by a few of the requisitionists .
I sat very quiet while my friend Cousens reconnoitred their forces , and communicated their arrival .
At length we saw them all proceed to the Town-hall , perhaps twenty-five or thirty of them at the outside -- as pretty a little snug cabal as ever was mustered upon any occasion .
They passed my window and went smirking along , little dreaming that they should meet with the slightest interruption or opposition to their measures , which were all ready cut and dry , and safely deposited in the pocket of the celebrated attorney , Mr. Charles Bowles , of Shaftesbury .
As the train passed up the street , the town 's - people took little other notice of them than by now and then eyeing them askance with a jealous look .
I had remained the whole time snug in my room , without one soul of them knowing or suspecting that I was in Warminster  but , as soon as I saw them all safely housed , out I bolted into the street , and made my way after them .
As we walked up the street , my friend Cousens intimated to two or three of the shopkeepers who I was , and the news flew like wildfire round the town , that Mr. Hunt was arrived , and gone up to the Hall .
As , therefore , something like fair discussion was likely to take place , the said meeting , which , ten minutes before , excited no interest whatever amongst the town 's - people , was , in a very short space of time , crowded by the shopkeepers , and attended by almost every respectable man in the town .
When I entered the Hall it was very evident that I was not a very welcome guest , and that I had not been expected by any one .
As , however , I was a landholder of the county , and one of those who were invited , it was impossible to make any objection , as I was as much entitled to be present as any man in the room .
Mr. Grove , whose name stood at the head of the requisition , was called to the chair .
This gentleman , who is descended from one of the most ancient families in the county , having shortly stated the object of the meeting , Mr. Benett arose , and , after some wriggling and twisting , addressed them .
As the following report , which was published in Keene 's Bath Journal , on the Sunday following , contains a brief outline and an impartial account of the proceedings , I will insert it verbatim , as it was afterwards copied into almost every newspaper in the kingdom :


On the 6th of January a Meeting of `` Landholders and Occupiers of Land , '' was held at the Town-Hall , Warminster , convened by public advertisement , signed by John Benett , Esq. of Pyt-House , ( the gentleman who gave such long and strong evidence before the Committees of both Houses of Parliament in favour of the Corn Bill ) , and several other respectable land-owners and farmers of the county of Wilts , to take into consideration the propriety of presenting Petitions to both Houses of Parliament , on behalf of the proprietors and occupiers of land .
Thomas Grove , Esq. of Fern , one of the gentlemen who called the meeting , having taken the chair , Mr. Benett addressed them at a very considerable length in favour of a petition that he submitted for their adoption , expressive of the serious injury already sustained by the farmer , and the probable result likely to fall on the landholder , arising from the reduced and low price of corn , owing particularly to the importations from France , c..
The Petition further stated , that as the agricultural interest was blended with that of the tradesman and mechanic , the latter were invited to join in its support , and add their signatures thereto .
Mr. Benett insisted that , as the evidence given before the Corn Committees had never been contradicted , the legislature were bound to afford the agricultural interest their protection  and , enforcing the necessity of Parliamentary interposition in favour of the landed interest , he said , that unless some measure were devised to enable the farmer to pay his present rent and taxes , the landholders would be completely ruined  and he solemnly declared , that , unless this desirable object was carried into immediate execution , he for one would be under the absolute necessity , before that day twelvemonth , of leaving the country with his family , to reside where provisions and all the necessaries of life were to be obtained at a rate within the reach of his fortune .


[ Footnote : Quere .
-- If this solemn asseveration of Mr. Benett 's be correct , ( who , by the bye , is a Land-owner to the amount of 10,000 l. a year , ) what will be the fate of those who are left behind , without the means of flying from the evil ? ]


The motion was briefly seconded by Mr. BOWLES .
-- Mr. HUNT began by stating his objection to the meeting altogether , asserting , that if the meeting was not illegal , it was highly improper for a few individuals of a particular class to call a meeting to petition Parliament in favour of tradesmen and mechanics , without giving them an opportunity of attending to decide upon its propriety .
This was a close meeting of landholders and farmers  many respectable tradesmen , inhabitants of the town , would have attended , but they were told they had no business there , not being landholders or farmers .
This meeting , therefore , bore a resemblance to a `` Conclave of Cardinals with closed doors . ''
-- Instead of calling a meeting like this , why not call a public county meeting , and meet the question manfully and openly ?
One reason against this was , that at an open county meeting , even Mr. John Benett would not be so hardy as to bring forward a petition , the sole object of which was the keeping up the price of corn , under the cloak of its being a petition in favour of the tradesman and the mechanic .
--


In fact , this was a petition especially to benefit the landholder  even the farmer was of secondary consideration , and it was decidedly hostile to the interest of every other class of society  and if acted upon would prove ruinous to the little tradesman , the mechanic , and the labourer .
The landlord had met with no reverse since the commencement of the war  his rents had progressively increased , in proportion as the rest of the community had suffered privations  the nearer the mechanic and the labourer had approached to starvation and beggary , the higher were the profits and the more efficient the means of the landholder .
This was no theoretical proposition , hastily introduced , it was a practical truism , the result of careful and recent inquiry .
He would read to the meeting an account of the population of the parish of Enford , a large parish in the centre of the county of Wilts , with the comparative statement of the rise in the price of labour , the price of bread , and the price of land , within the last 30 years .
The number of houses were 143 , population 656 , farmers , c. 250 , labourers 406 , labourers ( not paupers ) 201 , labourers ( paupers ) 205 .
About 30 years back , the labourers in this parish received 6s .
per week  at this time they received 8s .
per week -- 30 years back , the quartern loaf averaged about 5d .
at this time it is 10-1/2 d. -- 30 years back , the labourer could purchase with his week 's pay , 6s .
fourteen quartern loaves  now he can only purchase with his week 's pay , 8s .
nine quartern loaves -- about 30 years back , the principal farm in this parish , then belonging to the late Mr. Benett , of Pyt-house , in this county , was let for 400l .
a-year  at the present time this farm , the property of Mr. John Benett , of Pyt-house , is let for 1,260 l. a-year .
Thus it clearly appears in this parish , within the last 30 years , labour has risen from 6s .
to 8s .
per week , 33 per cent. , the quartern loaf from 5d .
to 10-1/2 d. , 105 per cent. , the rent of land from 400l .
to 1,260 l. , 212 per cent .
This proves that bread has risen within this period more than three times as much as labour , and land more than twice as much as bread , and more than six times as much as labour .
At the present price of land , corn , bread , and labour , the landlord is benefited three times as much as the farmer , and six times as much as the labourer .
Mr. Benett said , that he had , since the period mentioned by Mr. Hunt , purchased the tithes , and added them to the farm , which was included in the present rent .
Mr. Hunt replied , that he was perfectly aware of this circumstance , as well as of another circumstance equally important , which was this , that Mr. Benett bad taken a considerable portion of the best land from his farm , and added it to another , which produced a greater rent than the value of the tithes , therefore the balance was more in favour of the landlord than be had stated .
He had mentioned this particular farm , as it belonged to Mr. Benett , the proposer of the present measure  but from his own knowledge ( having an estate himself in the same parish ) he could state , that the land had risen in the same , and , in some instances , in a higher proportion .
He , therefore , particularly enjoined the farmers to pause before they gave their sanction to a measure , which had only for its object the benefit and aggrandizement of a few rapacious landholders , whilst it was calculated to shift the odium of a dear loaf off their own shoulders , and fix it upon the back of the farmer .
Let the odium rest where it was due , upon those who were the supporters of the war , upon those who have fattened upon the miseries of the people .
-- Mr. Bleeck followed on the same side with Mr. Hunt , exposing the fallacy of attempting to palm upon the meeting a petition , professing to have for its object the welfare of the tradesman and the mechanic , whilst the operation of it would tend to perpetuate the misery they had so long endured  he called to the recollection of many of the meeting , the scenes which they had been in the habit of witnessing in that hall , the walls of which had so often resounded with the professions of those gentlemen who were now complaining of the present times , the effect of that war , to support which , they had so often solemnly pledged , not only their last guinea , but their last drop of blood .
He called upon the Chairman not to blink the question , because the majority of the meeting appeared against the petition , but let it fairly meet its fate .
-- Paul Methuen , Esq. , one of the representatives for the county , said , that seeing a meeting called , signed by a number of respectable individuals , he felt it his duty to attend it  but if he had known that it was to have been a close meeting with closed doors , he certainly would not have come near the place .
If the meeting decided upon petitioning the House of Commons , whatever that petition may be , he should feel it his duty to present it  although he would not pledge himself to support the landed interest , to the injury of the tradesman and the mechanic .
The Chairman having hinted that it was going a little too far , to say that this petition was in favour of the tradesman and mechanic , and as they would not have an opportunity of voting upon the subject , he thought they had better be left out of the petition .
The whole meeting appeared to concur in this , and Mr. Benett proposed to draw the pen through the words `` tradesman and mechanic  '' which being done the Chairman desired all those who were for the petition to hold up their hats .
The Chairman declared a decided majority kept their hats on  which was followed by a symptom of approbation , whereupon the Chairman asserted , that the meeting was so tumultuous , he would not take the sense of it against the petition .
Upon this , the Chairman , with Mr. Benett and a few of his friends , retired to a private room at the inn , but whether to sign this petition in secret , which they could not carry in public , or to abandon it altogether , we do not know .
-- A statement of the fate of the petition was announced to the inhabitants of the town by the bellman , amidst the becoming cheers of the populace .


I have no hesitation to say , that the publication of this report in all the London newspapers , and in almost every country newspaper in the three kingdoms , first roused a general feeling aginst the proposed Corn Bill .
Meetings were afterwards called in London and in Westminster , and petitions were presented against the measure from almost every town and district throughout the country .
Sir Francis Burdett attended the meeting of his constituents in Palace-yard , where they passed strong resolutions , and sent a petition to the House against the measure  but Sir Francis took a different view of the question , and appeared to think it was necessary that the English farmer should be protected , and I believe he said that he cared not whether the Bill was passed or not , and that it would make no difference to him personally whichever way it was decided .
This certainly was not viewing the question with that liberality and sound judgment with which the Baronet was accustomed to act .
For the moment , his speech threw a considerable damp upon the ardour of a great many persons , who had before been very sanguine against the adoption of the said Corn Bill , and so completely were the affections of the people riveted to the opinions of Sir Francis Burdett , that his constituents cheered him , and drew him home in his carriage afterwards , amidst the acclamations of the populace .


This was the first instance that I recollect , for many years , in which I acted in opposition to the opinions of Sir F. Burdett  but , as I was thoroughly convinced of the mischievous intention of the supporters of the measure , as well as of the fatal result that must follow its adoption , I persevered in my opposition to it with all my power .
I was not contented with having attended the Common Hall , as a Liveryman of the city of London , to protest against the Bill  I was not satisfied with having blown up the cabal at Warminster , and compelled the parties to sneak off with their resolutions and petitions , to pass them and get them signed in holes and corners  but I personally procured a requisition to be signed by the freeholders of the county of Wilts , and presented it to the High Sheriff for the county , my old school-fellow , William Wyndham , Esq. of Dinton , who was then residing at Marshwood , near that place , while his house was building at Dinton .
The Sheriff was just upon the point of going out of office , and said the day was fixed for him to meet the new Sheriff , at Salisbury , for the purpose of the latter being sworn in .
He , however , undertook to transmit my requisition to him , and recommended that he should give notice of the meeting in the first Salisbury paper after he had entered into his Sheriffalty .
I ascertained that a Mr. GEORGE EYRE , the King 's printer , of the house of Strahan and Eyre , printers in London , was to be the new Sheriff , and , not choosing to trust to this mushroom gentleman , I appointed to meet Mr. Wyndham at Salisbury , with the requisition , that I might see the old and new Sheriff together  telling him , at the same time , that I was determined not to be shuffled out of the county meeting , for , in case the new Sheriff did not choose to call it , I should go to the expense of calling it myself  and in the propriety of doing so Mr. Wyndham concurred with me .
( My elder readers will recollect , and it is necessary to inform my young friends , that there was no law at that period to prevent my calling the county together , to consult upon the propriety of petitioning the Parliament  at least as many of them as chose to assemble for that purpose . )


I had drawn up a requisition , and procured a number of respectable signatures , and if the Sheriff , by refusing to call the meeting , had dared to neglect his duty and abuse the high trust reposed in him by his office , it was only necessary to advertise the requisition , and call the meeting in the name of the requisitionists .
When the day arrived I was punctual to my appointment , and met the two Sheriffs at the office of their Deputy , Mr. Attorney Tinney , who would as soon have seen the devil as me  but , as he knew that I was not to be put off with any of his usual quibbling tricks , upon demanding an interview with his principals , I was admitted forthwith .
I found this Mr. George Eyre just such a Jack-in-office as I should have expected a King 's printer , or a King 's lacquey , or a King 's hairdresser to be  as unlike Mr. Wyndham , both in appearance and manner , as a sneaking upstart could be unlike a respectable country gentleman .
The latter was unassuming , free , easy , and gentleman-like , willing and anxious to do his duty in such a way as was at once consistent with the character of his high office , and accommodating to the requisitionists  whilst the former was jealous of his authority , and appeared only to consider how he could get over the task which he had neither the courage to decline , nor the address to manage with common urbanity .
The day , however , was at length fixed , but at the greatest possible distance of time , evidently for the purpose of frustrating the object of those who signed the requisition , as in all probability the Bill would be passed the House of Commons before the day of meeting , or at least before the petition could be presented .
In fact , both the Sheriff and his hopeful Deputy declared with a sneer , that the necessity of holding the meeting might possibly be set aside , by the House of Commons passing the Bill .
Old birds , however , are not to be caught with chaff , and therefore the requisition was drawn too general to allow of practising a trick of this sort  it said not a word about the House of Commons  it merely requested that a county meeting might be called , to consider the propriety of petitioning PARLIAMENT against the proposed Corn Bill  and I sarcastically observed to these wiseacres , that it depended upon the feeling of the meeting , when we were assembled , which branch of the Parliament we should petition , whether King , Lords , or Commons , and it would be quite time enough to consider that point when we were assembled .
It always required considerable address and presence of mind to keep the upper hand of these legal quirk-dealers , these impudent under-strappers , whose whole trade consists in trick and chicane  but I do not recollect ever having been outwitted by any one of them as to the proceedings of a public meeting .


In the interval between the presenting of the requisition and the coming together of the meeting , there were great riots in London , each night that the measure was discussed in the House of Commons  great multitudes had assembled about the House in a menacing manner  the military were called in , and the Bill was passed while the House was guarded with an armed military force with bayonets fixed .
Many of the Members of the Honourable House were hooted and hustled as they passed into the doors  and Mr. Garrow , the then Attorney-General , had rather a narrow escape .
It is said that he was surrounded , and the mob were just upon the point of claping a halter round his neck , supposing him to be one of the obnoxious individuals who had been pressing the Bill through the House with the most indecent haste , when some one in the crowd sung out with a loud voice that it was Garrow , the Attorney-General , who had not prosecuted any one for a political libel since he had been in office  upon which they gave him three cheers and let him pass .


The day for the meeting at length came .
When we arrived at Salisbury , where the meeting was called , the news was brought down that the Bill had passed the House of Commons the night before  but we were not thrown off our guard by this event , as we had in some measure anticipated it .
It was , however , necessary to draw up fresh resolutions , and a petition to the Lords instead of the Commons , which Mr. Cobbett and myself had scarcely time to half accomplish before a messenger entered out of breath , to say that the Sheriff and his party were gone to the Hall , whither they had proceeded the moment the clock struck twelve , instead of waiting , as usual , till it was one  the county meetings having always been called at twelve , under an understanding that one was the hour at which business was to be commenced .
In another minute or two a second messenger hurried to us , to say that the Sheriff had opened the proceedings , and the meeting would be instantly closed if we did not proceed to the spot with all possible expedition .
In consequence of this , Mr. Cobbett and myself packed up our half-finished resolutions and hastened to the scene of action , yet still conceiving it impossible that any thing assuming the character of a gentleman could be guilty of such a mean , pitiful , and underhanded trick as that which we were told would be played .
Scarcely , however , had we reached the door of the Hall , when we met Mr. Sheriff , Mr. Deputy , and a pretty little knot of sycophants and dependants , coming out  and Tinney informed us , that , as no one had come forward when the requisition was read , the Sheriff had dissolved the meeting .
We expostulated against such an ungentlemanly like trick , but our expostulations would have been in vain if the tricksters had happened to have got without the door of the Hall  but , fortunately , we got into the entrance passage , and met them face to face , where our arguments were supported by such an overwhelming power in the rear , that they were quite irresistible .
The fact was , there happened to be no back door , and with a little gentle force we conveyed , or rather wriggled , these worthy men in office back again , step by step , and inch by inch , till the worthy Sheriff once more took the chair , amidst the deafening shouts of the largest county meeting that I ever witnessed .
To tell the truth , they found it impossible to get out of the Hall , and at length , after having made as many shifts and feints and shuffles as an old fox would to avoid the well-trained , true-bred pack , and finding that we neither yielded to coaxing , bullying , nor wheedling , they ultimately made a virtue of necessity , and the high-bred High Sheriff turned-to very kindly , and once more opened the proceedings of the meeting , by reading the requisition .
I then moved an adjournment into the open air , and two carpenters ' benches ( the very best temporary hustings ) being at hand , the business went on and passed off in a most regular and satisfactory manner .
After I had moved and Mr. Cobbett had seconded the resolutions , and a petition to the House of Lords , praying that they would protect us from the rapacity of the Commons , and not pass the Corn Bill , and after an amendment had been proposed by the Reverend Mr. Hill , supported by Mr. Gourley , our resolutions and petition , which also prayed for a Reform of the House of Commons , a reduction of all useless places , and an abolition of all unmerited pensions and sinecure places , were carried unanimously , or at least with only a few , very few dissenting voices .
Sheets of parchment and pens and ink were provided , and the people began to sign their names instantly .
Mr. Cobbett returned to his home , while I sent messengers or went myself into every town in the county , and collected signatures , which amounted , at the end of four days , to TWENTY-ONE THOUSAND , and were forwarded with the petition to Lord Stanhope , who presented it on the second reading of the Bill in the House of Lords .
I reckoned that it cost me upwards of fifty pounds , out of my own pocket , to accomplish this county meeting and petition  no one soul but myself having contributed a single sixpence towards the expense .


About the time that the populace in London were committing great excesses , by breaking the windows of those Members of Parliament who took a prominent part in favour of the Corn Bill , Lord Cochrane , who was confined in the King 's Bench prison , in consequence of a verdict given , or at least procured , against him , for the part it was pretended he had in the Stock Exchange hoax , made his escape from that prison , a circumstance which caused a very considerable sensation throughout the metropolis and the country  for it was rumoured that his Lordship had made his escape with the intention of placing him self at the head of the London rioters , who had by this time increased in numbers and daring resistance to the authorities .
In descending by a rope from the top of the wall , his Lordship fell from a very considerable height , and injured himself severely , so much so , that he was for a great length of time unable to raise himself from the earth .
His Lordship remained undiscovered for some weeks , and then appeared in his place in Parliament , where he was discovered sitting upon one of the benches of the House of Commons , and from thence he was taken by the civil power , and delivered once more into the custody of the Marshal of the King 's Bench prison .
Let the reader bear in mind what I have already mentioned , that the Parliament of England was obliged to be aided by the military  that Westminster Hall and both Houses of Parliament were encircled by troops , and all the avenues leading thereto were guarded by soldiers with their bayonets fixed , and that thus this law , this infamous Corn Bill , to enhance and keep up the price of bread , the staff of life , was passed under the protection of a military force , in defiance of the prayers , the petitions , and the remonstrances of a great majority of the people of England  a fact which clearly demonstrated that the House of Commons , where the Bill originated , were so far from being the representatives of the people , that they acted in direct hostility to them , and had no feeling in common with them , but were more like a band of venal , corrupt , profligate , dishonest , and merciless oppressors .


The landed gentry in other parts had now began to shew a disposition to shake off the income tax , called the property tax , which was an arbitrary and inquisitorial war tax , and ought to have been abolished as soon as peace was proclaimed .
As , however , the Ministers were evidently not in the least disposed to give up fourteen millions a-year , which this horrid imposition produced , many meetings were held and petitions agreed to , praying for its being abolished .
Amongst the number a requisition was signed and presented to the Sheriff of Somerset , George Edward Allen , Esq. of Bathhampton , requesting him to call a public meeting to take the subject into consideration , and he immediately advertised a meeting of the freeholders and inhabitants of the county , to be held at Wells .
At the head of this requisition was Mr. Hanning , of Dillington .
I saw the advertisement in the public papers , and as it appeared that the parties calling the meeting only intended to petition for a partial repeal of the tax , as far as it affected themselves , while they left the most odious and obnoxious half of it untouched , I mean that part which affected the small annuitant and fundholder , the widow and the orphan , whose income was under one hundred pounds a-year , I directly made up my mind to attend the meeting .
As a preliminary step , therefore , I wrote a letter to the freeholders and inhabitants of the county , calling upon them to come to the meeting , and to support me in the endeavour to frustrate such a partial proceeding .
In case of their being disposed to petition the Parliament , I urged them to support me in petitioning for an absolute repeal of the whole tax .
This letter was published in one or two of the county newspapers , and I also printed and caused to be circulated five hundred copies of it in hand-bills .


When the day came , I had to drive from Middleton Cottage in the morning , a distance of fifty miles , and I reached Wells a little after one o'clock , the meeting having been advertised to commence at that hour .
The news flew through the city like wildfire , and as I drove through the streets in my tandem I was hailed by the acclamations of the people .
I had not been five minutes in the inn , before I received a polite message from the High Sheriff , Mr. Allen , to say that he had delayed opening the meeting till my arrival , and he would not go to the hustings till I was ready to attend .
Here was a contrast to the conduct of the paltry upstart of the county of Wilts !
As soon as the clock struck one Mr. Allen was urged , by Mr. Perpetual Under-Sheriff and his associates , some of the attending Magistrates , to proceed to the hustings , and to open the proceedings forthwith .
With this suggestion he , however , peremptorily refused to comply , saying , `` as Mr. Hunt has published a letter in the public newspapers , to say that he should attend the meeting , and propose some amendment to the petition which is meant to be submitted to the meeting by those who signed the requisition , I have not the slightest doubt but he will keep his word  and as he lives at a great distance , I should not be doing my duty conscientiously if I did not wait half an hour , to make allowance for the difference of clocks , or any accidental delay that may have arisen in so long a journey . ''


As he had anticipated , I arrived within ten minutes of the time  and in answer to his polite message I returned another , thanking him for his attention , and promising not to detain him five minutes .
In the meanwhile I had a message from Mr. Hanning and the other gentlemen who signed the requisition , to say that , previous to our going to the hustings , they wished to consult with me upon the propriety of the resolutions , c. that they meant to submit to the meeting .
My answer was , `` give my compliments to the gentlemen , and say that I am at the Swan , where I shall be happy to confer with them if they wish it . ''
In three minutes , before I could scarcely wash my hands and face after my journey , they entered my room .
They began by saying that they had seen my letter in the public papers , and as they by no means wished to act hostilely to me , or to create any division at the meeting , they had no objection to adopt my resolutions and petition , which prayed for the total repeal of the Property Tax , instead of those which they had drawn up , which only went to the partial repeal of it .
I saw by this that they had fully ascertained what was the real public feeling , and that they were not willing to brave it at the meeting .
I begged to see their resolutions and petition , adding , that I by no means wished to take it out of their hands  and to skew them that I wished to meet them upon liberal terms , I proposed the embodying one of my resolutions among theirs , and a corresponding clause in their petion .
As these additions fully recognised the principle for which I contended , I was desirous to skew the requisitionists that I did not wish to take any advantage of the popularity that I possessed , and I therefore agreed that Mr. Hanning should propose his resolutions and petition , thus altered and amended , and that I would then give him my hearty concurrence and support .


My proposition being readily accepted , and hailed as an emblem of union , we proceeded to the hustings together , and every thing went off with the greatest unanimity and cordiality amongst all the parties , with the exception of a discussion that took place upon a bye resolution , which I proposed , of a vote of thanks to the Ministers , for having concluded a `` peace with the Americans , the only remaining free Government in the universe . ''
I meant this resolution to answer a double purpose  first , by thanking the Ministers , I gave the Whigs a kick  and second , it was a compliment due to the Americans , for having bravely repelled a tyrannical invader .
It was a Whig meeting , at least it was called by the Whigs , and therefore every exertion was made to prevent the passing of this resolution .
Old Sir John Cox Hippisley palavered , and whined , and begged and prayed , for an hour , and endeavoured to wheedle and coax me to withdraw my motion for the sake of unanimity .
Upon all public matters , however , I was ever inflexible , and I was therefore prepared at all times to do my duty without looking to the right or to the left , and I consequently insisted upon having the motion put to the meeting .
On a division it was lost by only a very small majority .


In the month of January , 1815 , a treaty was concluded between the Allied Powers at Vienna , to maintain the treaty of Paris .
In the Congress , by which this treaty was settled , the Ministers of some of the Allied Powers seriously proposed to seize Napoleon at Elba , to carry him off by force from that island , and to convey him to St. Helena  and this base scheme was to be executed in violation of the solemn compact entered into with him  a compact granting to him the island of Elba in full sovereignty !
But it is quite clear that there are no treaties , however solemn  no engagements , however binding  no obligations , however sacred , that tyrants will not violate , and laugh to scorn , when it suits their purpose so to do .


The treaty of Vienna was entered into upon the 25th of January , and it is supposed , and I believe pretty well understood , that this diabolical plot against the life and liberty of Napoleon was privately communicated to him , by some friend that he had amongst the diplomatists of the Allied Sovereigns .
Napoleon , therefore , took the resolution of leaving Elba as soon as possible , and returning to France , to endeavour to reconquer that crown which had been forced from him by the very same despots whom he had more than once restored to liberty and power after he had subdued them .


Having deliberately made up his mind to risk the attempt , Napoleon promptly carried it into execution .
He set sail from Elba on the 26th of February , with about one thousand brave followers , in four vessels .
An English frigate pretended to chase them , but he landed his little force at Frejus , in France , on the 1st of March , 1815 , and he was soon joined by various bodies of the army , who flew to the ranks of their old commander , who had bravely led them into a thousand battles , and with whom they had participated in a thousand victories over the enemies of their country .
Though at the outset his force was not more than a thousand strong , he marched boldly forward in a direct line for Paris , and his numbers continued to swell as he advanced .
France was in a state of the greatest agitation , and of hopes and fears for his safety and his success .
He arrived at Gasson the 5th , the next day he crossed the Upper Alps , passed on through Grenoble , reached Burgoin on the 10th , and on the 11th he entered the City of Lyons , the second city of the French empire , where he was received with every demonstration of respect and attachment .
The army and the people vied with each other which should evince the greatest enthusiasm  from Lyons he issued a Proclamation , annulling all that had been done in his absence .
On the following day he marched on , and reached Autun  on the 16th he entered Auxerre  on the 17th he halted at Fontainbleau  and made his entrance into Paris in triumph on the TWENTIETH OF MARCH .
There he was hailed with enthusiastic delight  and , amidst the deafening acclamations of the Parisians , he entered the Palace of the Thuilleries , from whence Louis the Desired had fled but a few hours before , with the utmost precipitation and dismay .
Napoleon could have arrested his flight , and brought him back as a prisoner without the least difficulty , but he was too brave even to tread upon so fallen a creature .
At a subsequent period the Duke d'Angouleme also fell into the hands of one of his Generals , but the moment Napoleon heard of it , he ordered him to be set at liberty to go where he pleased .
But , as it turned out afterwards , this proved a fatal lenity .
On the day that Napoleon entered Paris , the following notices were placarded by the people on the walls of the Thuilleries and the neighbourhood .
`` A Palace to be let well furnished , except kitchen utensils , which have been carried away by the late proprietor . ''
`` A large fat hog to be sold for one Napoleon , '' c. c..
These things evidently shewed with what feelings of utter contempt the Bourbons were regarded by the Parisians .
Napoleon , as I have already stated , was informed that Louis had only quitted Paris a few hours previously , and that it would be very easy to overtake him and his cavalcade , and bring them back prisoners to Paris  but this he positively forbade , adding , that he had no wish to touch a hair of his head .
Thus was Napoleon placed upon the throne of France , restored to all his former power of sovereignty in that country without one life being lost , one single shot being fired .
If ever there was a legitimate monarch , Napoleon was now that man  for he was voluntarily elected and placed upon the throne by the united voice of the whole people .
The cause of the Bourbons became so desperate , that not the slightest hope remained for them , except what could arise from resorting to the aid of foreign arms to restore the King to the throne from which he had fled with the greatest precipitancy , without having made the slightest resistance .
In fact the whole people were by this time completely sick of the Bourbons .
The Despots of Europe , meanwhile , were in the greatest alarm , but they soon entered into a league to make war upon France to restore the old tyranny of the Bourbons , and they instantly began to prepare to carry their project into effect .
Buonaparte offered peace to the combination of Sovereigns , but he did not neglect to prepare his troops for any emergency that might happen .


When the news arrived in England that Napoleon had quitted Elba , and landed at Provence , in France , it was with the greatest difficulty that John Gull could be made to believe that it was true , till the daily accounts arrived of his steady march towards Paris .
As he approached that capital the most intense interest was excited , not only in France and England , but all over the civilised world .
In England nothing else was talked of or thought of .
I own I never before felt so much anxiety  and the desire to see the newspapers , which furnished an account of the daily progress which he made , became every hour more and more acute .
At length , the official intelligence arrived , that Napoleon had entered Paris , and that he was peaceably restored to the throne amidst the shouts and applause of the whole French nation .
I had been from home upon business the whole day , and I had heard of this happy event , and when I returned in the evening I was much gratified to find that my family had anticipated my wishes , had procured candles , and were preparing to ILLUMINATE MY HOUSE .
I had said , in the beginning of March , when the information reached England , that Napoleon had landed in France , that I would illuminate my house if ever he reached Paris alive .
Although some doubts were expressed at the time by my family , as to the prudence of such a course , yet , as I declared my determination to do so when the time arrived , there was no hesitating , no desire to baulk my intentions , or to disappoint my wishes , which , having been once seriously expressed , were quite sure to be accomplished in my family  so that , if I had not returned home that night , my house would nevertheless have been illuminated .
The candles were all fixed , and every pane of glass could boast a light .
The moment it was dark , MIDDLETON COTTAGE WAS ILLUMINATED from top to bottom .
This was the only occasion , this was the first time in my life , that ever any house of mine had been illuminated .


Middleton Cottage is situated on the south side of the great Western Road , leading from London to Exeter , sixty-one miles from London , and three miles from Andover .
The Exeter and the Auxiliary Mail , and three or four other coaches , pass towards London between seven o'clock in the evening and twelve o'clock at night .
Every one of the coachmen pulled up their horses , and stopped to inquire the occasion of this blaze of light .
The passengers in the first coach also inquired of the coachman whose house it was , and what was the cause of this splendid display ?
Some one said , he supposed it was in consequence of peace with America , which had just been announced .
-- `` No , no  '' said the coachman , `` it is on account of the restoration of Buonaparte . ''
`` O , a vile Jacobin ! ''
exclaimed a nondescript with a whistling , piping voice , `` I wish somebody would break all his windows . ''
The coachman cracked his whip , and can they passed  but as there was the mail , and four other coaches to pass , I sent my servant out to stand at the gate , to inform those that might inquire , that my house was illuminated in consequence of the safe restoration of Napoleon to the throne of France .
The next coach that came was the mail  it was going very fast , being rather down the hill  and , as the glare came suddenly upon them , the coachman had some difficulty in pulling up his horses till they got rather beyond the front of the cottage .
I was just coming out of the garden , and as it was dark , I heard , unseen , but very distinctly , the following dialogue : `` Aye , aye , coachman , stop , by G-d !
tell me whose house this is ? ''
-- `` It is Middleton Cottage , Sir , the residence of Mr. Hunt . ''
`` I suppose it is illuminated for the return of Napoleon ? ''
-- `` Yes , Sir , '' said my servant , apparently to save farther trouble of inquiry , `` my master illuminates his house for the first time in his life , because Buonaparte has ascended the throne , and reconquered the crown of France , without bloodshed . ''
With some tremendous oath , two of them ( who it turned out were gemmen of the army ) swore that they would get out and smash every one of the windows , and they immediately began to open the door of the coach , to put their threat into execution .
Upon hearing this , I lost not a moment 's time , but darted in doors , and having seized a faithful cudgel , I sallied out , with the determination of taking prisoner the first man that threw a stone , and , at all hazards , conducting him into my parlour , where he should have drank long life and success to Napoleon upon his knees , before he should have been liberated .
This was the resolution I formed while I was hastening after my cudgel , and having once formed that resolution , I would have carried it into effect at the risk of my life .
When I got out the coast was clear , and the mail was got nearly out of hearing .
My servant informed me , that as soon as the guard saw what was going on , he jumped down from his seat , and warmly expostulated with the military heroes upon their folly and rashness  but when he saw that they persevered , he swore that the coachman should drive on and leave them behind if they got out  and he added , that he had no doubt but Mr. Hunt would blow both their brains out with his double-barrelled gun , if they offered to touch one pane of his windows .
To this the coachman assented , exclaiming , at the same time , `` By G -- d it would serve them right for their pains . ''
This being the case , the doughty heroes thought proper to sit still , but muttered out , `` d -- d jacobin , '' as the coachman drove off .
These worthies , I have no doubt , communicated this circumstance at head-quarters , and some of my worthy neighbours , of the rotten-borough of Andover , kindly conveyed the fact to several editors of the London newspapers .
The editors , however , took good care not to mention a word of it in their papers , but it was very currently talked of in the coffee-houses of Paris .
I know thousands of Englishmen that rejoiced at the escape of Napoleon from Elba , and at his return to the French capital , but I know of no one except myself who had the courage to testify his joy by any open demonstration .


As soon as the news of Buonaparte 's landing in France arrived in England , the Prince Regent sent a message to both Houses of Parliament , declaring his intention to join the Allies , and corresponding addresses were voted accordingly .
A public meeting was called by the electors of Westminster , to take into consideration a petition to be presented to Parliament , against renewing the war for the purpose of forcing a ruler upon the people of France .
I was in London when this meeting was held in Palace-yard  I attended it , and I spoke there , for the first time , in support of this petition .
What I said was so favourably received by the people , that they passed an unanimous vote of thanks to me , and drew me in my carriage to my inn , the British Coffee-house , they having spontaneously taken off the horses .
When I got there I mounted the roof of the carriage , briefly thanked the multitude , and requested them to retire peaceably , which they did without delay .
The petition was presented by Sir Francis Burdett , and , I think , on the same evening .
It was a strong remonstrance against plunging once more into a war with the French , merely to restore the Bourbons to that throne which they had not the talent or the virtue to fill , either with honour to themselves or with advantage to the people .


The Parliament now , almost by acclamation , voted that the property tax should be continued for one year .
The treaties made with Holland , Russia , and Sweden , were laid before both the Houses of Parliament , and approved of .
The Minister likewise proposed new taxes , to the amount of 3,728,000 l. per annum .


While the British legislators were thus honourably employed , the allied despots collected their forces in two great bodies , under Marshal Blucher and Wellington , the latter of whom had been created a Duke .
Napoleon on his side was busily engaged , both in civil and military affairs .
He laid before the Senate of France a new constitution , which was accepted , and a meeting , called the `` Champ de Mai , '' was held at Paris , on the 1st of May , to swear to that constitution .
On the 1st of June there was a revolution at Martinico , in favour of Napoleon , but it was soon suppressed by the British troops .
On the 8th , a confederation , or rather a conspiracy of tyrants and their agents , was signed at Vienna , called the `` Holy Alliance . ''
On the 12th , Napoleon left Paris , to join his army on the Belgian frontier .
The Prussian army , under Blucher , was attacked at Ligny , and totally defeated by Napoleon on the 15th , and on the following day he attacked the Dutch and the English under Wellington , and compelled them to fall back from Quatre Bas , at which place they were posted .
The combined English , Dutch , Belgian , and Hanoverian forces were concentrated , on the 17th , under Wellington , at Waterloo .
On the eighteenth , Napoleon , with sixty-eight thousand men , attacked the combined army commanded by Wellington , consisting of ninety thousand troops .
A dreadful slaughter ensued , and Wellington was hardly pressed by his illustrious opponent .
This success on the side of Napoleon continued till four o'clock , at which time he considered the battle as won , when two Prussian corps , one of thirty thousand and the other of forty thousand , under Bulow and Blucher , unexpectedly arrived and turned the right wing of the French .
The whole army was thrown into confusion from this unexpected reinforcement to their enemies , and at half-past nine they fled in all directions .
The arrival of these two corps was occasioned by some strange misconduct , or something worse , on the part of Marshal Grouchy , who was dispatched by Napoleon to attack these corps with a division of the French army , but by some strange fatality he suffered them to approach the right wing of Napoleon 's army unmolested .
This and this alone caused the defeat of Napoleon , as these corps of themselves were more numerous than the whole of the troops under his command , harassed and fatigued too as they were at the latter end of a dreadful battle .
`` Never did the French army fight better than it did upon this occasion  it performed prodigies of valour  and the superiority of the troops , infantry , cavalry , and artillery , over the enemy opposed to them , was such , that had not Blucher arrived with his second corps of Prussians , the victory over the Anglo-Belgian army under Wellington would have been complete , though aided by Bulow 's thirty thousand troops  that is to say , it would have been gained by sixty-nine thousand men opposed to nearly double their number  for the troops in the field commanded by Wellington , before Blucher 's arrival , amounted to one hundred and twenty thousand men . ''
The Allies , by their own account , lost sixty thousand men , viz .
eleven thousand three hundred English , three thousand five hundred Hanoverians , eight thousand Belgians , and thirty-eight thousand Prussians .
This makes a general total of sixty thousand eight hundred men .
The losses of the French , including those sustained during the rout , and till their arrival at the gates of Paris , was forty-one thousand men .
Out of twenty-four English Generals , twelve were killed or badly wounded .
The mind quite sickens at the recital of such a horrid slaughter of human beings , for the sole purpose of gratifying the malignant passions of a few tyrants , who had sworn to annihilate the very spirit as well as the substance of liberty .
To destroy NAPOLEON , and to raise up Louis , ONE HUNDRED AND TEN THOUSAND lives were sacrificed upon this occasion !


Napoleon repaired to Paris , where he found that traitors of the vilest cast had been at work .
The Chambers were in a state of insurrection , and on the 22d of June , 1815 , Napoleon resigned the government to a provisional Council .
On the 3d of July a suspension of hostilities was signed at St. Cloud , and on the same day Buonaparte arrived at Rochfort , while Paris was evacuated by the French troops and occupied by the allied army .
By the articles of capitulation , on which Paris was surrendered , a complete indemnity was secured to all persons .
We shall soon see how they were fulfilled .
On the 5th , the troops under General Oudinot declared for Louis  and on the 8th , Louis the Desired returned once more to Paris , and resumed the government under the protection of a foreign army .
On the 15th , Napoleon took the fatal resolution of throwing himself upon the protection of the British Government .
Relying upon the honour of the English character , he surrendered himself to Captain Maitland , of the Bellerophon  on the 24th he arrived in that ship at Torbay , and on the twenty-sixth he sailed to Plymouth , to which port tens of thousands of persons crowded from all parts of England to obtain a sight of him .
He was not allowed to land , but on the seventh of August he was removed on board the Northumberland , Captain Cockburn , which sailed on the following day for St. Helena .
Napoleon is now dead and gone , but his name will live for ever .
It makes my heart ache to think that such a man should have been so deceived and deluded as to the character of the English Government , so much so , as to flatter himself for a moment that he would ever receive justice or mercy at their hands !
Noble , generous , forgiving , and possessing all the attributes of a truly brave man himself , he little dreamt of the fate that awaited him  he had heard of the generosity of the English character , he knew the English to be brave , he had always found them so , but he was deceived as to their power and influence over the Government  he was grossly ignorant of the state and character of the British Parliament  he had read De Lolme and other popular writers upon the British Constitution , and he fell into the fatal , the irretrievable error , of believing that the practice of that constitution was the same thing as the theory described by these writers  and thus he was betrayed into a gulf from whence he was never to be extricated .
I have before observed , that at the Congress of Vienna it was proposed and seriously urged to seize Napoleon at Elba , and to convey him to St. Helena  and those who proposed this measure had taken care to have all things in readiness to carry their project into execution , in case it had been agreed to .
No time was , therefore , now lost in acting upon this plan .
The English Ministers knew the sentiments of the Allied Despots upon the subject , and the brave Napoleon , the fallen Emperor , was shipped off to linger , pine , and rot upon a barren rock , in a distant and pestilential climate , in the same way that we would send out a wretch convicted of the highest crimes , as a transport for life .
He who had spared Emperors , Kings , and Princes -- he who had restored them to their thrones after having bravely conquered them , was now treated like a common convict transport !
Disgraceful , damnable , imperishable blot in the escutcheon of England 's character !!!


The Assembly of France now met , and passed such laws as might naturally be expected in a country filled with foreign troops .
Treaties were entered into by the restored Monarch , to settle the terms of peace , and were signed on the twentieth of July .
By these treaties France lost all the conquered territory which she had been allowed to retain in 1814 , and was placed nearly in the same geographical situation as before the revolution .
One hundred and fifty thousand troops of the five Allied Powers were to remain in France for five years  France was to maintain them , and pay a large pecuniary indemnity , in which a provision was made for the claims of British subjects  and all other matters , good , bad , and indifferent , were to be settled by a convention , to be held at Vienna .
The expenditure of this year , drawn out of the pockets of John Gull , amounted to no less a sum than EIGHTY ONE MILLIONS , of which TWENTY-SEVEN MILLIONS were borrowed by loan .
The Honourable House of Commons voted TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS as an additional remuneration to the Duke of Wellington .
In the meantime , the wretchedness of the people of Ireland had driven them to a state of desperation  the resistance to the collection of the TITHES became general in many counties , and a large army of regulars and militia was employed to put down the poor , starved , distressed , and plundered people .
Many lives were lost , and a special commission was appointed , by which great numbers were found guilty , and transported to Botany Bay , and all this arose from the most horrid system of rapine and plunder that ever disgraced any nation on the face of the earth .


At the latter end of July , 1815 , I was one night taken suddenly ill  I had gone to bed in high robust health , but about three o'clock in the morning I was awoke by a most violent attack in my head , which caused a sensation like the ringing of a church bell in my ear .
The fact was , that a sudden pressure of blood upon the brain had taken place .
The effect was such that I was almost blind and speechless .
My surgeon , Mr. Davis , of Andover , was instantly sent for  but , before he could arrive , I had fainted away four or five times , and he found me in such a state , without any pulse , that he at first hesitated to bleed me  however , upon my urging him to do so , he complied , and the horrid noise which was caused in my head by the blood rushing through my brain with accelerated velocity , somewhat abated , and in the course of the day it wore off , and became like the singing of a tea-kettle .
This attack was so violent , and left such a weakness , that I was incapable of rising from my bed , and it was several days before I could walk across the room without assistance .
As soon as I was able , which was in four or five days , I drove to Bath , for the advice of Dr. Parry , one of the most eminent physicians of the day , and under whose care one of my family had recovered from the very point of death .
Dr. Parry and myself had been upon very friendly and intimate terms , during the time I had lived in Bath , and he had always attended my family while I was there .


When I had described to him the way in which I was taken , and the extraordinary sensation and noise which I had in my head , which still continued like the singing of a teakettle , he said , `` You have had a narrow escape , Sir  and had you not been a very temperate man , you would have never spoken again  you have had a violent pressure of blood upon the brain , and you are wholly indebted for your safety to your temperate manner of living  if , however , you will put yourself under my care , and strictly follow my advice , I am confident that I can effect a radical cure , so that you will be no longer liable to a return of your complaint .
The means I propose will be slow and tedious , but they will be certain .
If you return into the country , and follow the course usually pursued in similar cases , you will , in all probability , be apparently recovered , and as well as ever in a month  but they take my word for it , you will be very liable to a repetition of the same sort of attack , which will very likely prove fatal . ''
I told him that I would most certainly place myself in his hands , and scrupulously follow his directions .
`` Well , then , '' said he , `` I shall have you bled twice before you leave Bath , and my directions are , that you abstain from all fermented liquors  eat very sparingly of animal food , take regular strong exercise , and lose a pound of blood at least once a month , for a twelvemonth . ''
I certainly looked at him with some degree of astonishment , but when I saw that he was serious and in earnest , I replied , `` If you say that all this is absolutely necessary for the recovery of may health , it shall be done  but so excessively weak and languid am I at present , that I do not think I shall be able to take what you call strong exercise .
I drove my tandem down here yesterday to see you , and I was so excessively exhausted , that I was obliged to be carried out of the carriage into the inn where I arrived . ''
`` O , '' said he , `` driving fifty miles in a tandem may be very good exercise for your horses  but it is not sufficient exercise for you  you must take regular walking and riding exercise .
To keep a man in good health , it is always necessary that he should take sufficient exercise to make it a labour  it is indispensible for the health of man that he should labour -- and it will be absolutely necessary to your recovery , that you labour daily .
I assure you , my good friend , '' added he , `` there is not one in a thousand that ever recover from such an attack as you have had .
I never knew a patient who had the resolution to follow the advice which I have given you  I rely , however , upon your good sense , to concur with me in the absolute necessity of reducing your system very low , by abstaining from fermented liquors and animal food -- by laborious exercise -- and by a constant and regular succession of copious bleeding  and I have confidence in your courage and perseverance in carrying my plan into execution , by which I mean to effect a permanent and radical cure  that is to say , I mean that you shall be rendered as perfectly free from any future attack of the sort , as you were when you were born .
I know the precise nature of your complaint well , and I am confident of the remedy , although I have no particular precedent , because I never knew any one act up to the rules I have laid down for you .
I know that you have had a violent pressure of blood upon the brain  I know , also , that this attack was not produced by excess or intemperance , but that it arose from your having naturally too great a disposition of blood to the head .
I know that your system has received a violent shock , that the blood-vessels upon your brain have been distended , and thereby rendered liable to another and a more fatal attack , unless it can be guarded against by a total alteration of your whole system , which can alone be accomplished by the means that I have suggested . ''
Here he made a short pause , and then earnestly demanded if I was prepared to give him my word that I would act up to his directions  `` because , '' added he , significantly , `` I know if you once make up your mind to it , and give me your word that you will do it , that our object will be attained . ''


Thus it is , that a clever and intelligent physician , by flattering his patient , prevails upon him to encounter what would otherwise appear to be insurmountable difficulties  and thus it is , that human nature is able to bear so much .
I promised strictly to abide by his prescription , both as to regimen , exercise , and bleeding .
He then sent for Mr. George Norman , the surgeon , and I was bled immediately .
This being done , the doctor said that he would call again in the morning , and see the bleeding repeated , and then I should have nothing to do but to return to my home in the country , and follow the plan that he laid down for me .
He did so  and , although I was in a state of great weakness , I reached Middleton Cottage the same evening , having driven my tandem fifty miles in the afternoon .


A circumstance that occurred at this time made such a lasting impression upon my memory , that I shall record it for the benefit of future generations .
Although it is of a private and pecuniary nature , yet I suspect that it will not be altogether devoid of interest , as it makes part of my history .
When I left Rowfant , in Sussex , my stock , crops , underwood , and furniture , produced a very considerable sum , amounting to eight thousand pounds  and , after paying off all pecuniary demands upon me , I purchased five thousand pounds in Exchequer Bills , which I took with me to Middleton Cottage , and opened an account with Messrs. Heaths , the bankers , of Andover .
In their hands I deposited several hundred pounds , and the Exchequer Bills , taking all their notes , and drawing upon them for what sums I required to furnish my house , stock my farm , c. c. , they turning the Exchequer Bills into cash as often as I wanted money .
I took care never , for any length of time , to have less than five hundred pounds in cash in their hands , generally several hundreds more , and sometimes as much as fifteen hundred pounds balance of cash in my favour , which they had the use of , as well as the advantage of my taking their notes , and circulating them round the country , besides what I kept in my house .
I stocked my farms , both in Hampshire and Wiltshire , at a most expensive time , giving as high as fifty guineas each for my cart-horses  and as I had made great alterations and improvements , at a heavy expense , the money flew pretty fast .
When I was taken so dangerously ill , the news spread over the country with considerable rapidity , and , amongst others , it seems it reached the ears of my bankers , who , for the first time , the next morning sent in my account by the post , saying , that as I had overdrawn it a few pounds , they would thank me to remit the balance .
This was the latter end of July , and immediately at the point of harvest .
Thus situated , I wrote an answer , or rather dictated an answer , stating my situation  and , as I expected I should be prevented from getting out to collect any money to meet the expenses of the harvest , I requested that they would allow me to draw for one hundred pounds for a few weeks , when the balance should be repaid , and my account should be replenished with a fresh advance .
To my great surprise , however , I received a reply , saying , that they were much in want of cash , and not only declining to comply with my request , but re-urging the payment of the small balance due to them .
I certainly felt extremely mortified at such illiberal , ungenerous , ungrateful , and , I might add , brutal conduct  because it was generally believed at the time that I was in a most perilous situation , and my surgeon had pronounced it as his opinion , that it was absolutely necessary to keep me quiet , and my mind perfectly easy , or the most fatal result might be expected from a relapse  and I have good reason to know that my worthy friend , Mr. WILLIAM HEATH , the Quaker Banker , had been informed of this fact , previous to his sending in my accounts .
This treatment , however , operated very differently upon me from what might have been expected , and probably exactly the reverse of what might have been anticipated by Friend William .
I had experienced a sudden and violent attack of illness , which had deprived me of the use of my limbs , and almost deprived me of my sight and my speech  I was unable to leave my bed , and it was not expected that I should be able to leave my room for several weeks  and in the weak and very languid state in which I felt myself , I have often thought , and I believe now , that if I had not been roused by the base and unfeeling conduct of Friend William , I should have given way to extreme lassitude  I should have had a relapse , and probably should never have left my room alive , although I was attended by Mr. Davis , who is at the same time one of the most skilful , experienced , and attentive surgeons in the kingdom , and in whose ability and judgment I placed the greatest reliance  but the moment I received this second letter from the Quaker ( which was in the evening of the third day of my illness ) , I got out of bed , and with the assistance of my family I put my clothes on , and with great difficulty I was taken down stairs .
I ordered my servant to get my horses ready , as I was determined to go to Bath the next day , to have the advice of Dr. Parry  but the real fact was , that I was much more anxious to see my tenants there , to receive some rent that was due to me , that I might be prepared to pay my harvest people , and get out of the hands of neighbour Heath , the Quaker Banker .
On the next day I accordingly drove to Bath , as I have before described , and succeeded in both the objects of my journey , by obtaining the advice of Dr. Parry , and receiving my rent .


On my return home I wrote an answer to Friend William , to say , that I was sorry to hear that he was so pressed for money , the truth of which , I told him , I did not doubt , and , as that was the case , I would pay him the small balance which was due  but that , at the same time , I should certainly decline placing any more money in his hands , and I should also take good care not to keep any of his notes by me any longer than I could help  and from that time to this I have kept my word , as the day may not be far distant when a sovereign may be worth a hundred pounds ' worth of them .


I am bound in justice to say , that I do not believe that Messrs. Charles and Thomas Heath were in any way privy to this transaction .
On the contrary , I am convinced , that they are totally incapable of such dirty conduct  there is no improbability in their being ignorant of the matter  Squire Quaker Williams having the sole management of the Banking concern , while the two elder brothers , Charles and Thomas , managed the Brewing and Wine Trade .
The secret of this dirty conduct of Mister William Heath soon afterwards came out .
It seems that he was at the time bargaining to quit the Beaver , and to give up THEE and THOU for a seat in the Corporation of the rotten-borough of Andover  and I have no doubt but that he acted in this unworthy manner in hopes of currying favour with the rotten managers of that rotten , corrupt , and contemptible Corporation  as he very soon afterwards doffed the straight-cut coat without a collar , sunk the broad-brimmed hat , mounted a dandy-cut coat and puppy hat , went to church , married the Parson 's sister , and became a right worthy member of that truly worthy body , the Corporators of Andover .
Of course he had gone through the ceremony of being read out of the meeting , which is similar to that of being drummed out of a regiment .
Alas !
alas !
what would his poor old father say , if he could peep out of his grave and take a squint at his lisping , darling , baby boy Billy !
The old man was a very worthy , respectable , staunch Quaker , and I believe the two elder brothers are very worthy honest men  but Master Billy has just that sort of cast with his eye , that my father always used to caution me against .
He always used to say , beware how you trust any fellow that has such a twist in his eye  and I have generally found this observation correct .


Master Billy Heath is also the nominal possessor of a toft of land , or a pig-sty , at Ludgershal , and being a toft man of that wretched Borough , of course he is one of the electors , and he has been instrumental in sending to Parliament some of the most corrupt members that ever entered that Honourable House .
This amiable worthy has had a finger in the national pie  he has been one of those who has voted for those that created the national debt  he is , therefore , one of those whom I hold responsible for the payment of it , as long as he has a shilling left to pay with .
We hear of a great deal of horror expressed about the breach of national faith , when persons have talked about a reduction of the national debt  and it would indeed be a breach of national faith to reduce the interest of the widow and the orphan , who have their money in the funds , while one of the ramifications of the boroughmongers has got any thing left to pay it with  let all those who supported the system of extravagance , which created the debt , by all means pay the interest of it , as far as they are able  but the great breach of national faith has been , to compel others who have had no finger in the pie , to pay towards making it .
Only think of those impudent imposters who supported the infamous breach of national faith in the year 1797 , by passing a law to protect the Bank of England from paying their notes  only think of those barefaced swindlers now whining and canting about national faith  only think of the impudence of those who , at the very moment that they are blustering about national faith , and pretending to be shocked at the bare mention of reducing what they call the national debt  only think of their passing an Act of Parliament to reduce the interest of a particular portion of that debt , by lowering the 5 per cent .
stocks to 4 per cent.  thus , in the most partial manner , reducing the income of those persons who had their money in the 5 per cents .
from one hundred pounds a-year to eighty , while all the holders of other stock continue to receive their full interest !!
And yet these are the men that pretend they are so much shocked at the idea of being guilty of any breach of national faith !


But to return to my narrative .
-- On the sixteenth of August , 1815 , a most sanguinary murder was committed by the French Government , in direct violation of the treaty of Paris , which guaranteed the safety of all who had taken part against the Bourbons .
Marshal Ney was executed  and this was done under the sanction of the high Allied Powers .
Amiable alliance !
what a disgrace to the character of Wellington !
Ney was a brave soldier , and to execute such a man , under such circumstances , was the height of treachery and baseness .
Talk of keeping faith , indeed !
This is another proof that tyrants never keep their faith with God or man , any longer than they think it their interest to do so .
My opinion is , that Ney deserted and betrayed Napoleon , after the battle of Waterloo , by not doing his duty when he returned to the French capital  but that was no excuse for the gross and cowardly violation of the terms of the capitulation of Paris .
There could , in fact , be no justification for such an unfeeling breach of faith , and there certainly was no other excuse for such an act , but that of a base desire to be revenged in cold blood , upon a brave general , whom they could never subdue in honourable warfare .


On the third of October following , the brave patriot Spanish General , Porlier , met a similar fate , and was executed at Corunna , by the order of the execrable and treacherous tyrant Ferdinand .
To shew their detestation of such a murder , a considerable number of the British inhabitants of Corunna appeared in mourning for the death of the brave , though unfortunate patriot  upon which , Ferdinand immediately laid an extraordinary contribution upon them .
Let the present patriots of Spain never forget this fact , and let them remember that the cause of rational Liberty in that country will never be safe while such a treacherous tyrant has any power left .
It is cruelty of the very worst description to suffer such a monster to endanger the freedom and happiness of a whole people .
In Italy the despots also enjoyed a triumph .
Murat , having been defeated by the Austrian troops , fled , and was assassinated in the kingdom of Naples on the thirteenth of October .


About this time there were serious riots in the North , and particularly amongst the seamen at Sunderland , Newcastle , and Shields , which were ultimately settled by giving them the increase of wages which they demanded .
On the fifth of November a treaty was entered into between Russia and Great Britain  by which treaty the Greek Islands , called the Ionian Islands , were placed under the protection of the latter power  and on the twentieth , treaties of general peace were signed at Paris .
On the twenty-first of December , Lavalette , condemned at Paris for high treason , escaped from prison in the clothes of Madame Lavalette .
Sir Robert Wilson , and Messrs. Bruce and Hutchinson , were mainly instrumental in procuring the escape of this destined martyr to the Bourbon tyrants , by assisting Madame Lavalette in this holy enterprise , for which they were afterwards tried , found guilty , and sentenced to three months ' imprisonment in Paris .
Sir Robert , as well as Messrs. Bruce and Hutchinson , one of whom was an Irishman , the other a Scotchman , secured to themselves immortal honour , in addition to the sweet satisfaction of having rescued a victim from the remorseless hands of a cruel tyrant .


On the same day , Lord Cochrane was sentenced to a hundred pounds fine for escaping from the King 's Bench Prison  but such was the enthusiasm in favour of his Lordship , that the money was raised in a few days by a penny subscription .
The House of Commons having honoured his Lordship by expelling him , when he was found guilty of being privy to the Stock Exchange Hoax , a dead set was made by the Westminster Rump to get Mr. Brougham elected in his place  and many private meetings were held at the Crown and Anchor for that purpose .
These intrigues having been communicated to me by Mr. Samuel Miller , I wrote to him a letter , which I begged him to shew to the Members of the Rump , and say , that it was my opinion the Electors of Westminster would disgrace themselves if they did not unanimously give the Honourable House a kick , by returning Lord Cochrane again , and that if they did not choose to elect Lord Cochrane again , if they proposed to bring in any other person , except Major Cartwright , I would come to town and oppose him for at least the space of fifteen days .
This letter was shewn by Mr. Miller to some of the leaders of the junto , and Mr. Miller informed me that it had the effect of making them at once come to the resolution of returning Lord Cochrane again , or at least of not making any opposition to him , by bringing forward any other person .
I believe that on this occasion Sir Francis Burdett stood neuter , but it nevertheless was thought that he was favourable to the return of Mr. Brougham .
Whether this was so or not , I can not say , but it was very natural to conclude so , because those very persons who were his most devoted supporters , appeared to wish it .
There had , in fact , been an attempt made , a short time before , to prepare the way for Mr. Brougham and the Whigs to have a share in the rotten Borough of Westminster .
It was made at a public meeting , held on some occasion , I forget what , in Palace-yard .
At that meeting I attended , having heard that a resolution was to be moved , which had been agreed to at a previous private meeting , held the night before at the Crown and Anchor , and at which meeting some of the said Whig members attended .
This said resolution was drawn up by Lawyer Brougham himself , and it was in effect a vote of thanks to the Whigs , for their patriotic exertions in Parliament .
Well , after a considerable portion of the business of the day had passed off , as a matter of course , it was announced to the gaping , astonished crowd , by old Wishart , that some patriotic Members of Parliament were in attendance , and that they wished to address the people , they having just arrived upon the hustings for that purpose .
The old Tobacconist , Wishart , acting as a sort of master of the ceremonies , introduced them in form as they came to the front of the hustings : as , `` This is Mr. Brougham , Gentlemen : this is Mr. Lambton this is Mr. Madocks , ( upon which a few voices in the crowd cheered ) : this is Mr. Grey Bennet : this is Mr. -- , Member for Hertfordshire , '' I forget his name , which is not of much consequence , as he has since changed it , by taking a Peerage .
There might have been several others , but I forget  they were , however , all exhibited to the wondering multitude by Mr. Wishart , and very much in the tone , voice , and manner that a showman exhibits the wild beasts at a country fair -- '' This is the royal tiger from Bengal , '' c..


While all this was going on , I stood snug at one corner in the front of the hustings , and I must own , that I was considering in my mind which would be the best way to expose this intended hoax upon the people of Westminster .
I saw there was no feeling of enthusiasm amongst the people  they looked first at the exhibited M. P. and then cast an inquiring suspicious look at the dealer in pigtail and rappee , who introduced them .
I contrived to keep my muscles so unconcerned that no one could imagine what was passing in my mind , yet I saw and felt that I had a difficult card to play , and that it would seem very invidious to oppose a mere vote of thanks to any one of the individuals , or , in fact , to oppose a general vote of thanks to those Members of Parliament , for their opposition to the measures of a corrupt administration .
On the other hand , it forcibly struck me that it would look very much like an act of cowardice , to stand silent and hear a vote of thanks passed to the Whigs , whose measures and whose conduct I had so often beheld behind their backs , and , in conjunction with Sir Francis Burdett , reprobated and exposed in the strongest language .
I therefore determined at all risks to stand forward , and give my reasons for my opposition .
At any rate I was determined to support my consistency  although I felt some doubt about the success of my apparently difficult undertaking .
Thanks , however , to Mr. Wishart , who , at the best of times , was but a blundering politician , and who had no other influence over the minds of the people than that which he had acquired from being a wealthy shopkeeper , and by putting himself forward at the Westminster elections and dinners , as the advocate of Sir Francis Burdett , I was soon relieved from the unpleasant situation in which I was placed .
By the speech which he made , preparatory to the moving this resolution , he likewise completely removed all doubts which I had previously entertained upon the question  for he began with a pompous eulogium upon the political conduct of the Whigs generally , and on that of Mr. Fox in particular .
I took care to observe the manner in which the multitude received this eulogium  and I plainly saw , that it only required the boldness to refute his arguments , to be able to carry the proposition in the negative .
I saw , too , that there was every now and then a hint given , by one of the Rump understrappers upon the hustings , to get the people to cheer the sentiments which were delivered by Mr. Wishart , but it would not do  a few of the powdered-headed gentry in the crowd certainly responded these hints , by a solitary cheer or two , while the great mass of the people listened more with astonishment than with indifference , and continually cast their eyes towards me with an inquiring look , as much as to say , `` Hunt , will you tolerate all this humbug ?
Surely you will come forward and blow it into the air  we will support you . ''
Mr. Wishart concluded his speech by reading the resolution , and saying , that he confidently expected that it would be carried unanimously .
`` Stop a bit , '' said a man in the crowd , `` Softly , Sir !
let us first hear what Mr. Hunt has to say to it . ''


Mr. Brougham had been standing , smirking , and bowing , and smiling , all the time that Mr. Wishart had been larding them over with praises , and he was only waiting to have the resolution put and carried , as a matter of course , and was absolutely making ready , and seemed even to be clearing his throat , to thank the enlightened and patriotic Electors of Westminster , for the great honour which they had conferred upon him , and his honourable friends .
Some person , I forget who , but it was one of the junto , seconded the motion .
I shall never forget the old Major 's supplicating look at me  as plain as looks could speak , he seemed to say , `` Pray do , Mr. Hunt , let the vote pass  if you do not oppose it no one else will , and I shall have these gentry at any rate entangled in the meshes of my political net . ''
But when the paper was put into the hands of Mr. Arthur Morris , the High Bailiff , I coolly pulled off my hat , and before I could say a word , I was greeted with a shout that might have been heard at the Palace , and at Brooks 's .
This reception was a deathblow to the Whigs , who began to stare at each other in the most pitiable manner .
They knew me well , and they knew that I would not fail to denounce and expose to their faces , the hypocrisy of the Whigs , as I had so often done behind their backs .
I began , and the first sentence was received with a loud cheer , and `` Bravo , Hunt !
give it them  they richly deserve it , '' resounded from the crowd .
`` I shall , '' said I , `` without being personal , endeavour to shew you the fallacy , the absurdity , and the inconsistency , of all that Mr. Wishart has said . ''
-- ( Cheers . )
I then went through the history of the Whig measures during the administration of Mr. Fox , and this I did in the way of questions to Mr. Wishart , asking him if he meant that Mr. Fox who brought a Bill into the House of Commons , and got it passed by Ministerial majorities , to enable Lord Grenville to hold , at the same time , the two incompatible offices of First Lord of the Treasury , and Auditor of the Exchequer ?
-- `` Bravo !
answer that , Wishart . ''
Whether , when he was speaking of the purity of mind , and disinterestedness of soul of Mr. Fox , whether he meant that Mr. Fox who brought in the said Bill , to enable Lord Grenville to receive six thousand a-year , as First Lord of the Treasury , and at the same time four thousand a-year more , to audit his own accounts ?
-- ( tremendous cheers . )
-- I then went on in the same strain , to ask him , if he meant that Mr. Fox , and those Whigs , who , in defiance of all former precedents , when they were in power , in the year 1807 , introduced into the Cabinet , Lord Ellenborough , a corrupt , political Judge , so that he might sit one day as a member of the Cabinet , and advise the prosecution of a man for sedition , or high treason , and the next day might sit in judgment upon him ?
Whether he meant that Mr. Fox , and those Whigs , who raised the allowances of all the younger branches of the Royal Family , from twelve thousand to eighteen thousand a-year ?
Whether he meant that Mr. Fox , and those Whigs , who had so violently opposed the passing of the income tax by Mr. Pitt , declaring , in the House of Commons , that it was so unjust , so unconstitutional , and so inquisitorial a measure , that the people of England would be justified in taking up arms to resist the collection of it  yet , when they came into place and authority themselves , immediately raised the same income-tax , from six and a quarter to ten per cent.  while , to curry favour with the Crown , they exempted the King 's private property in the funds , amounting to several millions , from the operation of the act , though , with an infamous want of humanity , they left the widow and the orphan of fifty pounds a-year , subject to all its demands ?
Whether he meant that Mr. Fox , and those Whigs , who brought a Bill into the House to subject to the operation of the Excise Laws , all private families who brewed their own beer  a Bill , which , if passed , would have increased the number of Excise officers from ten to twenty thousand , giving them power at all hours to enter the house of every private family in the kingdom who brewed their own beer ?
I went on in this way , through the whole history of the Whigs , during the time that they were in power , one year , one month , one week , and one day , in 1806 and 1807  and , before I could get to the end of any one of the questions , the people , who anticipated what was coming , for the subject had been rendered familiar to the mind of every one , gave several almost unanimous and tremendous cheers .


It will be seen that I never spoke one disrespectful word of Mr. Fox , or ever mentioned the names of one of the Whig Members of Parliament who were upon the hustings , or even alluded to them  but just as I was about to wind up my string of questions , by noticing their dismissal from office , I observed a great bustle amongst the populace , who soon burst forth into exclamations of `` Look there !
they are running away !
Why do you not stay and answer the questions ? ''
I did not at first understand what this meant , till a gentleman exclaimed with a loud voice , `` Look round , Mr. Hunt  all the Whig gentry are run away ! ''
I turned round , and sure enough they were all flown , having escaped from the back part of the hustings through the King 's Arms Inn .
As soon as they were gone , the people gave three cheers , and roared out lustily , `` Hunt for ever ! ''
I proceeded with my harangue , and lamented that the gentlemen had not remained to assist Mr. Wishart in answering my questions  and I put it to the good sense of Mr. Wishart , whether , unless he could answer them satisfactorily , it would not be more prudent to withdraw the resolution of a vote of thanks to the Whigs , especially as none of them remained to return thanks , even supposing it possible that the resolution should be carried .
( This was received with a loud laugh , and a cry to put the question . )
Mr. Wishart , however , as if for the purpose of exposing his friends , and totally defeating his own object , persisted in having the resolution submitted to the meeting .
The result was , that perhaps forty or fifty hands were held up for it , and a forest of ten thousand hands were raised against it .
The High Bailiff , of course , declared that the resolution was lost by a very large majority .
This was received with loud peals of applause , and the usual votes of thanks having been passed to the members and the High Bailiff , the meeting was dissolved , reiterating the warm expressions of their approbation of my blowing up such a bubble as was intended to have been palmed upon them by the gentlemen of the Rump Committee .


The Courier , Morning Post , and other Ministerial papers , were unpardonably witty , both in prose and verse , at the expense of the poor Whigs , while the Morning Chronicle , and other Whig papers , were equally severe upon me , and the editors did not fail to be very lavish in their vulgar abuse .
That the Whigs were irritated at me is not very wonderful  it was quite clear that they set their hearts upon this meeting  in fact , it was got up by the Rump on purpose to gratify them , the other measures which were brought forward being a mere secondary consideration  and , after all , their labour was worse than thrown away  such a complete defeat never having been before sustained by any party at a public meeting .
Yet I will take upon myself to say that , had I not been there , the vote of thanks would have been passed without the slightest opposition , and Messrs. Lawyer Brougham and Co. would have figured away in great stile , and would have sworn that the meeting was not only the most respectable and the most numerous that they ever witnessed , but was composed of much the most intelligent , enlightened , and patriotic citizens in the world  now , forsooth , they were a despicable rabble , deluded and led away by that abominable demagogue , Hunt !
The fact is , that the multitude are often taken by surprise , and an English political assemblage is not only the most peaceable , but the best natured body in the world .
They often are misled for want of thought , and , in the warmth of their hearts , and for want of explanation , hold up their hands for measures which , upon reflection , they regret .
But if the matter is fairly discussed , and they are clearly made to understand the question , they always decide right  and they are not only the most disinterested , but the most honest and upright judges in the world .


Lord Cochrane , as I have before mentioned , having been sentenced to be imprisoned and fined 100l .
for escaping from the King 's Bench prison , it was proposed to pay this fine by subscriptions of one penny from each person  and the very same Rump Committee , who had been intriguing to bring in Mr. Brougham for Westminster instead of his Lordship , never choosing to let a good thing slip through their fingers , and always looking out to catch the public opinion , and to turn it to their own advantage , now stood forward to promote this subscription .
Boxes were placed up at Brooks 's , in the Strand , the standing treasurer of the Rump Committee , as well as at many other places in London and Westminster , and subscriptions , more or less , were sent in from every part of the kingdom  and , what is very extraordinary , the whole sum was subscribed to a penny  not one penny was there more or less than one hundred pounds  at all events , I never heard of any overplus , and I am sure if there had been any deficiency we should have heard enough of it .
When the time came for his Lordship 's liberation , it was proposed to tender the whole in copper-pence , as it had been subscribed  and I believe it was proposed or suggested by me , that there should be a public meeting called in Palace-yard , on the same day , and that I would announce to the people assembled , that we were going down to the King 's - Bench , to pay in pence , Lord Cochrane 's fine of one hundred pounds , which would be taken down in a cart  and I added , that I would give the hint , that those who wished to accompany us might see his Lordship walk out of the front door of the prison , instead of escaping over the walls .
By this plan I proposed to bring Lord Cochrane out of prison , and to have him drawn in triumph through the streets of the metropolis , to his house in Bryanstone-street , Bryanstone-square , attended by twenty or thirty thousand people .
Mr. Cobbett , who had taken a very active part in his Lordship 's favour , was in London at the time , and he fully concurred in the propriety of carrying my plan into effect .
The original plan of paying the fine in pence , I believe , was his own : my plan of procuring the meeting in Palace-yard , and proceeding from thence in a body , being an after-thought .


As the period approached , there appeared to be a great deal of shuffling by the Rump , about calling the meeting , and I was on the point of making some stir in the affair , but Mr. Cobbett said they had considered of it , and they thought it would be better for me not to have any thing to do with the meeting , but to let the Westminster people do it themselves .
A hint of this sort was never lost upon me , and I immediately said that I concurred in the opinion , that it would be much better for the whole to be done by his Lordship 's constituents  but I added , `` I am fearful that some cursed hitch may prevent the thing altogether , and that his Lordship will at last be left to walk out of the prison by him self . ''
`` Oh ! ''
said Mr. Cobbett , `` Peter Walker and the Major will take care of that . ''
I saw that my services were not wanted , and therefore I retired the next day into the country , where my business demanded my presence , and where my inclination at all times called me .
Before I left Town , however , I said in a very emphatic manner , `` take my word for it , Cobbett , there will be no meeting . ''
Mr. Cobbett replied , `` By G -- , Hunt , you are a little too bad !
You would make one believe that nothing can be done , unless it is done by you . ''
To this sally I merely answered , `` We shall see . ''


I went into the country , and , as I had anticipated , there was no meeting called .
The worthy members of the Rump knew very well how to manage to a nicety a thing of that sort , and they parried the importunities of Mr. Walker from time to time , till at length they boldly declared that it was too late to call a meeting .
Ultimately the fine was paid , and Lord Cochrane left the prison quietly , without his constituents knowing any thing of the matter  whereas , if it had been made public , tens of thousands would have paid him the compliment to have attended his liberation , and would have conducted him home , as he ought to have been , in triumph through the streets of the metropolis .


I forgot to mention that Lord Cochrane 's original sentence , for the Stock Exchange hoax , was , that he should be imprisoned and stand in the PILLORY .
The latter part of this sentence was remitted , not out of any kindness , but because the more prudent part of the Cabinet considered the experiment of placing his Lordship in the pillory , to be one upon which it would be a little too hazardous to venture .
It was currently reported , that , when Sir Francis Burdett heard of this infamous Star Chamber sentence , he at once declared that he would accompany his colleague , and stand by his side during the time of his undergoing that which was intended to be a disgraceful exposure .
However , as I said before , this part of the sentence was remitted , for reasons the most obvious  since , instead of being a disgrace to his Lordship , it would have redounded to his immortal honour .
The intention of placing men in the pillory is , to hold them up to the hatred , contempt , and execration of their fellow-citizens  but it was well known to his Lordship 's persecutors , that their making the attempt , in this instance , would have had a directly opposite effect : for if they had proceeded to place his Lordship in the pillory , he would have been greeted with the applause and affection of the whole population of the metropolis .
This exhibition was , however , dispensed with  but no thanks to the cruel , vindictive , and remorseless Ellenborough  no thanks to the amiable and the mild Judge Bayley , who passed the sentence  no thanks to the Ministers , who were only restrained from carrying it into effect by their fears , and by their fears alone .
Those Ministers had already received a lesson on this subject .
When Daniel Isaac Eaton was put in the pillory , for publishing some work which was pronounced to be blasphemous by the Judges , he was cheered by the people during the whole of the time that be stood there  every one endeavouring to console him by kindness and attention .
The cunning Ministers did not want a second exhibition of this sort  what had passed was calculated to bring the punishment of the pillory into disrepute with the minions of despotism .
The public were become too enlightened to contribute to the corrupt views of such a tool to the Government as Ellenborough , and therefore it was that one of the precious minions of the Whigs was selected to bring a Bill into Parliament , to abolish the punishment of the pillory , unless upon a conviction for perjury , and some other particular offence .
This Bill passed through both Houses of Parliament without any opposition , and without any discussion .
The punishment of the pillory surely is as good a punishment for misdemeanours as it was in the days of Prynne , who had his nose slit , his ears cut off , and stood in the pillory , by a sentence of the corrupt Judges of that day , but who lived to see his persecutors brought to condign punishment .
Placing a man in the pillory is an appeal to public opinion  and therefore no punishment on earth can be inflicted which leaves greater disgrace upon the character of the sufferer , where public opinion coincides with and supports the sentence of the Court : but , where public opinion does not coincide with the sentence , where , on the contrary , the sufferer is caressed and applauded by the public , it inflicts no disgrace whatever , but may rather be considered an honour .
It inflicted no disgrace upon Daniel Isaac Eaton , because not one single soul in the metropolis concurred in the justice of the sentence  the whole populace applauded him , and protected him , so that if one of the myrmidons of lawless power had dared to insult him , or to pelt him , that caitiff would have suffered on the spot for his temerity and villainy .
Had Lord Cochrane been placed in the pillory ( and I wish the corrupt knaves of the day had carried their design into execution ) , it would not have been the slightest disgrace to his Lordship  it would have only shewn that his malignant persecutors thought they had the power to carry their revengeful sentence into execution .
As it was , they had the shame of having wished to do what they did not dare to do .
At all events , the sentence , the being expelled from the navy and the House of Commons , and the kicking of his Lordship 's knight 's banner out of Westminster Abbey , was quite enough to show what they would have done , could they but have `` screwed their courage to the sticking place . ''


When this prosecution was commenced , his Lordship was on board a ship of war , upon the point of sailing to cruise against the Americans , and to fight against the only free people in the universe .
He was at that time not half a real Reformer , though he had certainly incurred the hatred of the Boroughmongers , by exposing the villainy of the Prize Courts of the Admiralty .
He had even gone further  he had done that for which he will never be forgotten or forgiven by them .
He had procured a return to be made to the House , of all the places , pensions , and sinecures , held under the Crown .
His Lordship took the House rather unawares , he caught its members in a complying mood , and , like a man of war , he pressed on to conquest , and induced them to grant that which they can never recall  and for granting which they have scarcely forgiven themselves , and will certainly never forgive him as long as he lives .
It was for THIS that he was prosecuted  it was for THIS that he was sentenced to stand in the pillory  it was for THIS that he was expelled the navy  it was for THIS that he was expelled the House of Commons  it was for THIS that his knight 's banner was kicked out of King Henry 's chapel : had it not been for THIS , he would never have been prosecuted at all  but if these things had never happened , I believe his Lordship would have never been a real Radical which now I hope and believe that he is  had it not been for this , I believe he would have still continued the ornament of the British Navy , and would never have joined to assist , by his talents and his consummate naval skill , to emancipate the South Americans from the slavery of Old Spain , the mother country , as it is foolishly called .


There were great emigrations to America , this year , 1815 , both from England and Ireland , in consequence of the distressed state of the farmers , who gave up their leases , owing to the decreased prices of all sorts of agricultural productions .
The average price of wheat , during the year , was sixty-four shillings and fourpence a quarter , about eight shillings a bushel  the quartern loaf was sevenpence .
The supplies voted this year were EIGHTY-NINE MILLIONS eight hundred and ninety-three thousand nine hundred pounds , for England , and NINE MILLIONS Seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds for Ireland , making 99,643,900 l. This , together with the expenses of collection , ( say five millions ) and ten millions paid for poor rates , makes the round sum of 114,643,900 l. collected in direct taxes this year from the pockets of JOHN GULL , besides tithes and other et ceteras .
O , brave John !
thou art at any rate a hard-headed and empty-pated fellow  and all in good time thy pockets will be as empty as thy hard pate now is !


As might have been expected , France and Spain were ruled with a rod of superstition , wielded by the flinty hearts and iron hands of the Bourbons , Louis the Eighteenth of France , and Ferdinand of Spain , a precious pair of English proteges .
In spite of all the pledges and securities which had been given , executions , banishments , and proscriptions were the order of the day , both in France and Spain .
In France , Labedoyere and Marshal Ney fell the victims of Bourbon revenge and cowardice .
A law of pretended amnesty was indeed afterwards passed , but all the relatives of Napoleon were excluded from residing in the French territory .
In the unhappy kingdom of Spain the execrable and impotent Ferdinand , impotent in all but cruelty , exercised the most unlimited powers of tyranny and oppression  a sad contrast to the comparatively mild and liberal Government of Joseph Buonaparte .
In Spain , almost every man who had assisted Wellington to drive out the French , in fact , every avowed friend of civil and religious Liberty , were either executed , banished , or imprisoned by the execrable and despicable bigoted tyrant Ferdinand , the beloved Ferdinand !
May the vengeance of Heaven pursue him !
The Parliament of England met on the first of February , when Castlereagh moved that a national monument should be erected , to commemorate the late victories  which proposition was unanimously agreed to by the `` collective wisdom '' of the nation .
Mr. Brougham moved for a copy of the treaty signed at Paris , by the allied despots , commonly called the HOLY ALLIANCE .
This was negatived by the `` collective wisdom , '' who also refused a copy of the treaty of Vienna .
John Gull had to pay for all , but John was not worthy of being trusted with such mighty secrets .


The Ministers now attempted to continue the property tax  but this caused such a ferment through the country , that public meetings were called , and petitions were presented from every part of the kingdom : the Livery of London set the example , and sounded the alarm , which flew like lightning throughout the country .
Seeing that the public were alive and anxious to oppose this tax , the Whigs once more made an attempt to rally  in fact , all the landed proprietors were against it  and the leading Whigs therefore called county meetings all over the kingdom  we had a county meeting in Hampshire .
It was held at Winchester , and was called by the Whigs , the leader of whom was Mr. Portal , of Trifolk , whose father had amassed a large fortune , by making all the paper for the Bank of England notes .
Mr. Cobbett and myself attended , and we completely frustrated the intention of the Whigs .
The Whigs , as we expected , endeavoured to make a party question of it , and all their anger was directed against the Ministers , or rather against the Prince Regent , because he would not turn those Ministers out of place , and put them in .
Mr. Portal called the tax a HIGHWAYMAN 'S TAX .
Mr. Cobbett and myself thoroughly exposed those hypocritical Whigs , and proved to the satisfaction of our hearers , that , if it were a highwayman 's tax , the Whigs had taken to the road in 1807 , and robbed the people quite as much as their more fortunate opponents .
I recollect that I took occasion to remind the worthy descendant of the Bank of England paper-maker , that I agreed with him fully in the designation that he had given to the tax , and to assure him that I considered those who collected it as nothing better than highwaymen  but I begged that he , as well as those that heard me , would at the same time not fail to remember that I considered him ( Mr. Portal ) an accomplice  for he aided and abetted them in their robbery , by acting as a Commissioner of the Property Tax , and did it with so much heart and soul , that he sanctioned not only the assessor and the collector , but likewise scarcely ever failed to confirm every infamous surcharge that the rascally inspector chose to make .
This caused a burst of laughter , at the expense of the said Whig Commissioner , who looked extremely foolish .
Mr. Cobbett and myself approved of their petition , as far as it went , but we moved a rider , which prayed for the reduction of the war malt tax , the reduction of the standing army , the abolition of useless pensions and sinecure places , and also for a Reform of the Parliament .
The Parsons , the Whigs , and the Tories , all united and voted against us , and maintained the propriety of continuing these burdens  and we were consequently left in a minority upon a division , as always was the case at every public county meeting that I attended at Winchester , with the exception of the county meeting held upon the subject of the Duke of York and Mrs. Mary Anne Clark , of notorious memory .
Upon that occasion the public feeling was so unanimous , that Mr. Cobbett 's motion , for a vote of thanks to Colonel Wardle , was carried by a very large majority .
Between the Parsons , the placemen and their dependants , they have always contrived , at all other times , to carry every thing before them  when I say they , I mean an union of the Whigs and Tories against the people .
I also attended the meeting at the Common Hall of the Livery of London , to petition against the renewal of the Property Tax .
Although the petitions were by no means so numerous , nor so numerously signed , as they were against the Corn Bill , yet as a great body of the Members of the Honourable House were personally interested in abolishing the Income Tax , they , good souls , kindly condescended to listen , or at least they pretended to listen , to the prayers of the people , and on the eighteenth of March this infamous tax was repealed .


On the nineteenth of April a Bill was passed for detaining the Emperor Napoleon Buonaparte a prisoner at St. Helena .
This Bill will ever remain a hateful and foul blot upon the statute book of England .
Whigs and Tories joined in passing this disgraceful Bill  an act that will be handed down to posterity as a stigma not only upon the legislature of the country , but also upon the character of the age in which such an unjust and tyrannical proceeding could be permitted .
Napoleon was not the prisoner of England .
The moment that peace was signed he was as free to come to England as any other man in the world , and the English Government had no more right to seize him , and carry him prisoner to St. Helena , than the French had a right to seize the Prince Regent of England , and chain him to a barren rock for life .
It was arbitrary , cruel , unjust , and most cowardly .
The protest which Napoleon made against being sent to St. Helena was as follows : `` I hereby solemnly protest , in the face of God and man , against the violation of my most sacred rights , in forcibly disposing of my person and my liberty .
I came voluntarily on board the Bellerophon , I am not the prisoner but the guest of England .
As soon as I was seated on board the Bellerophon , I was upon the hearths of the British people . ''
Alas , poor Napoleon !
you ought to have known that there was then no British people  that the British people , who formerly held an influence over the mind and actions of the Government , were no more  that the people of England were become a set of abject , grovelling slaves , ready to bow the knee and bend the neck to their taskmasters !
The conduct of the Ministers , in transporting Napoleon forcibly to St. Helena , and afterwards sending out such a gaoler as Sir Hudson Lowe to worry him to death , was well becoming their upstart character  for none but the basest cowards will be found to insult a fallen foe .
Mr. Brougham could not hold his tongue upon the occasion , but must disgrace himself , not only as a man but as a legislator , by declaring in Parliament , when this shameful measure was brought before the House , `` that the law of nations justified the detention of Napoleon at St. Helena . ''
Mr. Brougham did not condescend to tell us what law of nations  but of course he meant to say that the law of nations would justify any thing that a Government had the power to effect  this is the only standard by which modern statesmen estimate the law of nations .
On the same principle , or , more correctly speaking , want of principle , an Act was passed , to restrict the Bank of England once more from paying their notes in cash  or , in other words , to protect them from the just demands of their creditors .
The Act , however , explicitly declared that this protection should cease on the 5th of April 1818 , when the Bank should positively pay their debts which they owed , and which they had so repeatedly promised to pay to the public .
The Parliament was , in this case , like the shepherd boy , who so often cried `` wolf , '' for fun to alarm the people , that when the wolf really came and attacked his flock , nobody either believed or heeded his cries .
Thus it was with the Parliament  they had so repeatedly promised the people that they would make the Bank of England pay their notes , and they had so frequently broken this promise , that the people firmly believed that payments in cash would never be made .
All those , too , who read the writings of Mr. Cobbett were persuaded that it was impossible for it even to be attempted , and therefore those who had any faith in his predictions were of course totally unprepared for it , on the time arriving for its being carried into effect .


On the 24th of April , 1816 , Major-General Sir Robert Wilson , Michael Bruce , Esq. and Captain J. H. Hutchinson , were convicted , in Paris , of assisting the escape of the Count de Lavalette , who was condemned for high treason , and they were sentenced to three months ' imprisonment .
A well-written article has appeared in the Times newspaper , contrasting the mild sentence inflicted upon these gentlemen , with that which has been inflicted upon me , of two years and six months ' incarceration in this Bastile .


Some time in the spring of this year , a public meeting was called of the freeholders of the county of Somerset , and it was advertised to be held at Bridgwater , John Goodford , Esq. of Yeovil , High Sheriff .
I forget now what was the precise object of the signers of the requisition , but I believe that it was to congratulate the Regent upon the marriage , or the intended marriage , of the Princess Charlotte of Wales , to the Prince of Saxe Cobourg .
This I know , however , that the meeting was called by that faction in the county , at the head of which stood the Rev. Sir Abraham Elton , Bart .
By accident I saw , in a London paper , the advertisement for this meeting , and though I was then residing in town , I made up my mind to attend it .


When I arrived at Bridgwater , I put my horses up at the Globe , and during the time that I was changing my dress , I saw the country people and farmers ride into the town in droves , but I did not see a single soul whom I knew  and being a perfect stranger in the town of Bridgwater , I had to make my way up to the hustings alone .
As , however , I passed up the street , Mr. Tynte , the present Member for that town , accosted me , saying , `` Well , Mr. Hunt , what are you come here ?
I really believe that the meeting was called in this town because you were not known here , and therefore it was expected , or rather hoped , that you would not come .
At Wells they knew you would carry any proposition that you might choose to bring forward , and I really believe it will be the same here . ''
After this salutation from him I passed on  he took one side of the street , and I the other  for as he was a magistrate of the county , and one of the gang , it would not have been at all in character to have seen him walking at the same side of the street with me .


I reached the hustings just in time , and up I went with the rest .
Little Squire Goodford opened the proceedings , and had the requisition read , after which he called upon the people to hear all parties that might choose to address them , c. c. c. Sir Abraham Elton next came forward , and addressed the meeting in one of the most bombastical and ridiculous speeches that I ever heard .
He expatiated upon the GLORY that we had acquired by the war , and the overthrow of Buonaparte , and predicted that peace , plenty , and their concomitant train of blessings , would strew the path of John Bull .
Of the virtues of the Prince of Saxe Coburg , he spoke in high-sounding terms  and he drew the conclusion that the union between him and our Princess Charlotte would contribute greatly to the happiness , and even safety , of the British people .
Some one of the same kidney followed him , and seconded his motion in a similar strain of sublime humbug and nonsense .


While this farce was performing by the Rev. Baronet and his band , and while the people of Somerset , who were assembled to the amount of six or eight thousand persons , were gaping and swallowing all the stuff and trash dealt out to them by these worthies , a Mr. Trip , a gentleman of the lower part of the county , a barrister , addressed himself to me , requesting to know if I meant to propose any amendment .
I told him I had some resolutions of a very different nature , which I certainly meant to move as an amendment .
He then shewed me some resolutions which he had drawn up , and which he had intended to propose as an amendment , if no others were offered .
Upon reading them over , I found that they embraced all the material points contained in those which I had framed  and as they went most decidedly to object to the whole that was proposed by Sir Abraham , it was settled between us that he should move , and that I should second them .
He accordingly moved them , after a very able and violent speech , which certainly contained a great deal of good matter , though it was evidently clouded every now and then by ebullitions of party spirit , which at county meetings generally shews itself .
He was , nevertheless , heard with attention , and received considerable applause .
The moment that I came forward to second the resolutions , a murmur ran through the crowd to know who I was  and , on my name being announced , I was instantly honoured with three cheers .
In seconding Mr. Trip 's resolutions , I certainly took rather different ground upon which to found my arguments .
I ridiculed , in indignant language , the idea of granting sixty thousand a-year to a young German adventurer , merely for marrying our Princess , and of giving them fifty thousand pounds as an outfit .
But the most monstrous and most infamous proposition of the whole , I considered that of settling fifty thousand a-year upon him for life , in case of the decease of his wife .
It was , I said , a premium upon her death .


I was going on amidst the laughter and cheers of the whole multitude , when little Mr. Goodford , the Sheriff , interfered to call me to order  adding , that as he stood there as the representative of the King , and as a loyal man , he could never suffer the Royal Family of England to be spoken of in the way in which I had spoken of it , and he insisted that I should not go on so in his presence .
This interruption was received with evident marks of disapprobation .
Never at a loss upon such an occasion , I replied , that I considered myself quite as loyal a man as Mr. Goodford , both to the King and the people , and that , as the meeting appeared almost unanimously disposed to hear me , Mr. Goodford , as chairman , had nothing to do but to take the sense of the meeting , which , if he did not choose to act up to , it was only for him to vacate the chair , and we would place some one in it that would .
The little Sheriff did not relish the idea of vacating the chair , and therefore the question was put whether the meeting would hear what I had to say or not .
The show of hands in favour of my continuing in the same strain was nine hundred and ninety-nine out of every thousand  there being only three hats , that I saw , held up against it .
These three persons consisted of a little knot of placemen , led on by a notorious Custom-house scamp of that town  a tall , lanky fellow , whose head was nearly half a foot above the rest of the crowd .
From the visage of this worthy projected a cocked nose of a very peculiar kind , the nostrils of which appeared to be two round holes passing horizontally , instead of perpendicularly , into his head .
Upon this delicious proboscis ( which was a sort of mixture between the pug-dog and a Chinese pig ) , was mounted a pair of silver barnicles , apparently placed there for the purpose of hiding a brace of things more resembling coddled gooseberries than human eyes .
That feature which , in men , made as they ought to be , is called a mouth , was in him not entitled to the name  it being a vulgar gash , with a pair of very thick lips , extending across two dumpling cheeks , and nearly uniting a brace of tremendous asinine ears .
These altogether formed something like a half-decayed turnip stuck upon a mop-stick .
Let the reader only imagine to himself a figure of this sort , constantly opening the slit that I have above described , and vomiting forth at once , from a fetid carcase , the most disgusting sound and stench , and then he will have some faint idea of the scene exhibited by this animal of a Customhouse officer .
After being admonished twice to be peaceable , and not attending to it , he and his satellites were handed out of the crowd , and banished from the scene of action , amidst the cheers of the multitude .
This operation being performed upon the Customhouse ass and his two supporters , I proceeded to address the meeting , for the purpose of winding up the subject upon which I had been dilating , when Squire Goodford spoke to order .
I certainly handled , with very little ceremony , the trash which Sir Abraham had been sporting , and , after having admonished my hearers to exercise their own judgment like Englishmen , and not be led by the nose like slaves , I concluded by seconding the resolutions which had been moved by Mr. Trip , which , of course , included a resolution declaring the necessity of a Reform in Parliament .


What followed was more curious than all the rest .
Sir John Acland , the Chairman of the county quarter sessions , now came forward , and , like a cunning old fox , who saw which way the wind blew , he turned short round upon those whom he meant before to support , and declared that the resolutions moved as an amendment by Mr. Trip , and seconded by Mr. Hunt , had his full concurrence .
Sir John saw which was the strongest side , and which way the current of popular opinion was rolling , and therefore he was determined to come in for his share of merit , by joining in the cry and running with the stream .
Upon a shew of hands our amendment was carried by a majority of one hundred to one , at least .
I never saw a man so delighted as Mr. Counsellor Trip was , I thought he would have jumped over the hustings for joy .
It was evident to me that this success came upon him unawares , and that , although he had made up his mind to move an amendment , yet he had not the slightest idea that it would be carried .
I was more accustomed to these things , and took it more coolly  in fact , I felt it necessary to admonish him to bear his victory with more becoming joy , and not to exult so outrageously .
A vote of thanks was passed to little Squire Goodford , the nominal High Sheriff  I say nominal , for , in fact , all the Sheriffs of this county , for many , many years , have been called pauper Sheriffs , and have been merely nominal High Sheriffs  Messrs. Perpetual , or rather Messrs. Alternate Sheriffs , that is to say , Messrs. Mellior and Broderip , being the real or bona fide Sheriffs , their masters having been their mere puppets or nominal Sheriffs .


When the meeting was dissolved , almost the whole assembly followed , or rather attended me to my inn , where I was obliged to address them from the window , before they could be prevailed upon to depart .
Every one appeared delighted with the result of the meeting , except poor Sir Abraham , the Sheriff , and a little knot of Whigs , who had meant to curry favour with the Prince Regent , by presenting to him an abject , time-serving address from the county of Somerset  but who had been foiled , and , in a great measure , by my exertions .
Sir Abraham , and his friend the Sheriff , looked most wretchedly  no Frenchman ever shrugged his shoulders with a more emphatic expression of disaster , than the Rev. Baronet did  and he really reminded me of the knight with the rueful countenance .
Will any man who reads this believe that the worthy Judges of the Court of King 's Bench had not the effect of this meeting in their mind , when they sentenced me to be confined TWO YEARS AND SIX MONTHS in Ilchester Bastile , where they well knew the Rev. Baronet and the worthy Squire were two of the VISITING MAGISTRATES ?
Will any one who reads this have the least doubt , that those who have persecuted me here have been actuated by the cowardly feeling of wishing to be revenged upon me , now that they have me in their power , because I defeated their ridiculous and time-serving projects , and exposed their folly at the said county meeting at Bridgwater ?
Can any one doubt that the Ministers ordered their tools to send me here , that their underlings might exert their petty tyranny , in order to annoy me ?


On the twelfth of May , in this year , the Prince of Saxe Coburg was married to the Princess Charlotte of Wales .
The Parliament , as I have before observed , gave them for an outfit fifty thousand pounds of John Gull 's money , and settled sixty thousand pounds a-year of the said John 's money , and also settled upon him as a dower , for his life , fifty thousand pounds a-year , in case of her death : so that this hopeful German now receives annually out of the pockets of the distressed people of England fifty thousand pounds a-year , while the President of the United States of America only receives six thousand pounds a-year  so that Saxe Coburg does us the honour to drain the people of England of a sum more than eight times as much as the President of the United States of America receives from the people of that country , for attending to all their affairs , and presiding as the Chief Magistrate of a vast and free country , containing ten millions of people .


In the middle of May there were disturbances at Bideford , from the poor endeavouring to prevent the exportation of potatoes .
There was also a riot and great disturbances at Bury , by the unemployed , to destroy a spinning-jenny .
On the 24th , a great body of farmers and labourers assembled in a very riotous manner at Ely , and committed many depredations .
They were at length suppressed , after some blood had been spilt .
On the 28th , there were great disturbances , amongst the pitmen and others , at Newcastle-upon-Tyne .
On the same day a serious tumult occurred at Halstead , in Essex , to liberate some persons who had been taken up for destroying threshing-machines .
On the 2d of July , the Prince Regent prorogued the Parliament , after a new Alien Bill , and a Bill to regulate the Civil List , had passed .
On the 12th of July , 1816 , there was a public funeral of Richard Brinsley Sheridan , Esq. certainly the most brilliant and accomplished orator of the age .
In my opinion , he far surpassed either Pitt or Fox in real eloquence , and , in the midst of all his changings and vacillations , he was always , without one exception , the steady and zealous friend of the liberty of the press .
Poor Sheridan was always in pecuniary difficulties , and overwhelmed with debt  and he at last became quite a swindler in order to evade his creditors , and he died at a time when he could not obtain credit for a pot of porter .
On the 22d , the Duke of Gloucester , who was called by the Royal Family Silly Billy , was married to one of his cousins , the Princess Mary .
Fortunately for the public , they have , I believe , no children for John Gull to keep .
On the 2d of August , a riot took place in the Calton , one of the suburbs of Glasgow , on account of the soup-kitchens , which was not suppressed till some blood was spilt .
On the 8th of the same month , a mortar of uncommon size , left by Marshal Soult on his retreat from Cadiz , was fixed in St. James 's Park , opposite the Horse Guards .
This piece of ordnance is commonly known by the name of the Prince Regent 's bomb .
On the 27th , Algiers was bombarded , and the batteries destroyed by the English fleet , commanded by Lord Exmouth -- a treaty was entered into afterwards , by the Dey of Algiers and Lord Exmouth , in which Christian slavery was abolished .
On the 16th of September a riot and great disturbance took place at Preston , in Lancashire , by the distressed and unemployed workmen .
There was also a riot at Frome , in consequence of a sudden rise of one-third in the price of potatoes , in which riot the Yeomanry Cavalry sustained a defeat , and were driven from the field of action by the stones , potatoes , and rotten eggs that were hurled at them by the multitude , several of whom were taken into custody .
One of that anomalous hermaphrodite race called Parson-justices , a person of the name of Sainsbury , read the Riot Act , and called out the cavalry .
But , by the judicious conduct of Mr. Champness , of Orchardleigh , the disturbances were quelled , and peace was restored .
A Mr. Thornhill , who was a paid agent and adjutant of the Somerset Yeomanry Cavalry , who came over from Bath on the following day , after all was peace and quietness , wrote a letter to the Editor of the Courier newspaper , giving a most ridiculous and false account of the whole transaction .
In order to ascertain the truth , as to what really took place , I drove over from Bath , with Mr. Allen of Bath , and having detailed the circumstances to Mr. Cobbett , he handled the brave blustering Captain in a masterly stile , and fixed upon him the name of Captain Bobadil , which will last him as long as he lives .
Captain Bobadil and the battle of Frome will not readily be forgotten in the west of England , nor , indeed , in any place where Mr. Cobbett 's Register was read , which was now published at TWO-PENCE a number , and in consequence had increased ten-fold in its circulation .
There were also great riots at Nottingham , by persons calling themselves Luddites  these consisted of unemployed workmen , who went about in the most lawless manner , destroying the frames by which the stocking manufactory was carried on .
There were riots , too , at Myrthir-Tydvil , in Glamorganshire , by the workmen employed in the iron-manufactories , on a reduction of wages  and at Walsall , in Staffordshire , amongst the distressed and unemployed workmen .


In fact , great distress and dissatisfaction prevailed , not only in England , Ireland and Scotland , but all over Europe , which was in a calamitous state , produced by the reaction of the war , the fatal effects of which now began to be felt most severely .
The distress amongst the farmers was very great , and the agricultural gentry began to cry out most unmercifully .
The fools now began to find out that what I had told them was true , namely , that the Corn Bill would not ultimately serve them , that it was never intended by its promoters for any other purpose than to enable the Government , by means of keeping up the price of corn , to continue to extract from the farmers high rents and high taxes .
In many parts the manufacturers likewise suffered greatly , particularly in Staffordshire , South Wales , and the Metropolis , and especially amongst the poor weavers in Spitalfields .
The truth was , that the Bank of England had curtailed the issue of their notes , in order to meet the demands of their creditors , which they expected they should be compelled to pay in cash , instead of being longer protected by a pretended restriction , designed to prevent them from being called upon to pay any thing more than `` I promise to pay , '' in exchange for `` I promise to pay . ''
This restriction was nothing more nor less than a Government protection against the demands of their creditors , which enabled them to refuse to pay their just debts with impunity , and according to Act of Parliament .
Distress and discontent therefore prevailed from one end of the land to the other , but in no place more than the metropolis , which was full of discharged seamen , who had been dismissed from the British Navy , which was now dismantled almost universally .
These poor fellows , who had fancied that they had been fighting the battles of their country , who had suffered all the hardships of a sailor 's life , during a long and bloody war , and who had been successful against every power for such a length of time , had become exceedingly disheartened by the checks and defeats they had experienced in the naval warfare with the Americans , who , if I may use a familiar phrase , had completely taken the shine out of the British seamen , a race proverbial for being very superstitious .
They had always boasted that an English sailor was a match for two Frenchmen , or any other seamen  but Jack found in the American sailor not only his equal in bravery and skill  but more than his match .
Thus dispirited and almost broken hearted , and the British Navy being laid up , our sailors were discharged and treated worse than dogs  they were put on shore at any port , and they had to march to London , barefooted and pennyless , to receive the little pay and prize money that was due to them .
Hundreds and hundreds did I relieve , as they passed by Middleton Cottage  broken down in body and in spirit , they were made to feel that they had been fighting for despotism instead of Liberty .
Soup Committees were established , and subscriptions raised all over the kingdom , to supply the starving poor with soup  but to the offer of it they replied , that they did not want charity , they wanted work , and they would much rather live upon a scanty meal , the fruit of their own labour , than be feasted by charity .


Some time in the early part of September , I received a letter from London , signed A. Thistlewood , requesting me , when I came to town , to do him the favour of a call , as he had to communicate to me matters of the highest importance , connected with the welfare and happiness of the people , to promote whose interest he had always observed that I was most ready and active , c. c..
As Mr. Thistlewood was a perfect stranger to me , and as I was a stranger even to his name , I wrote to a Mr. Bryant , a quondam attorney , and Clerk of the Papers at the King 's Bench  a man who was said to know every body and every thing that was going on in London , both in high and low life  -- I wrote to this gentleman , and requested him to inquire at such a number for Mr. Thistlewood , and let me know who and what he was , as I had received rather a mysterious letter from him , and I wished to know something of him before I gave him any answer .
The answer which I received from Mr. Bryant was such that I never replied to the letter of Mr. Thistlewood , or took any further notice of it .


Some time , however , in the beginning of November , I received a letter from London , signed Thomas Preston , Secretary , to say that a public meeting of the distressed inhabitants of the metropolis was advertised to be held in Spafields , on Monday , the 15th of November , and that he was instructed by the Committee to solicit my attendance .
This letter was dated from Greystoke-place , and the writer requested an answer , which I gave him by return of post , desiring to be informed what was the object of the meeting .
I received a reply , stating , that the object was to agree to a memorial to the Prince Regent , setting forth their grievances , and praying for relief .
I instantly wrote , to say that I accepted their invitation , and I would attend the meeting at the time appointed .


On the next day I rode over to my friend Cobbett , at Botley , to consult with him what was best to be done .
When I mentioned the circumstance to him , he looked very grave , and said it was a dangerous experiment , and he scarcely knew how to advise me , whether to go or not .
`` Oh , '' said I , `` make your mind quite easy upon that point  there is no difficulty in it , I have accepted the invitation , and I mean to attend the meeting .
The moment that I ascertained that it was for a legal purpose , that of addressing the Prince Regent upon the distressed state of the people , and praying for redress , I no longer hesitated , but accepted the invitation , and promised to be there in time .
All that I want you to do , therefore , is , to assist me in drawing up some resolutions , and preparing a proper address to be presented to his Royal Highness upon the occasion . ''
`` That , '' said he , `` I will do with great pleasure . ''
After due consideration the resolutions and the address were agreed upon , and drawn up by him .
Mr. Cobbett never mentioned one word to me that he had been invited by the same party to attend this said meeting  but he said he should be at his lodgings in London at the time .


I arrived in London the Saturday before the intended meeting , and called at Graystockplace , to inquire for Mr. Thomas Preston .
I found no one there but two or three dirtily dressed , miserable , poor children , who told me that I should find their father at some house in Southampton-buildings , Chancery-lane .
Thither I repaired , meditating as I went along on the wretched emblem of the distresses of the times , which I had just witnessed in the family of Mr. Thomas Preston .
When I reached Southampton-buildings , I knocked at the door , and inquired for Mr. Preston .
The servant said there was no such person there , but she would go and inquire of Mr. Thistlewood and the Doctor .
She then desired me to walk in , and I was shewn into a very neat and well-furnished dining-room .
I could not avoid observing to myself the contrast between the elegant apartment I was now in and that which I had just quitted in Graystock-place  the name of Thistlewood was still tinkling upon the drum of my ear , I having quite forgotten where I had heard it before .


In a few minutes two gentlemen walked in  the one dressed in a handsome dressing-gown and morocco slippers , the other in a shabby-genteel black .
The former addressed me very familiarly by name , saying , that he was Mr. Thistlewood , and he begged to introduce his friend Dr. Watson .
They at once informed me that they were part of the Committee , for whom Mr. Preston acted as Secretary  that they had called the meeting , and directed their Secretary to invite me to attend it , and that they had also written to invite Sir Francis Burdett , Major Cartwright , Mr. Waithman , Mr. Cobbett , and several other political characters .
I then inquired what was the nature of the memorial or address which they meant to submit to the Prince Regent ?
They answered , that they had it not then by them , but that , if I wished it , they would procure me a sight of it before I went to the meeting .
To this I replied , that I certainly did not wish merely for a sight of it , but for something more  as , if I attended the meeting to take any part in it , I should choose to have time to peruse the memorial very minutely before I undertook to give it my support .
This they promised I should have an opportunity of doing , and the Doctor appeared anxious to have my opinion upon it .
I could , however , see that Mr. Thistlewood had set his heart upon this memorial as it stood , and he slightly intimated that the Committee had made up their minds on the subject , and that it was finally settled that the memorial was to be submitted to the meeting .
I inquired who the Committee were composed of , and I soon found that Mr. Thistlewood and Dr. Watson , the two gentlemen before me , were in reality the Committee  young Watson , Preston , Hooper , Castles , and one or two others , who formed the remainder of the Committee , being merely nominal members .
I informed them that I was staying at Cooper 's Hotel , in Bouverie-street , which makes part of the Black Lion Inn , in Water-lane , where they promised to wait upon me in the evening with the memorial , that I might look it over .


Mr. Thistlewood and the Doctor came at the appointed hour , and brought the document with them .
It was very long , and filled several pages closely written upon foolscap paper .
As soon as I had read the first resolution , I was satisfied in my own mind as to how I ought to act with respect to this voluminous production  but when I had read to the bottom of the first page I closed the book , and very seriously informed my visitors that it evidently contained treasonable matter , and that nothing more than the overt act of holding the meeting , to carry the scheme into execution , was required to make all that were concerned in it liable at least to be indicted for high treason .
I certainly should not , I told them , countenance any such measures as were proposed even in the first page , and the project of marching in a body to Carlton House , to demand and enforce an audience of the Prince Regent ( which formed a part of their design ) , was quite preposterous , as well as unjust and unreasonable .
As a private gentleman , I myself would not submit to be intruded upon in such a manner , and it was very unreasonable to expect that it could be endured by the Chief Magistrate of the country .
I found , in fact , that the whole affair was made up of Spencean principles , relating to the holding of all the land in the kingdom as one great farm belonging to the people , or something of that sort .
I told them my ideas upon the subject , which were , that the first thing the people had to do , in order to recover their rights , was to obtain a Reform of the Commons ' House of Parliament .
When once the people were fairly and equally represented in that House , such propositions as were contained in their memorial might then be discussed , but for one set of people to dictate to any other what should be the law , I maintained to be arbitrary and unjust .
The Doctor very readily concurred with me , and he asked my advice as to what was best to be done .
I replied , that the only course to be pursued was , to pass certain resolutions , pointing out the distressed state of the country , and the absolute necessity of Reform , to save the wreck of the constitution , and declaring that the only Reform that would be of any avail must be upon the principles of Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot .
They both at once agreed to the propriety of my suggestions , and requested that I would prepare some resolutions , and an address to his Royal Highness , which they also begged me to propose to the meeting , and they would support them .
I asked them if they did not expect the attendance of any other of the public characters to whom they had written ?
To this they replied , that I was the only person who had accepted the invitation .
The Doctor and Mr. Thistlewood promised to take care about the hustings being erected in Spa-fields , and the former was to call on me on Monday morning , to prepare and transcribe the resolutions and the petition which were to be submitted to the meeting .


The Doctor came at the time appointed , and he copied the resolutions and the petition which I had drawn up , which , with some few alterations and additions , were the same as were agreed upon by Mr. Cobbett and myself at Botley .
Before we had finished these , a messenger arrived , to say that an immense number of persons were assembled in the front of the Merlin 's Cave public-house , in Spa-fields , and that they were impatient for our arrival .
Upon this , the Doctor and myself got into a hackney-coach , and drove immediately to the spot , which was covered by much the largest concourse of people I had ever seen together in my life .
We were hailed with the most deafening shouts , and , with some considerable difficulty , we were driven to the summit of the hill , surrounded by the multitude .
Upon inquiry where the hustings were , I found that nothing had been done or thought of towards the erecting of them .
In this dilemma I mounted upon the top of the hackney-coach , and was immediately followed by the Doctor and another person , which person , without further ceremony , hoisted a tricoloured flag , red , white , and green !
The bearer of this flag was no less a personage than the notorious Mr. JOHN CASTLES , a gemman that I had never seen before .
I soon found that it was impossible to address such an immense multitude from such a situation as that of the top of a coach , and as the wind blew very sharp , our birth was a very disagreeable one .
While we were looking round for a better situation , we were hailed by some gentlemen from the window of a house in the neighbouring row , and a young person , whom I afterwards found to be Mr. William Clark , having made his way to the coach , invited me to enter the house opposite , and to address the multitude from the window  and , as the party who were assembled in that room still kept beckoning me to join them , I readily assented .
We dismounted and followed Mr. Clark , who led us up stairs into the front room of the Merlin 's Cave public-house , which I afterwards found had been taken by , and was partly occupied by , the Magistrates , accompanied by a number of the officers of the police and the reporters of the public press .
The sashes were immediately removed from the window , and I presented myself to the assembled multitude amidst universal shouts of applause .
I found myself surrounded by strangers , there being scarcely a man in the room I had ever before seen , with the exception of Mr. Clark and some of the reporters of the public press .
I proposed that Mr. Clark should take the chair , which proposal was seconded , and carried by acclamation .
I was the only person present who was known to the multitude as a public man .
I had often appeared before the people at Palace-yard , and at the Guildhall of the city of London , and I was instantly recognized by them .
In fact , I believe that it had been publicly placarded and advertised that I had accepted the invitation to attend , which had been sent to me by the Committee , and I was , therefore , expected .
The Chairman having , in an appropriate speech , briefly opened the meeting , I stood forward to move the resolutions , which I prefaced by a speech of about an hour in length .
I pointed out the enormous sums paid by the public for what is called the Civil List , amounting in the last year to 1,038,000 #  and in the same year , on account of deficiencies of the said Civil List , 584,713 # more  and for the Civil List for Scotland , 126,613 # additional , making in the whole , for the Civil List of that year , ONE MILLION SEVEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINE THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIX POUNDS .
I showed that the expense of keeping up the army , including the ordnance , was 26,736,017 #  that the additional allowance to the Royal Family that year was 366,660 #  that the secret service money was 153,443 #  and that the sum voted for the poor clergy of the Church of England was 100,000 # .
I also read a list of some of the most profligate sinecurists and pensioners , male and female , in which I included a sufficient sprinkling of ladies and gentlemen belonging to both the great factions of Whigs and Tories , taking as nearly as I could an equal number from each of them .
Among those whom I specified were the Marquis of Buckingham and Lord Camden , the two Tellers of the Exchequer , whose sinecures at that time were about thirty-five thousand a-year each  Lord Arden , the elder brother of Perceval , thirty-eight thousand a-year  Lords Grenville and Erskine , c. c. c. Amongst the number of lady pensioners I noticed Lady Auckland , Lady Louisa Paget , Mrs. Hunn , the mother of Mr. Canning , c. c. I represented these persons as contributing to the distresses of the country , by taking such large sums out of the taxes , without doing any thing for it .
I contended that the enormous weight of taxation alone produced the misery under which the people were groaning , and that the sole cause of such heavy impositions being placed upon the people , arose from the corrupt state of the representation in the Commons ' or people 's House of Parliament  and I laboured strenuously to convince them that the high price of bread and meat did not originate with the bakers and butchers , as was falsely asserted to be the case by the corrupt conductors of the daily press .
I demonstrated to them the folly of wreaking their vengeance upon unoffending tradesmen , who were suffering from the weight of taxes nearly as much as themselves  and I endeavoured to convince them of the superiority of mental over physical force  contending that it would be an act of injustice , as well as folly , to resort to the latter while we had the power of exercising the former .
Above all things , I took the greatest pains to promote peace and good order , as the only means by which they were likely to obtain any redress for their grievances , or any alleviation of their miseries , and to convince them that to commit acts of violence was to prove themselves unworthy of relief .
I concluded by reading and recommending to their adoption the four following resolutions .
These resolutions were received with long continued shouts of approbation :


Resolved 1st , That the country is in a state of fearful and unparalleled distress and misery  and that the principal immediate cause of this calamity , which has fallen upon all classes of persons , except that class which derive their incomes from the Taxes , is , that enormous load of taxation , which has taken , and which still takes , from the Farmer , the Manufacturer , and the Tradesman , the means of maintaining their families , and paying their debts , and of affording , in the shape of wages , a sufficiency to employ and support their Labourers and Journeymen .


Resolved 2d , That the causes of this intolerable burden , are , 1st , the amount of a Debt contracted by Boroughmongers for the purposes of carrying on a long , unnecessary , and unjust War , the main objects of which now appear to have been to stifle Civil , Political , and Religious Liberty , and to restore Despotism and Persecution  2d , The maintenance of an Army in France , in order to uphold the restored Despots and Priests in opposition to the express wishes of the whole French Nation  3d , The keeping up of an enormous Standing Army in these Kingdoms , with a view of overawing the People , and compelling them to submit to War Taxes in time of Peace  4th , A lavish and profligate expenditure of the Public Money on innumerable men and women , who are the holders of Sinecures , Pensions , Grants , and Emoluments of various descriptions , without having ever performed the smallest service to their Country .


Resolved 3d , That the sole cause of these desolating measures and practices , is the want of the People being represented in the Commons ' House of Parliament , and the return of Members to that House by those base and corrupt means , which were by the Members themselves shamelessly confessed to be `` as notorious as the sun at noon-day . ''


Resolved 4th , That a Petition be presented to the Prince Regent , beseeching him to take into his gracious consideration the sufferings of this industrious , patient , and starving People , praying that he will be pleased immediately to cause the Parliament to be assembled , and to recommend to them , in the most urgent manner , to reduce the Army , to abolish all Sinecures and all Pensions , Grants , and Emoluments not merited by Public Services  and to apply the same to feed the `` HUNGRY AND CLOTHE THE NAKED , '' so that the unhappy and starving People may be saved from desperation  and above all , to listen , before it be too late , to those repeated prayers of the People , for being restored to their undoubted right of enjoying the benefit of Annual Parliaments chosen freely by the People .


Dr. Watson seconded these resolutions , and they were carried unanimously , amidst the cheers of the multitude , without one dissenting voice .
I then read the following petition , which , after having been seconded by the Doctor , was unanimously adopted by the greatest concourse of people that had ever , within the memory of man , been known to assemble for any political purpose .


`` To his Royal Highness the Prince Regent of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland .


`` The Petition of the distressed Inhabitants of the Metropolis , held in Spa-fields , the 15th day of November , 1816 ,


`` HUMBLY SHOWETH -- That this kingdom is in a state of unparalleled distress and misery , and that the principal immediate cause of this calamity , which has fallen upon all classes of persons ( except that class which derive their incomes from the taxes ) , is that enormous load of taxation which has taken , and which still takes , from the farmer , the manufacturer , and the tradesman , the means of maintaining their families , and of paying their debts , and of affording , in the shape of wages , a sufficiency to employ and support their labourers and journeymen .


`` That the causes of this intolerable burden are -- First , The amount of a debt , contracted by Borough-mongers and their agents , for the purpose of carrying on a long , unnecessary , and unjust war , the object of which now appears to have been to stifle civil , political , and religious liberty , and to restore despotism and persecution .
Second , The maintenance of an English Protestant Army in France , in order to uphold the restored Despots and Priesthood , whom we have been taught to hold in abhorrence .
Third , The keeping up in these kingdoms of an enormous Standing Army , with all its colleges , barracks , and arsenals , with a view of overawing the people , and compelling them to submit to War Taxes in time of Peace .
Fourth , A lavish and profligate expenditure of the public money on innumerable men and women , who are holders of sinecures , pensions , grants , and emoluments of various descriptions , without having ever performed the smallest service to the country .


`` That the sole cause of these desolating measures and practices is , the want of the people being represented in their own House of Parliament , and the return of Members to that House by those base and corrupt means , which means were , by the Members themselves , shamelessly confessed ` to be as notorious as the sun at noonday . '


`` Upon the ground of these facts , the existence of which must be familiar to the mind , and painful to the heart of your Royal Highness , we earnestly beseech your Royal Highness to take into your gracious consideration the sufferings of this industrious , patient , and starving people  and we earnestly pray ,


`` That your Royal Highness will be pleased to cause the Parliament to be assembled immediately , and , as the friend of your Royal Father 's people , to urge the two Houses to reduce the Army , to remove those barracks , military colleges , and all those menacing parades so hateful to our eyes and so hostile to that Constitution which your Royal House were placed on the Throne to defend  to abolish all sinecures and all pensions , grants , and emoluments not merited by public services , and to apply the amount of the same to feed the hungry and clothe the naked  and , above all , to listen , before it be TOO LATE , to those repeated prayers of the people for being restored to their undoubted right of annually choosing their own Representatives .
In the mean time we implore your Royal Highness to appropriate a few hundred thousands of the enormous Civil List for the immediate relief of the numerous suffering , starving , and dying people .


`` And we shall ever pray , c. c. ''


The following resolutions were then proposed and carried unanimously : Resolved 5th , That Sir Francis Burdett , Bart .
be requested to wait on the Prince Regent , and deliver this Petition into his hands as soon as possible .


Resolved 6th , That Henry Hunt , Esq. be requested to accompany Sir F. Burdett .


Resolved 7th , That Sir Francis Burdett , Bart .
assisted by Major Cartwright , be requested to prepare and bring into Parliament , as soon as they meet , a Bill for a Reform thereof , agreeable to the Constitution .


Resolved 8th , That this Meeting do adjourn to Monday fortnight , then to assemble to hear the answer of the Prince Regent , in Spa-fields , at One o'Clock precisely .


Resolved 9th , That this Meeting do re-assemble the first day after the meeting of Parliament , in Palace-yard , Westminster , at One o'clock , to petition Parliament for a Reform thereof , agreeable to the Constitution .


Resolved 10th , That our fellow-countrymen of Bristol , Liverpool , Manchester , Birmingham , Nottingham , Leicester , Glasgow , Paisley , and of every City , Town , and populous place in the United Kingdom , are hereby invited , and requested by this Meeting to assemble and meet on the same day , at the same hour , and for the SAME PURPOSE .


Resolved 11th , That the Thanks of the Meeting be given to H. Hunt , Esq. .


Resolved 12th , That the Thanks of the Meeting be given to Mr. Dyall and Mr. Preston , and those Gentlemen who called the Meeting .


Resolved 13th , That the Thanks of the Meeting be given to the Chairman , William Clark , Esq. .


The parties thanked having briefly returned the compliment , the meeting was dissolved by the Chairman , who accompanied me into a coach , which the multitude immediately took possession of , and drew amidst the most unanimous cheers , to my inn , the Black Lion , Water-lane , where I had appointed to meet a friend to dine .
As soon as they had safely conveyed us , they dispersed to their several homes , in the most peaceable manner .


Just as we were sitting down to dinner , four of us , Mr. Bryant , his son , Mr. Clark , and myself , to our great surprise in marched Messrs. Watson , Thistlewood , and three or four strangers , whom they introduced as Mr. Watson , jun. .
Mr. Castles , Mr. Hooper , c. who had followed us from the meeting , with an intention , as they said , of dining with me .
I was very much disconcerted by this intrusion , and told them that I had private business to settle , that I had no idea of dining in public , and that dinner was only ordered for four .
As , however , they did not appear to take the hint ( although it was a pretty broad one ) , Mr. Bryant ordered more fish and some chops to be added to our dinner , and the table being lengthened , down we all sat together .
Mr. Bryant took the chair , at my request .


Dinner being ended , Mr. Bryant drank the health of the King , which toast passed round till it came to Mr. Castles , who , having filled a bumper , substituted the following vulgar and sanguinary toast for that of the King -- `` May the last of Kings be strangled with the guts of the last priest  '' a piece of brutality which had not even the miserable merit of being original , he having copied it from one of the French anarchists .
This was a pretty specimen of the company that had intruded upon us !
I remonstrated against such blackguardism , and declared that I would not remain in the room if there was any repetition of it .
Mr. Castles , nevertheless , soon began again in a similar strain , and having put forth some most outrageous speech , as vulgar as it was seditious , both myself and Mr. Bryant insisted upon the worthy gentleman leaving the room , or holding his peace .
He promised to do the latter , and he soon dropped off , or appeared to drop off , into a very sound sleep .
This was a circumstance which struck me as being very suspicious , and therefore I was particularly guarded in what I said , and in what was said by others .
At length two of the party , young Watson and Hooper , made a move to retire , and I insisted upon it that they should take their friend Castles with them  but he shammed so sound a sleep that it was with difficulty he was got out of the room , and it was only effected by my pulling the chair from under him  upon which he was in an instant as wide awake as any man in the room .
This convinced me that his sleep was all a mere pretence .
Soon after this the rest of the party left us , and Mr. Bryant and myself remained to talk over the curious adventures of the evening .
We were both convinced that Castles was at any rate a great villain , and I was determined in future not to be in a room where he was .


On the next morning , Dr. Watson and Mr. Thistlewood came to apologise for the ill-behaviour of their friend Castles , who they assured me was at heart a very good fellow , but that he was overcome with liquor on the preceding evening , and that he now wished very much to have an opportunity of making an apology in person , for which purpose he was waiting hard by .
I , however , positively refused to see him , saying , that I believed him to be a great scoundrel , and that I would on no account suffer him to come into my room again  and I not only cautioned the Doctor against him , but I believe I told him to take care , or Castles would bring him to the gallows .
In fact , I made up my mind that as long as the Doctor and Mr. Thistlewood kept company with such a fellow , I would have nothing to do with them in private , nor would ever see them alone .
The Doctor will recollect that , when they called on me in the evening afterwards , to make some inquiry about the proceedings which were to be adopted on the following meeting , intended to be held on the 2d of December , I declined to enter into any particulars , and did not even ask them to take a seat , although Mr. Mitchell , a liveryman of the city , was with me .
I felt that I had been in very dangerous company , and , though I would not neglect my public duty , I was determined that I would not place myself in the power of such a man as Mr. Castles appeared to me to be .


On the day of the meeting of the 15th of November , the Courier newspaper roundly stated that HUNT had arrived at the meeting about one o'clock , and , after having addressed the multitude in a most inflammatory speech , had submitted to them a memorial to be presented to the Prince Regent , full of treasonable matter  and the corrupt knave , who conducts that paper , actually inserted one of the resolutions of the memorial which Dr. Watson and Mr. Thistlewood had submitted to me , and which I had rejected .
The truth was , that the Government had previously procured a copy of the said memorial , from a person of the name of Dyall , one of the party who had called the meeting , and as this memorial had been unanimously agreed to by the Committee , my Lord Sidmouth , the Secretary of State , and his agents , made so certain that I should fall into this trap , and propose it to the meeting , that their principal organ , the editor of the Courier newspaper , actually inserted a copy of it in the paper , as having been proposed by me at the meeting .
But they soon found , to their sorrow , that old birds were not to be caught with chaff  for that I had blasted their fondest hopes of bloodshed , by proposing a petition to the Prince Regent , of a nature totally the reverse of the said memorial  which petition was universally adopted by the meeting  and that I had undertaken to present it to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent , and had also promised to report the answer , if I received any , at the next meeting , which was appointed to be held on Monday , the 2d of December .


On the following day , not only the Courier and the Morning Post , but every paper published in the metropolis ( with the exception of the Statesman , which was then conducted by Mr. Lovell ) , joined in pouring forth a torrent of falsehood , misrepresentation , and abuse of me .
I do not know that I can give a more correct account of what took place in London , more fairly represent the conduct of the public press upon this occasion , than by giving an extract from Mr. Cobbett 's Register , which was published the ensuing week , as follows , headed `` SPA-FIELDS MEETING : ''


`` Since my long acquaintance with the press , I do not think that I have ever witnessed so much baseness of conduct as this Meeting has given rise to .
If Mr. Hunt had been the most notorious pick-pocket  if he had been a raggamuffin covered with a coat hired for the day  if he had been a fellow who took up his lodgings in the brick-kilns or in the niches on Westminster Bridge  and if he had actually proposed to the Meeting to go directly and plunder the silversmiths ' shops and cut the throats of all those who opposed them  if he had drank off a glass of human blood by way of moistening his throat : monstrous as this is , it is a real fact , that , if he had been and had done all this , the London press could not have treated him in a worse manner than it has .
The Statesman newspaper is an exception  but , I believe , that it is almost the only exception .
Talk of violence indeed !
Was there ever violence like this heard of in this world before ?
And , what is the monstrous crime which has emboldened these literary ruffians to make this savage assault , and which induces them to suppose that they shall finally escape with impunity ?
They , the vile wretches , are the real mob .
They attack in body  they know that defence is impossible  they know , that a hundred times the fortune of Mr. Hunt would not purchase enough of their columns to contain an answer to their falsehoods .
Is this manly , is this fairness , is this discussion , is this liberty of the press ?
Infamous cowards !
They merit to be dragged by a halter fastened round their necks , and whipped through the streets .
They talk of decency and decorum indeed !
They call people blackguards and ruffians !
They pretend to complain of misrepresentation and exaggeration !
They !
who set up one common howl of foul abuse and viperous calumny .


`` But , what is the act which has awakened all those filthy curs , and put them in motion ?
Some persons , no matter who , but , I believe , some suffering tradesmen , in London , agreed to call a meeting of distressed people in Spa-fields , in order to present a petition on the subject of their sufferings : one of the Committee , who had called this Meeting , wrote to Mr. Hunt to come and assist at it .
This he did .
Being there , he proposed a Petition , which was agreed to .
This Petition has appeared in the Statesman newspaper , to which I refer the reader  and when he has looked at it , he will be convinced , that , if the language of moderation be desirable , the language of this petition is much more moderate than that of almost any petition , which has recently appeared in print .
Upon what ground , then , is this outrageous abuse founded ?
The Meeting separated very quietly  never did any Meeting partake less of riotous behaviour .
In the evening of the same day , a mob of boys and others attacked some bakers ' and butchers ' shops .
But , whose fault was this ?
Was it Mr. Hunt 's , who seems to have spent a quarter of an hour in endeavouring to convince his hearers , that to commit such acts was to prove themselves unworthy of relief  or , was it the fault of those pestiferous vehicles of falsehood , the Courier and the Times , who are incessantly inveighing against the avarice of bakers and butchers ?


`` It is clear , that these proceedings of the evening had no connection with the Meeting , but , on the contrary , that every thing which was said at the Meeting had a natural tendency to prevent them .
As to the attack on the office of the Morning Chronicle , that might possibly arise out of what Mr. Hunt said at the Meeting .
And , what then ?
Was he to endure the calumnies , the unprovoked calumnies , of that paper for years , and never reply a word ?
It would have cost him hundreds of pounds to cause to be published in that paper answers to a hundredth part of the base attacks upon him contained in that same paper .
And , was he never to answer in any way ?
Was he , when he had a hundred thousand men within his hearing , to abstain from expressing his indignation at the conduct of that paper , lest , by possibility , the indignation might be catching ?
The Morning Chronicle , The Courier , and Times , make no scruple to endeavour to cause him to be knocked in the head  they point him out for either hanging or murdering  they are ready beforehand with an apology for any one who may take his life .
And is he , who can find no entrance into their columns , without covering his paragraph with gold , to abstain from uttering a word against them when he comes before a public meeting , lest the people should espouse his cause and demolish their windows ?
Whence have they derived this privilege of assaulting him with impunity ?
He has no newspaper in his hands .
He has no means of answering them through the press .
They assail him , sitting snugly in their offices .
They assail him daily .
And , is he never to open his lips at any time , or at any place ?


`` Where , then , is the ground of all this infamous abuse ?
After accusing Mr. Hunt of having raised a mob for treasonable purposes , some of the papers have , in the most serious manner , asserted that he was insane , and that he had been to a madhouse !
Is not this a pretty stretch of calumny ?
Is a man bound to endure this in silence ?
` He has his redress at law . '
Oh !
the base cowards !
Their answer is worse than their crime .


`` Was it any fault in an Englishman , living in the country , to come to London to take part at a Meeting of Englishmen in distress ?
Was this any fault ?
No one can say that it was .
-- The Meeting had been advertised many days before any knowledge of it reached Mr. Hunt  he was requested to come up  and who can blame him for coming ?
However , it is not a question of blame or no blame  he had a right to come , and he chose to exercise his right .
If , indeed , the invitation had been from persons in prosperity , he might have easily declined  but , I do not see how he was to resist the call of people in distress .


`` But his speech , that was ` inflammatory . '
Good God !
what is not inflammatory now-a-days ?
But , though the speech might , and , I dare say , did contain matter much stronger than that which I have read in the report of it , I am very sure that it could not surpass what I have read in the Morning Chronicle within this month  and that it could not surpass ( for nothing can surpass ) the inflammatory matter in the Times and the Courier on the subject of their alleged extortions of the Bakers and Butchers .
Besides , as to the printed reports of the speech , Mr. Hunt was wholly at the mercy of the Reporters .
They have made him say just what they pleased , and he has no redress  no means of correction  no chance of being heard in explanation .
They impute to him the having asserted , that Lady Oxford is on the pension list .
This was false , as he has since proved to me by the list which he read .
It has been asserted , that he went to the Meeting with a tri-coloured flag .
This is also false , he never having known of the existence of any flag until his arrival on the spot  and , was he to go away merely because some whimsical persons had hoisted a flag and a cap of Liberty ?
Besides , are there not flags enough at contested elections ?
Do not freemasons and others parade about with flags ?
Why was this meeting not to have a flag , if it chose it ?
Call the thing nonsensical if you please , and I shall not dissent .
But , where was the harm ?
Where was the justification for all this vile , this atrocious abuse ?


`` It is said , that Mr. Hunt urged the people to use physical force if their petition was not granted .
This also is false  or , at least , he assures me that it is  and I believe him , because it was too foolish for him to think of .
But , how often have we heard of resistance being recommended ?
Mr. Fox once recommended it , and he never was calumniated in this outrageous manner .
I have no doubt that many things escaped Mr. Hunt during his speech , that he himself wished he had uttered in more select phrases  but , who is there who is so very choice upon such occasions ?
If any one say , that he would do better to remain in Hampshire or Wiltshire , and take care of his farms , the answer is , that he is seemingly of a different opinion .
He chooses to take a part in public matters .
He prefers this bustle to the tranquillity of a country life .
The boisterous hallooing of multitudes is more pleasing to his ears than the chinkling of the plough traces , the bleating of lambs , or the song of the nightingale .
His taste may be bad  but , a ` God 's name , do not cover him with all sorts of infamous names and imputations , on account of his want of taste .
Besides , if this sort of objection were made to leaders at Public Meetings , we should , I imagine , have very few meetings .
One might be told to keep to his snuff shop , another to his haberdashery , and so on .
Indeed , the tools of Corruption are so very nice upon this head , that I have never yet heard of any one trade , or calling , which they did not despise , if a man who came forward against abuses happened to be of that trade or calling  and , on the other hand , there is nothing too low or vile for them , if it be put forward in Corruption 's defence , or employed as one of her agents .


`` We shall see in the end how this most calumniated gentleman conducts himself .
He has engaged to carry the Prince 's answer to the Spa-fields Meeting next Monday week .
Now , if , in the conducting of this business , he shall be found to have acted the part of a stupid country jolterhead , or of a head-strong insolent ass , let him be left to the public contempt  but , if he shall be found to have carried the matter through with due respect towards the Prince and his Ministers , and at the same time , with the spirit and resolution of an independent man , let him have the praise that will be his due .


`` In the meanwhile it must be not a little mortifying to the Morning Chronicle in particular to see , that votes of thanks to Mr. Hunt have been passed at many of those meetings , in different parts of the kingdom , the proceedings at which meetings Mr. Perry has very highly and very justly praised !
How will this calumniator of Mr. Hunt account for this ?
And how will he account for the speech of Mr. Hunt , at the late Westminster Meeting , having been re-published in Norfolk , and widely circulated in that county ?
There can have been no trick made use of by Mr. Hunt to produce these effects .
He has no acquaintances and cronies about the country .
Ten times his fortune would not have purchased him these marks of popularity .
And , why should the people of Spa-fields be abused for having chosen to ask the assistance of him , who has received votes of thanks from those very meetings , both in England and Scotland , the proceedings of which meetings Mr. Perry of the Chronicle has praised to the skies ?
Surely , the people in Scotland , in Norfolk , in Lancashire , can not have had their judgment unduly biassed in his favour !
They have heard the former outrageous abuse of Mr. Hunt  never have heard , except by mere accident , a word in his defence  and , yet they have most solemnly decided , that his efforts are worthy of their praise and of their specific thanks .


`` Were I , who am acquainted with Mr. Hunt , to say to him , ` why do you not stay quietly at home and attend to your country affairs , and pursue the foxes , and hares , and pheasants , when you find yourself in need of recreation ?
You will be much happier in so doing , than in getting into all this turmoil of politics , and exposing yourself to so much calumny , and , indeed , to the hatred of those , whose hatred is full of danger to you . '
If I were to say this to him , would he not be fully justified in asking me , why I did not myself act upon the principle of my own advice ?
Times and circumstances create men  or , at least , they call men forth , who would otherwise have remained unknown to the end of their days  and the present are times when it is impossible for such men as Mr. Hunt to remain dormant .


`` Since writing the former part of this article , I have discovered , that the report of Mr. Hunt 's speech in the Statesman was taken , word for word , or nearly so , from the Chronicle .
The evening papers have , I find , no reporters .
So that no true account has gone forth  and thus has the misrepresentation circulated without the possibility of defence !
There is a gentleman in Wiltshire , whose name is Benett , whose speech , at an agricultural meeting , about the Corn Bill , was published in all the London papers , and which speech , as published , drew down on him the execrations of those same papers , and , indeed , of the public in general .
He said , that he never uttered such words  that he bad been very grossly misrepresented .
He wrote to some of these same papers a contradiction of the statement  a defence of himself .
But , in order to get in a short paragraph , he was called upon to pay to one paper nineteen guineas !
and , though he has a fortune of , probably , 10,000 l. a year , he declared that his fortune would have been insufficient to obtain the means of defending himself through the same channels which had attacked him .
A hundred such fortunes would not have obtained the means of such defence  for , the moment he had paid for inserting a defence against one calumny , he would have found another to defend himself against .
What , then , is a calumniated man to do ?
The law !
The reptiles know how to evade that  and , besides , where is the fortune sufficient for law ?
Therefore , the calumnies must go and take their course .
If men can not hear up against them , they must hold their peace , and retire from before the public .
Whether Mr. Hunt is to be driven off by these means remains to be seen .


`` WM. COBBETT . ''


The reader , who is old enough to recollect this circumstance , will never forget the infamous conduct of the public press at that time .
Mr. Cobbett 's description of it , in the above extract , is by no means an exaggeration .
The younger branch of my readers may thus form some faint idea of what a bold and straight-forward friend of the people had to encounter in the year 1816 .
While this cry was yet at its height , I wrote to Sir Francis Burdett , who was then staying at Brighton , with General Halse , the Aid-de-Camp of the Prince Regent , and I informed him of the resolution which had been passed , requesting him , at the same time , to present the petition to the Prince Regent , a copy of which and of the resolutions , I enclosed to him as they were published in the Statesman newspaper .
I likewise begged that he would favour me with an answer , to say when he would please to present it , as I wished to accompany him , agreeable to the instructions of the meeting .
I received a very laconic answer from the Baronet , saying , that `` he did not choose to be made a cat 's - paw of , neither would he insult the Prince Regent . ''
As I had for many years been upon terms of intimacy with Sir Francis Burdett , and had always acted in strict conformity with his political principles , I own that I considered that answer to me as a direct insult , and , in the heat of the moment , I was disposed at once to resent it as such .
From this , however , I was dissuaded by Mr. Cobbett and Major Cartwright , who were extremely anxious not to do any thing to risk the loss of Sir Francis Burdett 's support to the numerous petitions which had been agreed to , and were preparing to be sent up to the Parliament , from all parts of the kingdom .


Mr. Cobbett had addressed several of his Registers to Sir Francis , pointing out what sort of Reform it was necessary and just the people should have .
In these letters he contended for Annual Parliaments , and that all direct tax-payers should have a vote , but no others .
In his Register , No. 16 , of Volume 31 , published on the 19th of October , after having in a very elaborate manner maintained this doctrine , he says , `` All , therefore , that the Reformers have now to do , is to adhere to the above-stated main points .
Every man who pays a direct tax to have a vote  and Parliaments to be elected annually . ''
The test to ascertain whether a man should have a vote or not , is laid down by Mr. Cobbett as follows : -- `` When a man comes to vote , the Church-wardens who have the charge of the ballot-box ask his name  the Overseers look into their rate-book , to see whether he be a TAX-PAYER  finding his name there , they bid him put in his ballot , which done , home he goes to his business .
If the Overseers do not find him to be a tax-payer , he , of course , does not vote . ''
This was the sort of Reform which , on the 19th of October , 1816 , Mr. Cobbett proposed as competent to work our salvation .


Mr. Cobbett , very properly , attributed a great portion of the evils which the people endured to the corrupt state of the public press , which he denominated `` blind guides . ''
`` They are , '' said he ( in speaking of the provincial papers ) , `` some of them tools of corruption , and some of them dumb dogs , that have not the courage to take the part either of right or wrong  they are neither one thing nor the other  they are quite vapid , and , therefore , will the public ` spew them out of their mouths . '
Not , indeed , such papers as the Nottingham Review , the Stamford News , the LIVERPOOL MERCURY , and some others , the proprietors of which do honour to the press , and the pages of which will always be read with pleasure and advantage . ''
This is the way in which he spoke and wrote of Mr. Egerton Smith , the proprietor of the Liverpool Mercury , in the year 1816 .


After the great public meeting , which had been held in Spa-fields , on the 15th of November , Mr. Cobbett , in the very next Number of his Register , published on the 23d of that month , came round all at once to Universal Suffrage  and he says , `` In Nos. 16 and 18 I gave my reasons for excluding from the vote all persons who did not pay direct taxes . ''
He then very clearly demonstrates the justice of every one having a vote , and adds , `` But , it appeared to me , when I wrote Nos. 16 and 18 , to be too difficult to put this right in motion all at once  and therefore I recommended the confining of the right of voting to the payers of direct taxes , until there should be time for a reformed Parliament to change the mode of taxing .
Since , however , I have come to London , I have had an opportunity of consulting MAJOR CARTWRIGHT upon the subject  and the result is , my THOROUGH CONVICTION that nothing short Of UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE would be just , and that such a system is perfectly practicable . ''
This was published on the 23d of November , 1816 .
The reader will have to recollect these things when I come to detail what took place at the meeting of delegates , in London , on the following January .
Now , Mr. Cobbett says that `` there are three things for which I contend -- Universal Suffrage , Annual Parliaments , and Vote by Ballot . ''


As soon as I received Sir Francis Burdett 's letter , declining to present the petition of the distressed people to the Prince Regent , I took the earliest opportunity of proceeding to Carlton House by myself .
When I arrived there , I was informed that Colonel McMahon , his Royal Highness 's secretary , had left town , and would not return till two o'clock the next day .
I informed the under secretary , who was in waiting , who I was , and what was my business , and I made an appointment to wait on Colonel McMahon at two o'clock on the following day .
I took care to knock at the gate at Carlton House at the appointed time , and the moment that the gate was open , the porter took off his hat , and , ringing a bell , accosted me by name , and requested me to walk forward to the front door , which I had scarcely reached before the large folding doors of Carlton House were thrown open , and I was politely requested by the attendants to walk in , as Colonel McMahon was ready to receive me .
I was ushered into his apartments in great state , and was immediately introduced to him by name .
I was most graciously received by the Secretary , to whom I stated that I was deputed to present to his Royal Highness a petition , agreed to at a meeting of nearly one hundred thousand of his distressed subjects of the metropolis , assembled in Spafields on the 15th , and that I wished to know when I could have an audience for that purpose .
The Colonel then took his book , and informed me that the next levee would take place in about three weeks , which was the first opportunity that I could have of being introduced to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent .
I told him that would be too distant a date , and I begged to know if there were no means of presenting the petition earlier , as I had promised to deliver the Prince 's answer to the people on the second of December , when they would assemble again to hear what the answer was .
To this he replied , that the only other means was to forward the paper through the Secretary of State for the Home Department , who , he had no doubt , would deliver it to his Royal Master immediately , as he knew it was considered by the Ministers as a matter of very considerable importance .
I thanked him for his polite attention and obliging information , and I then retired with the same form as I entered , the Colonel attending me to the doors , which were thrown wide open as before .


I immediately wrote a letter to Lord Sidmouth , to appoint a time when I could have an audience , for the purpose of delivering to him the petition to be presented to the Prince Regent , and I carried this letter myself direct to the office of the Secretary of State , and sent it up to his Lordship , saying , that I would wait in the ante-room for an answer .
In a very few minutes the servant in waiting returned , attended by an under secretary , who said that Lord Sidmouth would give me an audience immediately , and he desired that I would follow him .
I did so , and was forthwith introduced into the audience room , where his Lordship received me with all that parade of overstrained politeness which belongs to a finished courtier .
He was surrounded by some half-dozen lordlings , who , from the manner in which he ordered them out of the room , appeared to be hungry expectants , seeking and supplicating some place , office , or boon .
They vanished in a twinkling , and his Lordship could not hear a word for the world , till I did him the honour to take a seat , which he politely drew for me .
My letter had explained the object of my visit , and , after having briefly apologised for intruding at a time when he was surrounded by others , I expressed my wish to have the petition of 100,000 of the distressed inhabitants of the metropolis , who had assembled in Spafields the preceding Monday , presented to the Prince Regent  and I then put into his hands the petition : he read it over attentively , and having finished the perusal of it , he said that it was a most important paper , and was couched in such proper language , that he should feel it his duty to lay it before his Royal Master the very first thing on the following morning , and he had not the least doubt but every attention would be paid to the prayer of it .
I begged to know if I might expect any reply from his Royal Highness .
He answered , certainly not  it being the practice never to give any answer to petitions  but , if it was thought advisable to attend to the prayer of it , his Royal Highness 's Ministers would immediately act upon it , and indeed he had no doubt that it would receive due attention .
He then entered into familiar conversation as to the nature and extent of the meeting  and I embraced the opportunity of pointing out , in glowing terms , the great and severe distress under which the mass of the people were labouring , and expressing my earnest hopes that some relief would be granted to them .
He next introduced the subject of the Memorial , a copy of which , he informed me , he had received several days before the meeting was held  and he declared , that if any attempt at going in a body to Carlton House had been made , it would have been resisted by the military , and that bloodshed would have been the consequence .
He was perfectly aware that I had been the cause of setting aside the Memorial , and substituting the petition in its stead  and he emphatically added , `` his Majesty 's Ministers are greatly indebted to you , and they are fully sensible that you have been the cause of preventing a great public calamity  you have prevented the spilling of human blood . ''
I told him that I had promised to attend another meeting , in the same place , on the Second of December , to acquaint them with the result of my application , and I promised him that I would represent it fairly .
With this he appeared perfectly satisfied , and he repeated the assurance , that he would lay the petition before his Royal Highness the moment he could gain access to him in the morning , and that he had no doubt it would receive due attention .


In the evening paper , the Courier , of the next day , it was announced that the Spafields petition bad been presented to the Prince Regent , who had graciously ordered FOUR THOUSAND POUNDS to be paid to the Spitalfields soup committee  which sum was to be taken from the Droits of the Admiralty .
In consequence of this grant from his Royal Highness , the soup committee met , and called a public meeting in the city , for the purpose of promoting the subscriptions , and devising the best means of relieving the distress which now was admitted universally to prevail amongst the labouring classes in the metropolis  so that it was quite evident that our Spafields meeting had produced infinite good , that in all probability it had been the means of saving the lives of thousands , and relieving the distresses of tens of thousands .
Mr. Fowell Buxton attended this meeting , and , after having described the unparalleled distress and misery of the people , he made a most animated and feeling appeal to the humanity of the public , to come forward to relieve them .
This and all the other meetings that followed , and all the subscriptions that were raised , may very justly be ascribed to the meeting at Spafields  for till that meeting took place , the general overwhelming distress was little known , and less regarded , by the opulent and powerful , who alone had the means of relieving it .
Notwithstanding this was undeniably the fact , yet the whole public press of the metropolis , with very few exceptions , was daily employed in spreading the most atrocious falsehoods and calumnies against me , for having attended that meeting .
I was represented as a traitor , and one who wished to overturn the sacred institutions of the country , and to produce revolution , confusion , and bloodshed .
The Times , the Chronicle , the Morning Post , and the Courier , held me up to public execration , and even pointed me out for destruction .
The editor of the Times , who was then the notorious Dr. Slop , alias Dr. Stoddart , the present proprietor of the New Times , urged my assassination over and over again .
As , however , no one would kill me in reality , he determined at least to kill me in print .
Accordingly along article was inserted in the paper , announcing , in the gravest manner , the death of Hunt .
It stated that I bad got drunk , at Mr. Thompson 's gin-shop on Holborn-hill , and had fallen into one of the areas of the new buildings at Waterloo-place , opposite Carlton-House , where I was found dead .
A few days afterwards , it was declared that they were misinformed as to my death , but that I was taken in a melancholy state of insanity to Bedlam  and the writer gave an account of the incoherent conversation which I had held with Major Cartwright , Mr. Cobbett , and Sir Francis Burdett , who had been to visit me .
These accounts were given in such a serious manner , the details were so minute , and they had altogether so much the appearance of truth , that many of my friends and relations in the country were exceedingly alarmed , not having any idea that the editor of a respectable newspaper would have the impudence to put forth such barefaced falsehoods .
There was also generally one scoundrel or other who gratified his malignity by writing to my family some dreadful story of my death , or of some serious injury which I had received .


On the Saturday previous to the 2d of December I drove again to London , and as I was sitting , in the evening of that day , in the room at the Black Lion , Water Lane , Dr. Watson and Mr. Thistlewood called to consult me upon what I meant to propose on the following Monday .
I declined , however , to have any conversation with them upon the subject .
I should , I told them , be there at the time appointed ( one o'clock ) , on the ensuing Monday  but that I was going out of town on the next morning , and should return on the following day in time for the meeting .
On Sunday morning I left London with my servant , and drove to a friend 's , at Wanstead , in Essex , where I passed the day and slept , on purpose to be out of the way of the party which I had before met at Spafields  as , after what I had seen and heard when Mr. Castles was present , I was determined to avoid having any communication with any of them , unless it was in public .


About twelve o'clock I started from Wanstead in my tandem , and , as I was driving down Cheapside at a pretty smart pace , I met a considerable crowd going towards the Mansion-House  and , just after I passed Bow - Church , I saw Mr. John Castles amongst those who appeared to be going in a contrary direction from that which led to Spafields .
He beckoned me , and I drew up to the pavement to inquire the cause of what appeared to me rather extraordinary .
Before , however , I could put the question to Mr. Castles , he inquired where I was going ?
to which I replied , `` to Spafields , to be sure . ''
`` Oh , '' said he , `` the meeting has been broken up these two hours nearly  young Watson has got possession of the Tower , and we are all going thither  turn your horses ' heads and come with us . ''
I gave him a look that appeared to strike him dumb , and laying my whip upon my wheel-horse , I passed rapidly on , exclaiming `` what a ------ scoundrel ! ''
I looked at the clock of Bow-Church , and saw that it wanted a quarter of an hour to one .
I drove on at a smart pace towards Spafields , and observed to my servant , that I had no doubt in my own mind that Castles , the villain whom we had met , was an agent of the Government , a spy  and the suspicions which I entertained of him when I first met him , were now fully confirmed .


When we reached Spafields , the throng was very great , much larger than even at the first meeting of the 15th of November .
By the kindness of the multitude I was enabled to drive up to the door of the Merlin 's Cave , in the front of which the people were assembled .
My servant returned with my tandem , with orders to have my horse Bob , which I drove as leader , ready in the evening with a saddle and bridle on , that I might ride him home to my Inn from the meeting .
The cheers of the congregated tens of thousands were almost insupportable  I never heard such before .
I made my way into the Merlin 's Cave with difficulty , as it was again taken possession of by the police .
When I entered the room , I found very few persons there except the newspaper reporters , and the police magistrates with their officers , and none of those that had taken any part at the previous meeting but Mr. William Clark , who was again appointed to take the chair .
Watson , Thistlewood , Preston , and all that party were absent , but I had no knowledge of the cause , any farther than the intimation which I had received from the very worthy Mr. John Castles , not one word of which did I believe to be true .


After having addressed the people , I moved a string of resolutions , the first of which inculcated the necessity of peaceable conduct , and denounced as the greatest enemies of Reform all those who should commit any act of violence , or any breach whatever of the peace .
Another resolution was , to agree to petition the House of Commons for a Reform in the representation of the people , upon the principle of universal suffrage , annual parliaments , and vote by ballot .
The resolutions being seconded by Mr. Haydon of Welbeck-street , were all passed , and the petition which I proposed was unanimously agreed to , and was , as will hereafter be seen , signed by twenty-four thousand of the suffering unrepresented people , and which was presented to the Honourable House by Lord Cochrane .


Towards the latter end of the meeting information was brought to me that , in the course of the day , there had been some serious riots in the city  I therefore immediately cautioned all those who had attended our meeting to avoid mixing themselves up in any way with those illegal and foolish proceedings .
I told them that I should ride home to my hotel upon my favourite horse BOB , and , as I knew they would attend me , I earnestly entreated them that , as soon as they had protected me to my abode , they would each of them peaceably and quietly return home , and not give the enemies of Reform an opportunity of attributing disorderly conduct to any part of the meeting .
This advice they promised me they would attend to .
I then mounted my horse , and almost the whole assembly accompanied me to my inn .
As we passed in the front of the House of Correction , in Cold Bath Fields , I observed great numbers of constables and police officers assembled , armed with their staves of office , c. c. , as if for the purpose of protecting that building from the fury of the populace .
But there was not the slightest occasion for this , as the people did not evince the least disposition to do any harm to any one  and , notwithstanding the immense pressure of the crowd , I do not believe that there was a single pane of glass broken .


When we arrived at the Black Lion in Water-lane , I stood up in my stirrups , and demanded of the people if they would grant me one favour ?
A thousand voices exclaimed `` Yes , Sir , any thing that you wish . ''
I then requested them to disperse immediately , and return to their homes .
They answered , `` We will , we will ! ''
I alighted and went into my inn , and in a very few minutes afterwards the whole of this immense multitude had dispersed , and were on their way homeward , without doing any mischief .


It was now for the first time that I heard any thing of the riots which had taken place in the city .
A second edition of the Courier gave a most exaggerated account of them , misrepresenting every thing , and heading the statements `` Spafelds Meeting  '' when the truth was , that so far from any of the persons who attended the Spafields meeting having had any hand in the riots , they actually knew nothing of the matter , till they heard it from their neighbours , after they had returned home from the meeting .
The fact was this : Watson and Thistlewood found that I would not have any thing to do with their wild schemes , whatever they might be  they therefore assembled in Spafields about eleven o'clock in the morning , more than an hour before the persons who meant to attend the meeting began to meet together  they mounted the waggon , and addressed the few individuals that surrounded them , perhaps at the time two or three hundred  the elder Watson harangued them upon the advantages of the Spencean plan , and young Watson , urged on by Castles , having briefly addressed them , jumped from the waggon , and called upon those who wished to be led on to victory to follow him  the villain Castles taking care to leave a few bullets , wrapped up in an old stocking , so exposed in the waggon , that those who remained could not avoid seeing them .
The whole of what occurred was reported by Mr. Spectacle Dowling , a confidential reporter of the Sunday Observer , who swore to the particulars afterwards with an astonishing degree of minuteness , although other reporters who were present declared , that not one-tenth of what was said could be heard .


About forty persons followed young Watson , accompanied by his friend Castles  and Mr. Dowling the reporter followed this little squad of desperadoes , no doubt for the purpose of giving a faithful detail of what passed , although he was sent by Mr. Clement , of the Observer , to report the proceedings of the meeting to be held in Spafields at one o'clock .
It appears that having been reinforced by a party of distressed sailors and others , who were returning from the Old-Bailey , where they had been to witness the hanging of some criminals , these gentry attacked and began to plunder the shop of Mr. Beckwith , a gun-smith , in Skinner-street .
It is said that young Watson was seized there by a man of the name of Platt , and that , in order to save himself , he fired a pistol loaded with powder and wadding only , which wounded the said Platt in the groin .
Young Watson was , however , seized and taken up stairs into a back room , and the front doors of the shop and the windows were closed .
During the confusion Platt escaped over a back wall of the premises , and as young Watson was left in the house a prisoner at large , he walked into a front room , opened a window that looked into the street , and waved his handkerchief to the multitude , to make an effort to relieve him .
This they immediately attended to : a sailor volunteered his services , and being hoisted up by the people , he threw himself through the fan-light over the front door , which he soon opened , and Watson was released without any resistance .
They then seized some of the guns , and pushed forward towards the Exchange , firing in the air as they passed along Newgate-street and Cheapside .
They entered the Exchange  upon which the doors were closed upon them , and Alderman Wood , who was a second time Lord Mayor , and Sir James Shaw , seized a sailor or two , one of whom proved to be Cashman , who was then bearing the tricoloured flag .
The rest of the party , headed by Watson , marched off to the Tower , where , as it was afterwards sworn , Thistlewood demanded of the soldiers upon duty on the parapets to surrender the Tower to them .
Some of the party broke into a gunsmith 's shop in the Minories , and carried off several of his guns , some finished and others not finished .
By this time , however , a half-dozen of horse soldiers made their appearance upon Tower-hill , upon which the authors of this mighty insurrection all fled with the greatest precipitancy , helter skelter , the devil take the hindermost , without the soldiers having made a charge , raised an arm , or even approached near to them .


So much for this disgraceful and contemptible riot , during the whole of which not one life was lost , and , with the exception of Platt , not one person was even wounded or hurt .
While these things were going on , it has been seen that Castles had contrived to way-lay me , in Cheapside , on my road from Wanstead towards Spafields  and , as I have before observed , kindly invited me to accompany him to the Tower , which he said young Watson had got possession of for more than an hour before .


In the evening the elder Watson and Thistlewood were taken near Paddington or Islington , as they were endeavouring to make their escape into the country .
The worthy Mr. John Castles no doubt surrendered himself , and soon after Preston and Hooper were apprehended , and they were all five committed to prison .
I believe a reward of 750l .
was offered for the apprehension of the chief conspirator , young Watson .
The next day the London papers were crammed full of the most wonderful accounts of this most wonderful plot and insurrection  attributing the whole of it to ME , and to the Spaflelds meeting .
The London press had raised such an outcry as never was heard of before  and if ten thousand of the inhabitants of the city had been massacred , there could not have been greater consternation produced throughout the whole country  which consternation was sedulously kept up by the most abominable falsehoods promulgated by almost the whole of the country provincial newspapers .
As a faithful account of the whole transaction was published at the time by Mr. Cobbett , in his Register of the 13th of December , in a letter which he addressed to me on the subject , and as it contains matter worthy to be recorded in my Memoirs , I shall insert it verbatim .


`` A Letter to Henry Hunt , Esq. of Middleton Cottage , near Andover , on the London Plots .


`` London , 13th Dec. 1816 .


`` Sir -- The summer before last , when you came over to Botley and found me transplanting Swedish turnips amidst dust , and under a sun which scorched the leaves till they resembled fried parsley , you remember how I was fretting and stewing  how many times in an hour I was looking out for a south-western cloud  how I watched the mercury in the glass , and rapped the glass with my knuckles to try to move it in my favour .
But great as my anxiety then was , and ludicrous as were my movements , ten thousand times greater has been that of Corruption 's Press for the coming of a PLOT , and ten thousand times more ludicrous its movements in order to hasten the accomplish ment of its wishes !
You remember how my wife laughed at me , when , in the evening , some boys having thrown a handful or two of sand over the wall , that made a sort of dropping on the leaves of the laurels , I took it for the beginning of a shower , and pulled off my hat and held up my hand to see whether more was not coming , though there was nothing to be seen in the sky but the stars shining as bright as silver .
Just such has been the conduct of Corruption 's sons upon hearing of the discovery of Mr. Watson 's and Mr. Preston 's papers . '
They sigh for a PLOT .
Oh , how they sigh !
They are working and slaving and fretting and stewing  they are sweating all over  they are absolutely pining and dying for a Plot !


`` In these their wishes it is hard to say which character is most prominent , the fool or the knave  for , if by any means , they were to make out the real existence of a Plot for the destruction of the Government , would such proof tend to the credit of that Government in the eyes of the world at large , or in those of the people of this kingdom ?
Would it tend to make the world believe that the Government is good , and is beloved by the people ?
Would it tend to lessen the mass of misery that is now in existence ?
Would it tend to enable the Landlords and Farmers to pay the interest of the Debt ?
And , if it would have no such tendency , what good could arise to the Government from the producing of even undeniable proof of the existence of a Plot of any sort , however extensive ?


`` But , as clearly appears from all their publications , the main hope of Corruption 's sons has been to trace a Plot to YOU !
In order to effect this , they have stuck at no thing that villainy could suggest .
They have asserted as admitted facts hundreds of falsehoods .
As a specimen of these , the Times , Sun , Courier , and others have stated ` on authority , ' that you and I were in close consultation , on the Sunday before the riots , with Lord Cochrane , in the King 's Bench Prison .
You know that you were at Wanstead , in Essex , all that day  and I know that I was at Peckham , in Surrey , never having seen you on that day , and not until the succeeding Tuesday .
The wretched man who conducts the Sun newspaper asserted , that I came up for the express purpose of organizing the Plot  and that , having prepared every thing , I set of to Botley the night before it broke out .
-- Here I have been in London , however , without having stirred out of it one minute from that time to this .
I could mention a hundred other falsehoods which the sons of Corruption have sent forth with equal boldness , with equal impudence , and with equal baseness .
But , the Times newspaper , always preeminent in infamy , asserted , that ` Young Cobbett ' was one of the persons who spent the evening with you after your return from the Spa-fields Meeting on the Monday .
The object of this falsehood was to alarm his mother and sisters for his safety , seeing that that statement was accompanied with other falsehoods calculated to excite a fear that all who were with you that evening would be implicated in some state crime !
It is for the Courier , the Sun , the Post , and some others to be guilty of premeditated falsehoods , but it is only , I believe , for Walter , the Proprietor of the Times , and the instigator to the killing of the brave Marshal Ney , to be guilty of such baseness as this .


`` However , even these falsehoods will tend to good .
There are yet many very worthy people , who have believed in the statement of these sons of Corruption  who , judging too much from their own hearts and minds , have not been able to work themselves into a belief , that other men could be so totally void of all sense of moral feeling as coolly to put upon paper , in the most serious and solid manner , and to send forth as acknowledged truths , that which they know to be utterly false .
To such worthy persons it seems to be a libel on human nature to suppose , that such black-hearted villainy can be in existence .
They can not conceive how a man can dare walk the streets , or how he can look even his acquaintances or his own family in the face , after being guilty of such shameful conduct .
They now see , however , that this really is the case  and , though there are some who will still , from corrupt motives , affect to believe in the statements of these corrupt men , there will , I hope , be found a great many to say , that they have been deceived , and that they will be deceived no longer .


`` The unfortunate men , whom want and ruin have driven to deeds of desperation , are not , with all their temptations , more desperate in their way than are the sons of Corruption in theirs , without any temptation at all .
The numerous and ponderous facts , the clear and forcible arguments , by which they have been assailed , leave them no means of defence .
-- They have been driven to the wall , beaten , subdued .
They dare not show themselves , in the field of dispute .
They , therefore , resort to false accusations  and , unable to find any thing upon which to put a false construction , they have , at last , thrown aside all attempts to discover the means of misrepresentation , and have had recourse to open , unblushing , to sheer invented falsehoods .
That love of fair play , for which all orders of Englishmen in all ages have been so famed , finds no place in the bosoms of these degenerate men .
-- They enter the ring with seeming bravery , but being , round after round , knocked down and crippled , they use , like a Dutchman , their remaining strength to draw out a snigarsnee to run into our bowels .
Let us , however , by a steady and cool perseverance in the cause of our country 's freedom and happiness , endeavour to break the arm that wields this hateful instrument of malignity and cowardice .


`` You , conscious of your honourable motives , and listening only to your courage , have always been deaf to the intreaties of those who cautioned you against the danger of spies and false-witnesses .
But , do you think that the wretches who could be base enough to publish falsehoods such as I have enumerated above : who could coolly represent you as having been sent first to gaol and then to Bedlam  and who , in order to deter me from my duty , could exhibit my son as being in danger of his life , and thereby cause alarm in his mother and sisters : do you think that men so lost to all sense of shame , and so devoted to every thing that is corrupt  do you think they would hesitate one moment to bribe villains to swear falsely against you or against me or against any man , whom they thought it their interest to destroy ?
Nay , do you think that they would hesitate one single half moment to be guilty , for such a purpose , of the blackest perjury themselves ?
Be you assured , that there is nothing of which such men are not capable  intimidation , promises , bribes , perjury , any thing such men are capable of recommending to others , or of doing themselves .
Your country life , your sober habits , your dislike of feastings and carousings  these are great securities  but , while you follow the impulses of your public-spirit and your valour , I hope you will always bear in mind , that there are such things as false-swearing in the world , and that a defeated coward has never been known to be otherwise than inexorably cruel .
The proprietor of the Morning Post , in his paper of last Monday , says , that Cobbett and Hunt ought at least to lose their lives  and the author of the Antigallican has , I am told , put the drawing of a gallows in his Paper , with a rope ready for use , having my name on it , or very near it .
-- And , you may be well assured , that , if the false oaths of these men could do the job , those oaths would be very much at our service .
Therefore , though I am quite sure , that these menaces will not deter you from doing any thing , which you would have done if the menaces had never been made  yet , as being proofs of the shameless , the remorseless , the desperate villainy of these tools , their present conduct ought to impress on your mind the necessity of being on your guard , so far , at least , as not unnecessarily to expose yourself to the consequences of false-swearing .
These men and their associates call the younger Mr. Watson ( whom they , without proof , charge with shooting Mr. Platt ) an assassin , though they themselves state , that the shot arose from the seizure of Watson by Platt , and that the former , like a wild enthusiast as he appears to have been , expressed his sorrow on the instant , and actually went to work to save the life of the wounded man .
Nobody justifies , or attempts to justify , the shooter  but , if he were an assassin , what are these men who , while they keep their names hidden , are endeavouring to produce persecution and ruin and death in every direction ?
The man who shot Mr. Platt , though highly criminal , is not a thousandth part so criminal as these men , who to premeditated bloody-mindedness add a degree of cowardice such as was never before heard of .


`` Let me now , before I proceed to other topics , hastily trace the progress of the developement of the Plot , as given to us through the channel of these same Papers .
When Mr. Watson the elder was taken , the sons of Corruption promised the public a series of grand discoveries .
His answers to the questions put to him , appear , however , to have been perfectly open and frank .
All that was really found out from him was , that he was a surgeon who had lived in great esteem , and had a family who had been rendered so miserable by want , that ' a lovely daughter of his had died for the want of the things , such as wine , c. necessary to her recovery . '
His story , of the truth of which there appears to be no doubt , would have softened any hearts but those of the sons of Corruption , who , instead of expressing compassion for his calamities , are as loudly vociferating for his blood , as they did for the blood of Marshal Ney .
They tell us , that he attributed all the sufferings of himself and others ` to the Oligarchy  ' but , not a word does he seem to have said , that can justify these detestable writers in imputing to him any share in any Plot or in any Riot .


`` The lodgings of himself and his son have been searched , and all their papers seized , amongst the rest , we are told , a Letter from you to the younger Watson .
Oh !
what a prize !
How the eye must have glistened upon the sight of your name at the bottom of a letter to the ` Chief Conspirator , ' as they call him !
With what eager haste were the contents run over !
With what trembling , what slavering expectation must those contents have been perused !
Alas !
how the head must have turned slowly away and the Letter have fallen gently upon the table , when those contents became intelligible to the fluttering senses , now returned to a state of coolness !


`` Corruption 's darlings confess , that there was nothing in ` this ' letter that showed you to have bad any criminal hand in ` the conspiracy . '
How came these newspaper writers to know the contents of your letter ?
Who was it that authorized them to publish this account of your letter ?
Either they know its contents , or they do not : if the latter , they have published what they do not know to be true  if the former , why do they not publish the whole of those contents ?
The reason is this : the contents of your letter would convince every man who should see them , that you were not only ignorant of any Plot or Conspiracy  but that , if your correspondent really had any such views ( which I do not believe ) your letter was calculated to check any hope that he might have entertained of having your co-operation .
This is what , I venture to say , the contents of your letter would have proved to the satisfaction of every well-wisher to the peace and happiness of the country  and because they would have proved this , these base writers have carefully kept them out of their columns !


`` But , Mr. Preston , they tell us , boldly avows the intended ` insurrection , ' and confesses all that can be wished , except , indeed , the main thing , which is , that you had a hand in the said ` insurrection . '
However , this is all a falsehood  and , if the proof of its falsehood be not made clearly appear before this day month , I will be content to pass for an ideot for the rest of my life .
The account of Mr. Preston 's ` confessions , ' as the sons of Corruption call them , you shall have in their own words .
The Lord Mayor , it seems , went to Mr. Preston 's home , and having examined him and his papers , found no grounds for detaining him  but , since that he has been , it appears , taken up and kept in custody , and the following is the account which Corruption 's Press gives of his examination : '' ` The next person of importance who has been apprehended is Thomas Preston , who is called the Secretary to the Spa-fields Committee .
This poor wretch lives with his two daughters in a small room in Greystoke-place , Fetter-lane .
He has undergone two or three examinations , in all which be has been as communicative as the most zealous could have wished .
-- The substance of all he related is accurately thus -- that a plan of insurrection was formed -- that it was as general as it was good , but that precipitancy had injured its progress , though it had not defeated its object .
The plan , he asserted , must still be carried into effect -- it was too powerful to be resisted when properly undertaken  and the only resource left to the Government , in order to its being averted , was , by the Prince Regent answering the petition of the people , and the immediate adoption of Parliamentary Reform .
` The soldiers , ' he added , ` were not firm  ' their friends were starving , but they having a provision , forgot their pledge and duty .
He acknowledged his connection to the fullest extent with the Spa-fields Meetings , to which he was joint Secretary .
He knew the two Watsons , and had frequently acted with them upon the Committees , and various other occasions .
He denied having taken the slightest part in the riotous proceedings of Monday , and deprecated in the strongest manner the horrid system of taking away the life of a fellow-creature .
He frequently repeated , that the plan was constitutional , and delivered the whole of his account in the most undisguised and enthusiastic manner . '
In another examination he is stated to have said , that ` the PLOT had been going on for EIGHT YEARS , and that he himself HAD WRITTEN TO THE LATE MR. PERCEVAL ON THE SUBJECT , urging him to ADOPT it , as the only means of SAVING THE NATION ! '


`` Now , when your laughing fit is over , let me ask you , whether you ever heard of a Plot and Insurrection like this before ?
What !
an eight years ' Plot !
a good Insurrection !
Dennis , in his criticism upon Addison 's silly play of Cato , ridicules the idea of the conspirators against Cato 's life picking out Cato 's own hall for the scene of their consultations  but these modern Plotters beat Syphax and his associates hollow  for they , in order to further their view of destroying the government , communicate their Plot to the Prime Minister himself !


`` What must the people in the country think of all this ?
What a mass of absurdities and contradictions !
What madness it all appears to be !
Good insurrections  constitutional attacks on the government !
Plots which the prime Minister has been urged to adopt in order to save the nation !
What can the people at large make out of such a strange medley ?
The sons of Corruption it is who have made the medley .
They wanted a Plot .
The mad riots in the city afforded them a pretext , and they have put the words PLOT and INSURRECTION into Mr. Preston 's mouth in order to favour their views .
Now , let us see how a plain tale will put them down and expose their malice to the world .


`` About sixteen years ago , a Mr. SPENCE , a schoolmaster in Yorkshire , conceived what he called a PLAN for making the nation happy , by taking all the lands into the hands of a just government , and appropriating all the produce or profit to the support of the people , so that there would be no one in want , and all would live in a sort of Christian Brotherhood .
This plan , accompanied with some political remarks , he published in 1800 , for which he was pursued by a Criminal Information Ex-Officio , by the present Chief Justice , who was then Attorney-General .
When brought up for trial I was present in the Court of King 's Bench .
He had no counsel , but defended himself , and insisted that his views were pure and benevolent , in proof of which , in spite of all exhortations to the contrary , he read his pamphlet through .
He was found guilty and sentenced to be imprisoned for I forget how long .
He was a plain , unaffected , inoffensive looking creature .
He did not seem at all afraid of any punishment , and appeared much more anxious about the success of his plan than about the preservation of his life .
After he came out of prison , he pursued the inculcation of his plan , appearing to have no other care  and this he did , I am assured , to the day of his death , always having been a most virtuous and inoffensive man , and always very much beloved by those who knew him .


`` We have all seen , for years past , written on the walls , in and near London , these words , `` SPENCE 'S PLAN : '' and I never knew what it meant , until , a little while ago , I received a pamphlet from Mr. Evans , Newcastle-street , Strand , detailing the Plan very fully .
This Mr. Evans , I understand to be a very worthy man , and his pamphlet , though I do not agree with it in opinion as to many of its propositions , contains some interesting observations , and breathes a spirit of benevolence throughout the whole .


`` Mr. Preston and the Watsons appear to have been followers of Mr. Spence  and the ` plan ' of which Mr. Preston is said to have ` confessed ' the existence , is , as you will see , ` Spence 's Plan , ' and nothing more  and nothing more , no , not a hair more , will Corruption 's sons , with all their torturing and twisting , with all their falsehoods and affected alarms , be able to make of it !
Thus , you will clearly perceive , that the ` confessions , ' as they are called , of your correspondent , Mr. Preston , are no confessions at all .
You will clearly see , that Corruption 's Press has foisted in the words insurrection and plot  for , unless you see this , what sense is there in the words good and constitutional ?
What absurdity to believe , that a man , and a guilty man , too , would talk about a good insurrection and about a plot that was constitutional , and which plot had been going on for eight years , and had been communicated to Mr. Perceval as the only means of saving the nation !
But , strip these lying accounts of the words insurrection and plot , and leave the word plan , and then the whole , however wild in itself , becomes perfectly consistent  and such , you may depend on it , and no other , has been the ` confession ' of Mr. Preston .


`` The Courier of Monday last , in pursuance of its endeavours to keep the scent of a plot from cooling , has these remarks : ` Whether the plan of the rioters was to commence in the morning or at night , is not ascertained  but from the declaration of Preston , who charges young Watson with precipitancy , it appears that the operations were not to commence till dark .
Preston still maintains a high and indignant tone  he talks more enthusiastically than before of the extent of the plot , and adds , that not less than three hundred thousand persons were enrolled in the cause .
Hooper , who states Preston to be the instigator and great mechanist of the conspiracy , has declared that the two Watsons , himself , and Preston , were in concert together in Spa-fields on the morning of Monday . '
-- Now , I dare say , that it will finally turn out , that Hooper has said no such thing as is here stated .
But here again you see , that the words plot and conspiracy are used instead of the word plan , and this is manifestly for the base and diabolical purpose of causing the people to believe , that there has been a conspiracy against the government , and that all the Reformers are enrolled in this conspiracy !
But be you well assured , that these eager efforts to excite alarm will fail of their purpose , and that the workers in them and their abettors will come out of the attempt covered with infamy , though nothing can produce in them any feeling of shame .


`` In the meanwhile the Spenceonians are posting up , all about , the prospectus of this plan , and as if for the express purpose of preparing the way for their own everlasting disgrace , the owners of the Corrupt Press are publishing this very document , which I insert here as taken from the Courier of Monday .


'' ` The following hand-bill , it is stated , was circulated through the Metropolis yesterday , and excited much apprehension : --


` SPENCE 'S PLAN For Parochial Partnerships in the Land , Is the only effectual Remedy for the Distresses and Oppressions of the People .
The Landholders are not Proprietors in Chief  they are but the Stewards of the Public  For the LAND is the PEOPLE 'S FARM .
The Expenses of the Government do not cause the Misery that surrounds us , but the enormous exactions of these ` Unjust Stewards . '
Landed Monopoly is indeed equally contrary to the benign Spirit of Christianity , and destructive of The Independence and Morality of all Mankind .
` The Profit of the Earth is for all  ' Yet how deplorably destitute are the great Mass of the People ?
Nor is it possible for their situations to be radically amended , but by the establishment of a system , Founded on the immutable basis of Nature and Justice .
Experience demonstrates its necessity  and the rights of mankind require it for their preservation .


To obtain this important object , by extending the knowledge of the above system , the Society of Spencean Philanthropists has been instituted .
Further information of its principles may be obtained by attending any of its Sectional Meetings , where subjects are discussed calculated to enlighten the human understanding , and where also the regulations of the Society may be procured , containing a complete developement of the Spencean system .
-- Every individual is admitted , free of expense , who will conduct himself with decorum .


The Meetings of this Society begin at a quarter past eight in the evening , as under :


First Section , every Wednesday , at the Cock , Grafton-street , Soho .
Second ... ... . .
Thursday , Mulberry Tree , Mulberry-court , Wilson-street , Moorfields .
Third ... ... ... Monday , Nag 's Head , Carnaby-market .
Fourth ... ... . .
Tuesday , No. 8 , Lumber-street , Mint , Borough . '


`` This is the Plan !
This is the plan , the plot , the conspiracy , and the insurrection scheme !
And , what an impudent , what an incorrigible , what a hardened impostor , must this writer be , who can tell the public , that this hand-bill excited much apprehension !
Apprehension , I believe , indeed , in him and his associates and encouragers  for it furnishes the clue to unravel all their falsehoods and to expose them to scorn and to detestation  but , it is calculated to excite ` apprehension ' in nobody else .
The public indignation is fast collecting and winding up to a high pitch  and it only waits the result of the present examinations to pour down upon the heads of these corrupt instigators to fury and bloodshed .
A gang of spies and informers , in one of Beaumont and Fletcher 's plays , who , after long and wearisome contrivances to discover a plot and to get the reward , just at the moment when they are expecting to see their victim swing and to pocket the blood-money , are sent away abashed and confounded by the discovery that it was a Cod 's Head and not that of the Sovereign , against which he had been plotting .
Not less complete would be the confusion of these corrupt writers , if it were not that they are destitute of every feeling that can lead to shame or remorse .


`` Monstrous , however , as are the baseness and malice and cruelty of these men , they are , I think , still exceeded by their folly .
The main object of all their endeavours , is , very clearly , to render you odious and to put you down  and , if they had been created for the express purpose of exalting you , it would have been impossible for them to labour to that end with more zeal or more effect .
Your manner of conducting the second meeting , the way in which you carried on your communications with the government , the punctuality and decorum of your proceedings , the language and matter of your Resolutions and Petition , and the effect of these , very justly entitled you to a large share of public applause  but , the blows which these ferocious writers have aimed at your life have excited an interest in your favour such as no human being could have thought possible , and in the tide of which are completely drowned all your momentary errors and indiscretions , which , besides , having arisen from an excess of zeal , were not calculated to be long held in remembrance .
Some very good , but very weak and timid people talked of your violence , while they seemed to overlook the violent thing which you attacked  but in the minds of all good men there is an inherent abhorrence of baseness like that which has aimed its murderous sting against your life , and , in the present case , this abhorrence has overpowered all the alarms of the good and timid people in whose breasts what is called your violence had excited such alarms .
`` The vipers have the mortification to perceive this , and their rage is increased accordingly .
They see your portrait , from three different hands , setting them at defiance in the print-shop windows .
They hear your speech and resolutions cried through the streets , and sold out of shops in several separate editions .
They hear the taverns and public-houses filled with talk about you .
They have contrived by their endeavours to implicate you in a ` treasonable conspiracy , ' to excite a strong feeling of some sort or other respecting you in every human breast .
And this is their way of putting a man down !
They have , even by the use of their own columns , made your name familiar to the very water 's edge of these islands .
They have made you the only one of your kind  there is now but one Mr. Hunt in the world .
Your ambition must be a cormorant indeed , if this does not satisfy it .
No longer ago than Monday , they very seriously announced , that ` Hunt was SEEN , in his Tandem , going towards his home on Thursday last ! '
They seem to think that the public is much more interested in your movements than in those of the Prince Regent or of the Queen .
I should not wonder if they were to have a ` Court News Writer ' to give an account of all the movements of your body  and , after what I have seen within these ten days , I do not despair of seeing them announce , that ` on Monday , Mr. Hunt took the diversion of shooting till three o'clock .
On Tuesday , Mr. Hunt went to inspect his barns , and was graciously pleased to express his high approbation of the ingenious mode of laying the crab-stick on upon the sheaves of wheat .
On Wednesday , Mr. Hunt gave audience to several tax-gatherers , to whose importunities he did not listen with an overstock of complacency . '
And so on , day after day .
Why should I despair of this , after what I have seen ?
Your Tandem is become far more renowned than the Bulletproof coach , and your horse Bob , is far more famous already than the charger of old Blucher .


`` Oh !
the fools !
Could not the settled reputation of being the most consummate of knaves content them ?
Was it necessary , in order to satisfy their ambition , to stand unrivalled through the world for folly as well as for knavery ?


`` Gratified , however , as you must be by these demonstrations of the impotent malice of such men , I hope , and indeed , I am sure , that a more gratifying consideration with you will be , as it ought to be , that these vile men have added to your power of serving your country , and which you will now be the better able to serve , because , having given such ample proofs of earnestness and resolution , you may safely moderate your zeal without risking any imputation of a want of that super-excellent quality .
That quality , in which so many men are deficient , you possess to a redundance .
Guard against this excess in future : take in a little sail , and add a little to your ballast : exchange a little of the courage of the lion for a little of the wisdom of the serpent : give up a little , and only a very little , of the stubbornness of the oak , for a little , and only a very little , of the pliancy of the reed : do this , and trust to the folly and knavery of these stupid and malignant wretches to make you a great man .


`` The situation of the country is becoming day after day more and more perilous , and there can be no relief without a radical cure .
The Prince in his answer to the City of London ( which I shall fully notice by and by ) confesses , as he well may , the existence of national distress and difficulty .
These are important words , and especially the last .
This is a great change produced since the beginning of last session of Parliament , when the wondrous prosperity of the country was a prominent theme of the Speech , and when your Wiltshire County Member , Mr. Paul Methuen , congratulated the House , that this country bad become the pillar of legitimacy all over Europe !
Alas !
how soon things have changed !
Misery is a greater teacher than Messrs. Lancaster and Bell both put together .


`` The Spitalfields subscription swells at a great rate , and , as a means of immediate relief , I am glad it does , though I shall always contend , that whatever degree of good may thereby be done , is due to you more than to any other person , and more than to all other persons put together  for , it is impossible that the misery should not have existed before the first Meeting in Spa-fields  and why , then , was it not before relieved ?
Mr. Buxton must have long known the facts which he so eloquently and so affectingly described  and why did he not then describe them sooner ?
The miserable sailors have long been perishing about the streets with hunger and cold  and why , then , has no measure of relief for them been adopted until now ?
I do not pretend to say , nor do I believe , that the greater part of those who now so freely subscribe , did not before feel for the unhappy sufferers  but , this I am quite sure of , that it was your first meeting and your petition which roused their feelings into immediate action  I do not say , nor do I believe , that the greater part of the subscribers had no real charity in them  but I defy any one to say , that their charity , which before lay dormant , was not quickened by your exertions .
One of your flags , or rather of the flags of the Meeting , which had on it ` FEED THE HUNGRY , ' ` CLOTHE THE NAKED , ' was called by the Courier ' a standard of rebellion  ' but , it is a standard under which the subscribers have hastened to range themselves  for they are serving out soup and old clothes in all directions !
But , this very Courier , after the first Meeting , expressly stated , that the people in and near London , were not in want .
He said , that , though work had fallen off and wages had been lowered in the country , it was not so in London  and he called the poor starving multitudes mutinous , lazy , and rebellious .
He charged them with designs to overset the Government , and plainly and distinctly asserted , that they stood in no need of relief !
How quickly he changed his tone !
And how clear is that change to be traced to you !


`` But , in the general subscription for the poor creatures of Spital-fields , you see only a small part of the effects of your labours .
There have been meetings in almost all the parishes of the metropolis for similar purposes .
Large subscriptions are going on in every direction .
Just as if the poverty and misery were not as great a month ago as they are now !
Great indeed they are , and they are producing symptoms so horrible that one sickens but to think of them .
Amongst others , take the facts described in a placard now sticking against the walls .
` PUBLIC NOTICE .
-- United Parishes of Saint Andrew , Holborn , above Bar , and St. George the Martyr , Queen 's Square .
At a meeting of the overseers held this day in consequence of MANY PERSONS DESERTING THEIR FAMILIES , -- It was resolved , That , in future , all persons , who desert their families , whereby they become chargeable to these parishes , or when the reputed parents of an illegitimate child abscond , such persons shall be advertised in the public papers , or in posting bills , with a full description of their persons , residence , and calling , and other particulars , and a reward offered for their apprehension .
And all inhabitants harbouring persons for the night , for the like purpose , will be prosecuted accordingly . '


`` To what are we come at last !
And this is the age of our glory , is it ?
This is the situation we are in , when immense sums are voted for the erection of monuments to commemorate the deeds of the last 25 years !
This is the state which not to be proud of , Mr. Vansittart said was proof of baseness in an Englishman !
It is in this situation of the country , that Pitt Clubs have the insolence to hold their triumphal carousals !
-- Shall we never see these men in sackcloth ?
These insolent men , while wallowing in wealth , do not reflect on the pangs which must wring the poor man 's heart before he can so far subdue the feelings of the husband and the father as to make him `` desert his family  '' or , if they do reflect on them , they must be more cruel than the storms and the waves .
The labouring men in England , generally speaking , are the kindest and most indulgent of husbands and of parents .
It has often been observed by me , that they are generally so to a fault .
If a boy or girl belonging to them behave ill towards their employers , their father and mother are very hard to be convinced of the fact .
-- I have often to remonstrate with them upon this subject , and to remind them of how much more indulgent they are to their children than I am to mine .
` Aye , Sir , ' said a very good woman to me a little while ago , ` but your children have their belly full of victuals . '
The answer was a silencer .
And this is the true cause of their indulgence , and of their excessive affection too .
They see their children in want  they grow up in continual suffering  they are incessantly objects of compassion over and above the love which nature has implanted in the parent 's breast .
Their obstinate perseverance in justifying the conduct of their children upon all occasions is a fault  but it arises from the most amiable of human weaknesses  and though it may , and often is , injurious in its effects , it is the least censurable of all the frailties of the heart .


`` If I have here , as I am sure I have , given the true character of the English labourer , as a parent and a husband , what must that state of things be , which has rendered the desertion of family so frequent an offence as to call forth a hand-bill and placard such as that which I have quoted above ?
And , in a state of things like this , are men to be called promoters of sedition , because they endeavour to point out the real cause of this horrible evil , and also endeavour to point out the remedy ?
Aye , but in doing this we point at the same time , to the weight of taxes  and we cite Mr. Preston in support of our doctrine , who says , that every poor man , who earns eighteen pounds in a year , pays away ten pounds of it in taxes .
Mr. Preston 's words are these : -- ` Every family , even of the poorest labourer , consisting of five persons , may be considered as paying , in indirect taxes , at least ten pounds a-year , or more than half his wages at seven shillings a week ? '
And , in another place he says : ` It should always be remembered , that every eighteen pounds a-year paid to any placeman or pensioner , withdraws from the public the means of giving active employment to one individual at the head of a family  thus depriving five persons of the means of sustenance from the fruits of honest industry and active labour , and rendering them paupers !


`` What !
is this rebellious on the part of Mr. Preston ?
He is a lawyer of great eminence .
A Member of Parliament .
A man of great landed estate .
Could he write and publish this from rebellious , from treasonable motives ?
What he says is certainly true  and is he not to say it , because the saying it may be disagreeable to those who live upon the taxes thus collected ?
Is it not clear , that , if the money , which the labourer and journeyman now pay in taxes , were to be suffered to remain in their pockets , they would not stand in need of parish or subscription relief ?
And , if this be not true , why does not some one of the numerous tax-eating tribe attempt to prove it to be false ?
Have not they their full share of the press at their command ?
Aye , and more than their share .
The sons of corruption are spreading about answers to me at a penny each , and some of them are given away .
There must be money , somewhere , found for this .
The sums necessary to do it must be very large too .
Are they not content with this superiority ?
I have no means of giving papers away .
They say that my writing is trash  they call the Letter to the Luddites seditious trash  they say that I am an ignorant fellow , a shallow man , and so forth .
Why , then , are they in a passion ?
Why not laugh at me and my trash ?
Why name me at all ?
Why break silence after so long a period ?
They are continually vowing that they will never notice my trash again  but their hatred , like the love of the swain , returns the next hour with more ardour than ever , and scatters their vows to the winds .
The most furious amongst them is a Sinecure Placeman , who writes in the Times newspaper , and upon whom the droppings of my pen seem to have the same effect as the crumbling of blue-stone or lump-sugar on the proud flesh of a galled jade .
He winces and dances , and kicks and flings about at a fine rate .
Amidst his ravings he swears that he will cause me to be hanged  and if he should not succeed , he would , I am sure , if he had any decency , finish his career by tucking up himself , and that too in his ribbon of the order of St. Lewis .


`` The truth is , that these men and their assistants and encouragers see their certain doom in the enlightening of the people .
They see clearly enough , that conviction must follow facts and arguments like mine rendered familiar .
They see that I am uniting the mind with the muscle of the country  and , above all things , they see , and they tremble at , my incessant , and I hope , successful efforts , to convince the labourers and the journeymen , that they are men who have rights , and that the way to obtain those rights is to pursue a peaceable and orderly conduct .
They hate every one who dwells upon the miseries of the country  for , to them , it is confusion to acknowledge that misery exists .
The Courier asserted , only the other day , that there was no suffering in or near London , and abused the people for complaining !
Such men would kill you or me or any man who talks of the people 's sufferings .
They call the complaints of hunger sedition .
These writers are like the wretch , who , unable to force his poor worn-out and starved horse to drag his load along any further , took out his knife and cut his throat .
And , I have not the least doubt , those men would see one half of the people 's throats cut in order to reduce the rest to silent submission .
The following case , taken from their own accounts of Wednesday last , will serve as a specimen of what is going on in London .
This is dying quietly , according to the recommendation of Mr. Jabet 's Old Townsman , who gave such just offence to the people of Birmingham .
` Between twelve and one o'clock on yesterday morning , a poor fellow was found in a passage in High-street , Bloomsbury , by Sullivan and Hogan , the watchmen of that district  he had taken shelter for the night .
They requested him to walk on to his lodgings  he did not answer , but walked towards Monmouth-street , and they walked the contrary road .
Between two and three o'clock they again found him lying upon a step in the same street  they asked him if he had no lodgings he tried to answer , but could only move his lips , which gave no utterance .
They raised him upon his feet to assist him to the watch-house  he walked a few yards , and from weakness fell upon his knees .
They got him upon their shoulders to carry him to the watch-house , but before they arrived with him he appeared to be dead .
The watchman took him to the workhouse , and called up the house surgeon , who examined the body , and said it was useless to bleed him , or use any method to restore him , as he was quite dead .
The deceased is apparently about fifty years of age , the most complete picture of human misery , having no linen upon his back , and his bones almost through his skin .
By his dress he appears to be a workman out of employ .
He has not been OWNED . '
-- Look at this , ye vile miscreants , and then say , whether it was a crime to call a meeting of the distressed to petition for relief !
Hundreds must perish in this way .
Only five days ago I saw more than twenty sailors on Westminster Bridge , neither of whom had any linen on , and some neither shoes , stockings , nor hat .
But , the numbers who have perished and who are perishing from the diseases occasioned by want are not to be counted .
And yet , it was a crime in you , and the sanguinary sons of corruption called for your instant execution , because you obeyed the call of the distressed to hold a meeting of them in Spafields !
Not to have obeyed that call would indeed have been a crime  but , it was a crime of which your nature was incapable .


`` I now come to the City Petition and the answer of the Prince Regent .
This is a very important matter , and , therefore , I shall insert the documents themselves previous to making any remarks on them .


'' ` ADDRESS AND PETITION .


'' ` May it please your Royal Highness ,


'' ` We , his Majesty 's most dutiful and loyal subjects , the Lord Mayor , Aldermen , and Commons of the City of London , in Common Council assembled , humbly approach your Royal Highness , to represent our national sufferings and grievances , and respectfully to suggest the adoption of measures which we conceive to be indispensably necessary for the safety , the quiet and prosperity of the Realm .


'' ` We forbear to enter into details of the afflicting scenes of privations and sufferings that every where exist  the distress and misery which for so many years has been progressively accumulating , has at length become insupportable -- it is no longer partially felt , nor limited to one portion of the empire -- the commercial , the manufacturing , and the agricultural interests are equally sinking under its irresistible pressure  and it has become impossible to find employment for a large mass of the population , much less to bear up against our present enormous burdens .


'' ` We beg to impress upon your Royal Highness , that our present complicated evils have not arisen from a mere transition from war to peace , nor from any sudden or accidental causes -- neither can they be removed by any partial or temporary expedients .


'' ` Our grievances are the natural effect of rash and ruinous wars , unjustly commenced and pertinaciously persisted in , when no rational object was to be obtained -- of immense subsidies to foreign powers to defend their own territories , or to commit aggressions on those of their neighbours -- of a delusive paper currency -- of an unconstitutional and unprecedented military force in time of peace -- of the unexampled and increasing magnitude of the Civil List -- of the enormous sums paid for unmerited pensions and sinecures -- and of a long course of the most lavish and improvident expenditure of the public money throughout every branch of the Government , all arising from the corrupt and inadequate state of the representation of the people in Parliament , whereby all constitutional controul over the servants of the Crown has been lost , and Parliaments have become subservient to the will of Ministers .


'' ` We can not forbear expressing our grief and disappointment , that , notwithstanding your Royal Highness 's gracious recommendation of economy at the opening of the last Session of Parliament , your Ministers should have been found opposing every proposition for lessening the national expenditure  and that they should have been able to obtain majorities to support and sanction their conduct , in defiance of your Royal Highness 's recommendation and the declared sense of the nation -- affording another melancholy proof of the corrupt state of the representation , in addition to those facts so often stated , and offered to be proved at the bar of the House of Commons , in a petition presented in 1793 , by the Honourable Charles , now Lord Grey , whereby it appeared that the great body of the people were excluded from all share in the election of Members , and that the majority of the Honourable House were returned by the proprietors of rotten boroughs , the influence of the Treasury , and a few powerful families .


'' ` We can , Sir , no longer support out of our dilapidated resources , an overwhelming load of taxation  and we humbly submit to your Royal Highness , that nothing but a reformation of these abuses , and restoring to the people their just and constitutional right in the election of Members of Parliament , can afford a security against their recurrence -- calm the apprehensions of the people -- allay their irritated feelings , and prevent those misfortunes in which the nation must inevitably be involved , by an obstinate and infatuated adherence to the present system of corruption and extravagance .


'' ` We therefore humbly pray your Royal Highness to assemble Parliament as early as possible  and that you will be graciously pleased to recommend to their immediate consideration these important matters , and the adoption of measures for abolishing all useless places , pensions , and sinecures  for the reduction of our present enormous military establishment  for making every practicable reduction in the Public Expenditure , and restoring to the people their just share and weight in the Legislature .


'' ` Signed by order of the Court .


'' ` HENRY WOODTHORPE . ' ''


* * * * *


'' ` PRINCE 'S ANSWER .


'' ` It is with strong feelings of surprise and regret , that I receive this Address and Petition of the Lord Mayor , Aldermen , and Commons of the City of London , in Common Council assembled .


'' ` Deeply as I deplore the prevailing distress and difficulties of the country , I derive consolation from the persuasion , that the great body of his Majesty 's subjects , notwithstanding the various attempts which have been made to irritate and mislead them , are well convinced , that the severe trials which they sustain with such exemplary patience and fortitude , are chiefly to be attributed to unavoidable causes , and I contemplate with the most cordial satisfaction the efforts of that enlightened benevolence which is so usefully and laudably exerting itself throughout the kingdom .


'' ' I shall resort with the utmost confidence to the TRIED wisdom of Parliament , at the time , which upon the fullest consideration , I have thought most advisable , under the present circumstances of the country  and I entertain a perfect conviction , that a firm and temperate administration of the Government , assisted and supported by the good sense , public spirit , and loyalty of the nation , will effectually counteract those proceedings , which , from whatever motives they may originate , are calculated to render TEMPORARY difficulties the means of producing PERMANENT and irreparable calamity . '


`` The surprise and regret , and the broad hints that came after , have nettled the citizens a little .
Whether they will shew any bottom , remains to be seen  but , as to the distress and difficulties being TEMPORARY , and as to their having arisen from UNAVOIDABLE causes , I differ with his Royal Highness , or , rather with his Ministers who advised this answer .
The distress has been visibly proceeding in a regular increase of severity for more than two years  it becomes every day greater and greater  it is deep rooted  it is destroying the means of resuscitation  it is ripping up the goose and taking out the golden eggs  in suspending the operations of labour , it is cutting off the possibility of a speedy return of employment .
But , what say the Correspondents of the Board of Agriculture ?
Not one single man of them , except a parson or two , pretends that the distress is of a temporary nature  on the contrary , 205 of them , out of 322 , attribute the ruin to the weight of taxes !
And , therefore , to make the distress temporary , the weight of taxes must be temporary  and this is one of the main objects of the prayer of the Citizens of London .


`` Oh , no !
the distress and difficulties have not arisen from unavoidable causes  for the weight of taxes might have been avoided .
However , let me ask the Ministers a few questions here .
I will not ask them whether it was unavoidable for the Bank to stop payment in cash in 1797  whether it was unavoidable to renew the war in 1813  whether it was unavoidable to persevere in the war with America after the war in England ceased , and , at last , to make peace without attaining any object of war  whether it was unavoidable to renew the war in 1815 for the purpose of compelling the French people to give up Napoleon and submit to the Bourbons  whether it was unavoidable to keep up an army to maintain the Bourbons on the throne of France , at a time when thousands of the Protestants of the country were butchered or burnt by those who called themselves the loyal .
I will not put any of these questions to the Ministers  but with the official accounts before me , I will ask them a few questions applicable to the present moment .
I ask them , then ,


Was it unavoidable to keep up an army at the expense , including the Ordnance , of 26,736,067 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable that the expense of the Civil List should , in last year , amount to 1,928,000 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable for as to pay in the same year , on account of the deficiencies of the Civil List 584,713 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable that the other additional allowances to the Royal Family , in that year , should amount to 366,660 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable that the Civil List for Scotland should amount to 126,613 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable to give for the relief of suffering French and Dutch Emigrants , in that year , after , the Bourbons and the ` Orange Boven ' had been restored , the sum of 79,591 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable to expend in that year ( including ) an arrear of the former year , in SECRET SERVICE Money , the sum of 153,446 pounds ?


Was it unavoidable to pay last year , out of the taxes for the relief of the Poor Clergy of the Church of England , the sum of 100,000 pounds ?


`` I could ask them a great many more questions of a similar nature and tendency  but here are enough for the present  and , if the Citizens of London should happen to be satisfied , that all these expenses were unavoidable , all the taxes , of course , are unavoidable , and then it is clear , that the present distress and difficulty of the country are to be attributed to unavoidable causes .
But , if the citizens should think , that a very large part , nine-tenths , for instance , of these expenses might have been avoided , then they will come to the opposite conclusion , and , if they be not beaten at a single blow , they will not fail to communicate that conclusion to his Royal Highness .


`` As to the hint about irritating and misleading the people , the charge can apply only to the enemies of Parliamentary Reform  for we deal in soothing language , in the inspiring of hope , and in the promulgation of useful political truth , and , therefore , the charge can not apply to us .
But , when the Prince is advised to talk of the TRIED wisdom of the Parliament , he compels us to fix our eyes on those ` distresses and difficulties , ' of which he is graciously pleased to speak at the same time , and which , at any rate , have grown into being under the existence of that ` TRIED wisdom . '


`` I have just received from America the most authentic accounts of the happy state of the people there .
English goods were selling at auction for a fourth of their prime cost  and the Americans say , that they are , in this way , getting back what they lost by our Orders in Council , under which their ships were seized and condemned .
The ruin , in America , is wholly confined to the agents and merchants connected with England .
The country at large is in the most flourishing state  no beggars , no paupers , no distress , and their newspapers are filled with true accounts of our distresses .
Still , let us cling to the Old Ship , and let us try , in spite of all opposition , to make our own country as happy as America .
But , here is another mark of our distresses not being of a temporary nature .
The market of America is gone for ever as to most articles of manufacture .
I shall , however , treat more fully of this another time .


`` I am , with the greatest respect ,


`` Sir , `` Your most obedient and most humble Servant ,


`` WM. COBBETT . ''


When the reader has perused this letter , he will be able to form a pretty correct opinion of the state of the public mind in the metropolis upon this occasion  and , as it was written at the time when Mr. Cobbett was divested , of prejudice , it will be read with considerable interest at this period .


The plot that had been laid for the purpose Of SPILLING MY BLOOD , had been completely frustrated .
I returned to the country , where I received invitations to attend public meetings for Reform , which the inhabitants of Bath and Bristol wished to hold .
I went to spend a fortnight with a friend at Newton , near Bath , and , as I was a freeholder of both those cities , I drew up requisitions and signed them first , to be presented to the Mayors , requesting them to call meetings , to petition for Reform .
They both refused to comply with the request of their fellow-citizens , and we , the requisitionists , therefore advertised and called them ourselves .


The Bristol meeting was advertised to be held upon Brandon-hill , on the 26th of December , the Mayor having refused us the use of the Guildhall .
I started from Newton about 11 o'clock , on one of the wetest days that I ever remember .
On the road I passed several troops of the Lancers , who had been ordered up from Weymouth , to watch this meeting .
When I reached Bristol I met , at Temple-gate , my worthy friend Mr. John Cossens , with Mr. Pimm and a few others .
They informed me , that they had been deterred by the corporation from erecting any hustings upon Brandon-hill , and that the City was invested by a regiment of North Somersetsbire Yeomanry Cavalry , which had been arriving from all parts for several hours .
Some of my friends strongly urged the propriety of my returning to Bath , and postponing the meeting to some future time , in consequence of the extreme wetness of the day .
I had never promised to attend any public meeting of the people and then disappointed them , and I felt extreme reluctance at the base thought of doing so upon this occasion  particularly as such a body of the military were assembled from all quarters , since , to decline holding the meeting under such circumstances , would carry the idea that , because the corrupt knaves of Bristol had called out the military , we were fearful of performing , and that , too , in a perfectly legal and constitutional manner , an imperative public duty .
That , however , in order to deter us , some persons , who were not gifted with strong nerves , should hesitate , is not to be wondered at , when we look at the following statement , which was published in the London Courier , of the 25th of December , the day previous to the meeting being held : `` that the regular soldiers are assembling  that the North Somerset regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry are ready to march to the aid of the Mayor  that a vestry in one parish has been held to collect persons to march to the Mayor 's to be sworn in as special constables  that the parties signed a resolution at the said vestry , that they will not distribute any Christmas gifts on Thursday , in order to keep the watchmen to their duty on that day  and that they will dismiss from their employ all persons who do not work on the day of the meeting . ''


This was all true  the streets were lined with troops , drenched in rain : I never saw such drowned rats in my life !
they looked wretched indeed !
nevertheless , on I drove , through the City up to Brandon-hill .
When I got there not ten persons were present , but as the rain held up , and the day became fine , in less than ten minutes there were as many thousands assembled .
I sent my servant with the leader of my tandem to the inn , and I made my gig the hustings .
A chairman was appointed , and the resolutions and a petition to Parliament were proposed by me , and seconded by Mr. Cossens , and were unanimously adopted by the meeting .
The petition , which was for Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot , was left for signatures in the City , and in a very short time it received TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND names .
These resolutions and this petition were carried by a meeting of unarmed citizens , assembled upon Brandon-hill , which was surrounded by armed troops , drawn up within sight , and some of them within hearing , of what was said and done by myself and others who took part in the said meeting .
The Bath troops were commanded on that day by a person of the name of King , a marble mason of that city .
The men were mounted before day-light , when the rain commenced  and this very gallant officer and profound soldier objected to the men wearing their cloaks .
As they were going upon such a magnanimous errand , such an heroic exploit , he said `` he hoped they would not disgrace themselves by wearing their cloaks . ''
The consequence was , that these feather-bed soldiers suffered most wretchedly , as they were soaked to the skin before they had got two miles on the road to Bristol .
Their being kept in this woeful plight all day caused the death of two or three of them  Robert Ansty , a butcher , and Wilton , who kept the Bear inn at Holloway , never recovered from the effects of their trip to Bristol .
There was , in truth , no more call for soldiers at Bristol on that day than there was for them in the Guildhall at Bath , where there was no meeting to be held .
The Mayor of Bristol and other Magistrates had sworn in 800 special constables upon the occasion  in fact , the appearance of the City was more like a besieged fortress than any thing else .
But all this parade was intended only for the purpose of intimidating the minds of the weak and silly portion of the people and creating a panic throughout the country .
I will venture to say , that the business of the meeting would have been carried on as quietly , and as much without any breach of the peace , and without one window having been broken , had there not been one soldier , or one constable or peace officer present at the time .


Mr. Thomas Cossens , of Castle-street , manfully stood forward to support me , and courageously braved the anger of the corrupt knaves of Bristol .
He rode through the city with me to the extremity of it , cheered all the way by the people , unless it was in passing the new reading room , in Clare-street , where a few of those who had been sworn in as special constables were assembled  a little contemptible group of the abject , dependant tools of the corporation , who , as I suppose , from the appearance of their lips , attempted to raise a hiss , but their voices were instantly drowned by the cheers of the multitude  and thus the meeting passed off as peaceably as if there had not been any bustle made by the corporation and police of the city , in order to create a riot .


A few days after this , I got a requisition signed by thirty respectable inhabitants of the City of Bath , the exact number of the corporation who return the members .
Having placed my name at the head of them , I waited upon the Mayor , a Mr. Anderton , an apothecary , I believe  he was better known amongst the citizens by the name of Pump-handle .
When I laid the requisition before him , he was presiding at the justice-room at the Guildhall .
He read it over , while I kept my eyes fixed upon him , and when he had finished the perusal of it , he hemmed and hawed , and began to make all sorts of excuses , saying that the City of Bath had never been troubled with a public meeting , and he could not see why there should be any meeting there now .
I told him that there would certainly be a meeting , whether he called it or not  that we the requisitionists merely wished to pay him the compliment of giving him , as the chief magistrate of the city , an opportunity of convening it  but that , if he felt the least difficulty upon the subject , we would quite as soon call it ourselves .
He replied by some foolish observation , which I now forget , but the purport of which was , to leave it doubtful whether he would or would not comply with our wishes .
This , however , did not suit me , and I pressed him for a definite answer .
At length be gave such a one as , before I waited on him , I was thoroughly convinced that he would give , namely , that he could not think of complying with the request of his fellow-citizens .
So thoroughly convinced indeed had I been that he would not call the meeting , that , previous to my waiting on him , I had sent the copy of the placard , calling the meeting ourselves , to the printer 's to be set up , only leaving room for the answer of the Mayor  so that , within one hour after he had refused , large broadsides were placarded all over the city , calling the meeting on the following Monday , in the name of myself and the other persons who signed the requisition .
The meeting was appointed to be held at 12 o'clock , on my premises , a large yard in Walcot-street , formerly belonging to a brewer , so that we were totally free from any interruption that might have been intended to have been given us .


The circumstances attending the calling of this meeting were rather curious , and deserve notice , to shew how necessary it is upon these occasions to act with promptness and decision .
The calling of this meeting had been in contemplation for some time .
I had drawn up a requisition , signed it with my own name , and sent it to Mr. John Allen , who , together with Dr. Oliver and Mr. Binns , had undertaken to get it signed .
Some names , I knew , had been procured , but the business had been driven off from time to time , and a number of difficulties had been started  but now that I was come into the neighbourhood of Bath the thing was to have been done out of hand .
I had , meanwhile , procured and held the meeting at Bristol , and now that it was over I was determined to see after that of Bath , without further delay .
I therefore drove over , and found matters quite at a stand , and all sorts of difficulties and impediments appeared to have quite overcome Messrs. Allen , Oliver , and Co. .
I saw that it was their determination not to call the meeting  as they said it was impossible to carry resolutions and a petition for Reform in a city which was under such a corrupt influence .
I requested to have the requisition handed over to me , and I would get it signed myself  but , after a great deal of searching the shop of Mr. Binns , and hunting a long time for the said requisition , IT WAS LOST .
To be humbugged in this sort of way did not suit me  I called for pen , ink and paper , instantly drew up another requisition , signed it myself , and sent little Young , my tenant in Walcot-street , and little Hickman , the assistant at Binns ' shop , round with the requisition , to get it signed by thirty tradesmen who were housekeepers , which I predicted they would accomplish in half an hour .
In the meantime I drew up the copy of a placard , to be posted on the walls , calling the meeting on the following Monday , in the name of the requisitionists  I being , as I have already stated , perfectly convinced that the Mayor would not call the meeting .
As I had anticipated , Hickman and Young returned , in less than an hour , with the requisition signed by thirty very respectable tradesmen , and Young and myself carried it instantly and presented it to the Mayor , so that in less than three hours after I put my shoulder to the wheel , the requisition was drawn up , signed , presented to the Mayor , and his answer was printed on large placards , which placards were posted all over the city , appointing the meeting to be held on the following Monday .
All this was accomplished in less than three hours , though the little clan of pretended Reformers , Messrs. Allen and Co. had been humdrumming about it for three weeks , without even getting the requisition signed .
I wish I had a list of the brave men 's names who so promptly signed this requisition  I would certainly record them .
I remember that Mr. Crisp , the hatter , and Mr. Rolf , the shoemaker , and my tenant , Mr. Young , the builder , in Walcot-street , were three of them  Mr. Hickman , not being a householder , did not sign it .
The day came , and a hustings was erected in my yard , and when I arrived , not only was the place full from top to bottom , but all the roofs of the buildings were covered with people .
This also I had anticipated , and provided for .
I had got two carpenters ' benches already loaded in a cart , which , upon a signal being given , were to be taken to the Abbey Grove , to which spot it was my intention to move that the meeting should adjourn .
Accordingly as soon as I got upon the hustings , I moved that the meeting should forthwith adjourn to the Abbey-Grove .
This was seconded , and , although it came very unexpectedly , yet it was carried by acclamation .
The cart with the carpenters ' benches reached the Abbey-Grove before we did , and they were placed under the wall of the Abbey-Church .
Thither I and my friends walked , the immense multitude , of from twelve to fifteen thousand persons , following us through the Marketplace , where many of the military were drawn up  for , in spite of the example of peaceableness which , in the week before , the people of Bristol had exhibited , the worthy Mayor of Bath had ordered out all the troops , Lancers and Somersetshire Yeomanry  and he had likewise been occupied the whole of the previous days in swearing in a large body of the gentlemen and tradesmen of the city , to act as special constables .
These , of course , being present at the meeting , swelled our numbers very considerably .
When we mounted the hustings , the Abbey-Grove was at least one-third of it crammed full , so that , on a moderate calculation , there were from twelve to fifteen thousand persons present .
A public meeting of the people for any political purpose had never before been held in Bath , and therefore it attracted greater attention than is usual in other cities .


Resolutions were now proposed and passed , which exposed the glaring injustice of paying away enormous sums of the public money to sinecure placemen and unworthy pensioners , c..
The Marquis of CAMDEN , who held the office of one of the Tellers of the Exchequer , a sinecure of thirty-five thousand a year , being the Recorder of the city of Bath , gave us a fine opportunity of expatiating on the profligate waste of the public money upon that corrupt and knavish corporation .
Our resolutions were extremely strong and pointed upon this subject of our Recorder 's enormous sinecure  and these resolutions were embodied in our petition , which was passed almost unanimously , amidst the cheers of the citizens of Bath .
In this petition we forcibly remonstrated against such a wanton and unfeeling waste of the public money , and urged the necessity of the immediate abolition of the Marquis of Camden 's sinecure .
I wish I had a copy of the resolutions and petition by me , that I might insert them here , as I conceive this to have been the most momentous petition that was ever presented to the House of Commons  and the effect which it produced was more important than that of any other petition that was ever passed at any public meeting , not excepting that which was passed at Spafields .
At this , as well as at all the public meetings that I attended , the petition prayed for Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot  but , as it was the first and only petition that ever came from a public meeting of the citizens of Bath , we laid very great stress upon the Marquis of Camden 's sinecure , he being the Recorder of the City .


After this petition had been passed unanimously , it was left for signatures in several places in the city , but the rendezvous was at Mr. Young 's , who occupied my house and premises in Walcot-street , so that he was totally independent of the corporation .
The meeting was held and conducted in the most peaceable and orderly manner , and as soon as it was concluded the people retired to their homes in the same regular and satisfactory way , each individual being conscious of having done his duty to himself , his family , and his country .
It is necessary to observe , that Mr. John Allen , a builder , of Bath , who had offered himself as the popular representative for that city in 1812 , altogether abstained from taking any part in any of the proceedings of this meeting .
He being a mushroom reformer , raised his head for a short season , and was cut off and disappeared from the political world almost as quick as a mushroom disappears after a nipping frost .
The effect produced by this meeting did indeed rouse him again for a moment  but it was only that he might fall still lower , and be totally buried in the lap of corruption , mingling with its basest tools and dependants .
The petition was signed by upwards of twenty thousand persons , in a few days .


There had , in the meanwhile been meetings held , for the purpose of petitioning for Reform , all over the kingdom , particularly in the North of England and Scotland  which meetings emanated from the first Spafields meeting  and at almost all of these Meetings resolutions and petitions of a similar tendency were passed  Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot , being very generally prayed for .
Hampden Clubs had been formed all over the North of England , by Major Cartwright , who had sent an agent round the country for that purpose .
The Major had also supplied a copy of a petition for Reform , to be transmitted to the members of these bodies , which prayed for the suffrage , or right of voting , to be extended only to all payers of direct taxes .
These petitions being printed upon large paper , were very generally adopted , as this saved the trouble of drawing up others .
A circular letter had also been sent round the country , signed by Sir F. Burdett , or rather with the Baronet 's fac-simile , which he had authorised the Major to use , for the purpose of inviting the Hampden Clubs , and all other petitioning bodies , to send up delegates or deputies to London , to meet a deputation of the Hampden Club , to decide upon what sort of Reform the reformers would unanimously agree to petition for .
Great numbers had followed the example set them at Spafields , Bristol , and Bath  others , who had signed the Major 's printed petitions , only prayed for all payers of direct taxation to be admitted to the right of voting .


On the 20th of January , 1817 , five persons were tried at the Old Bailey , for rioting in the City of London , on the day of the second Spafields meeting .
Cashman , the sailor , was found guilty , and sentenced to be executed in the front of Mr. Beckwith 's , the gun-smith 's shop , in Skinner-street .


The Parliament was to meet on the 28th of January .
About the 24th of that month , the delegates , or deputies , from the Hampden Clubs , and other petitioning bodies , from various parts of the kingdom , arrived in London  and a day was appointed for them to meet at the Crown and Anchor .
I was delegated from Bristol , to accompany Mr. Cossens , who brought the petition from that city , signed by twenty-four thousand persons .
I was also delegated from Bath , together with Mr. John Allen , who , seeing the spirit displayed by his townsmen , volunteered once more to act the part of a Reformer , and he brought up the Bath petition , containing upwards of 20,000 signatures .
The Reformers of Bath and Bristol gave positive instructions to their delegates that they should support Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot .
Mr. Allen brought up the written instructions from Bath which he delivered to me , and he accepted the delegation upon the express condition that he would support and vote for Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot .
I met Mr. Hulme from Bolton , Mr. E. Taylor from Norwich , Mr. Warburton from Leicester , and several other delegates from England and Scotland , at Mr. Cobbett 's house in Catherine street , in the Strand , which was the general rendezvous  and there I first saw Mr. Fitton and Mr. Kaye of Royton , Mr. Bamford from Middleton , Mr. Benbow and Mr. Mitchell from Manchester , and many others .
Major Cartwright had , in the meantime , been down to Brighton , personally to ascertain Sir Francis Burdett 's opinion upon the subject  and from him the Major learned that he would not support any petitions that prayed for Universal Suffrage  that he would support Householder Suffrage and the payers of direct taxes , but nothing farther .
When the Major returned he communicated this to Mr. Cobbett , who was requested to use all his influence to prevail upon me to give up Universal Suffrage , and to adopt the plan of Sir Francis Burdett .
I had consulted with Mr. Hulme , whom I found an honest and staunch friend of Liberty , and he had agreed to support me in the motion which I had resolved to make at the delegate meeting , for Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot .
The Major , as well as Mr. Cobbett , had already done every thing to prevail upon us to give it up for the householder plan , but we were inflexible .
This being the situation of affairs , on the day before the meeting was to take place , the Major was very anxious for Mr. Cobbett to attend as a delegate  but to accomplish this was not quite an easy matter , as Mr. Cobbett had not been elected a delegate by either of the petitioning bodies .
The Major , however , was never at a loss for a scheme , and his agent or writer , whom he employed at the time , an Irishman , of the name of Cleary , was set to work privately to assemble some members of the Union , which had been formed in London by the Major , previous to the formation of the Hampden Club  in fact , the latter sprung out of the former , which was too democratical for the aristocracy , and they consequently set on foot a select club amongst themselves , called the Hampden Club  although I believe , with the exception of the Major and Mr. Northmore , there was not a member amongst them who was at all disposed to follow the example of John Hampden .
But , be this as it may , Cleary was ordered to get together , at the Crown and Anchor , the night before the intended delegate meeting , a chosen number of the members of the Union , expressly for the purpose of appointing two delegates for the metropolis .
Although we were both members of the Union , Cleary was strictly enjoined not to communicate either to me or to Mr. Hulme any intention of holding this conclave , which was to have been a snug junto of Westminster men , nothing more nor less than the Rump Committee , who were to assemble at the request of the Major , to appoint Mr. Cobbett a delegate , that he might attend the meeting the next day , purposely to oppose my motion for Universal Suffrage , and to move in its stead , that we , the delegates , should adopt the recommendation of the Hampden Club , and support the householder suffrage only .


This good piece of generalship could not , however , be carried completely into effect , as one of the invited party communicated it in confidence to Mr. Hulme and myself .
We laughed heartily at the intrigue of the old Major and Mr. Cobbett , and agreed that , being members of the Union , we would unexpectedly attend the meeting at seven o'clock , without saying a word to any one .
We both dined with Mr. Cobbett , and a little before seven we made an excuse for leaving his table , saying , that we had a particular engagement for an hour or two , after which we would return again .
Mr. Cobbett strongly opposed our leaving him  but whether he had any suspicion that we were up to the tricks of the Major and himself , I never ascertained .
However , off Mr. Hulme and I started together , and we soon arrived at the Crown and Anchor , and desired to be shown into the room where the members of the Union were assembled .
At first the waiters did not appear to understand us  at length they asked me if we meant Mr. Brooks and Mr. Cleary 's room .
We replied , `` exactly so , '' and in we marched , to the great consternation of Mr. Brooks , who sat at the head of the table , with Cleary at his right , and surrounded by some half score of as pretty a picked junto for dishing up a little under-plot of the sort , as could have been selected for the purpose in the whole kingdom .


Our unexpected visit , without any invitation , appeared to create very considerable uneasiness , and even dismay .
I informed them that , as we were both old members of the Union , and had accidentally heard that there was to be a meeting , we did ourselves the pleasure of attending it , although ( no doubt from mistake ) we were not summoned .
This did not at all relieve them from the dilemma in which they were placed .
After looking at each other for some time , they cautiously developed the object of the meeting , and with great timidity and doubt Mr. Brooks proposed Mr. Cobbett as `` a proper man to be a delegate to represent the Union , at the delegate meeting to be holden the next day . ''
Instead of throwing any obstacle in the way , which they had expected would be the case , I instantly arose and seconded the motion  adding , that I believed Mr. Cobbett to be one of the most proper men in the kingdom to attend such a meeting , and that I proposed Mr. Brooks as a proper colleague for him  and I moved that those two gentlemen should be appointed as the delegates of the Union Society , to maintain their rights at the approaching meeting .
Mr. Hulme seconded the motion , and it was carried unanimously  upon which we returned to Mr. Cobbett 's , and were the first to communicate the result of that select assembly which was got up privately , and from which it was intended that we should have been totally excluded .
He appeared astonished , but carried it off with a laugh .


After this , many , many hours were employed by Mr. Cobbett , in endeavouring to prevail upon us to give up the plan of supporting Universal Suffrage .
He should , he said , propose to the delegates to agree to the householder plan  especially as Sir F. Burdett had declared that he would not support the former .
I lamented differing from him , but I declared that I would support Universal Suffrage from principle , in spite of all the policy in the world , and in spite of the opinion or whim of all the baronets in the world .


With this determination we left him , and met at the appointed hour , at the Crown and Anchor , on the next day .
Major Cartwright and Mr. Jones Burdett were the deputation from the Hampden Club  and there were , in the whole , about sixty delegates from different parts of the kingdom of England and Scotland  but , with the exception of those from Bath , Bristol , and London , they all came from the North .


Major Cartwright was unanimously called to the chair , and he opened the proceedings by informing us , that the Hampden Club had come to the determination of supporting the Householder Suffrage  which plan he strongly recommended to the delegates to adopt , particularly as Sir Francis Burdett had declared that he would not support any petition that prayed for a more extended right of voting .
In truth , the Major , instead of performing the part of chairman , actually became the strenuous and eloquent advocate of the Hampden Club , and their notable scheme of restricting the right of voting to householders and payers of direct taxes to Church and King  and I must in justice say , that I never saw an advocate labour harder than the Major did to carry this point , which I believe he confidently relied upon accomplishlng , as he knew that he would have the support of Mr. Cobbett 's great talent and weight of influence amongst the assembled delegates .


Mr. Cobbett then rose , and , in a luminous and artful speech , endeavoured to convince the delegates , or rather to bring them over to the same way of thinking .
He , as well as the Major , were heard with great attention , but it was with such silent attention as rendered it very evident to me that their doctrine of exclusion was listened to by the delegates without any conviction of its truth .
It may easily be supposed that I took good care narrowly to watch the contrivances of those who , by their votes , were to decide the great question  many of whom Mr. Cobbett had previously had an opportunity of communicating with , and using his influence upon , in private .
After a most ingenious speech , he concluded by moving , that the present meeting was of opinion , that the right of voting for Members of Parliament could be safely and practicably extended only to householders paying direct taxes to Church and State , and that it should be recommended to the Reformers throughout the country to petition for a Reform of the Commons ' House of Parliament , upon the plan of householder suffrage .
If not the words , this was the substance and meaning of the motion .


The moment that Mr. Cobbett sat down , ( sat down with perfect silence round him ) , to my great astonishment up started John Allen , my brother-delegate from Bath , and seconded the motion for the EXCLUSION from the right of voting of all persons except householders and payers of direct taxes  that is , except they were payers of church and poor rates , and King 's taxes .
This was the conduct of the volunteer delegate from Bath , although he had received written instructions , from the committee of Reformers of that city , to support Universal Suffrage .


As soon as Mr. Allen was seated , I rose to move an amendment to my friend Cobbett 's motion , and , in my address to the delegates , I combatted and successfully controverted the doctrine of exclusion which had been so forcibly urged by the chairman , and so ingeniously supported by Mr. Cobbett .
I modestly and with great deference called to their recollection the language , the irresistible arguments , in favour of Universal Suffrage , which , in his Register , Mr. Cobbett himself had published , within one short fortnight of the time in which I was addressing them .
Almost every sentence that I uttered in favour of Universal Suffrage was hailed by the enthusiastic cheers of the great body of the delegates .
Mr. Cobbett rose to order , and protested in strong language against my quoting his own words , or any thing he had previously published , in order to controvert his present proposition .
I therefore forbore to do so again  not from any conviction of its impropriety or unfairness , but because I wished to conciliate , and because I was quite clear that my amendment would be carried .
I concluded by asserting the right of every freeman to be represented in the Commons ' House of Parliament , which could only be done by Universal Suffrage  and on this ground I moved that the word universal should be substituted for householder .


Mr. Hulme seconded the motion , and Mr. Bamford was about to support him , by refuting Mr. Cobbett 's arguments with respect to Universal Suffrage being impracticable  but before he had concluded his sentence , Mr. Cobbett rose and said , that what Mr. Bamford had stated had convinced him of the practicability of Universal Suffrage , and consequently he should withdraw his motion , and support Mr. Hunt 's amendment .
The fact was , that Cobbett plainly saw that his motion would be lost by a large majority , and he had the policy not to press it to a division .
I , however , insisted upon having the question put , and it was carried in favour of Universal Suffrage by a majority of twenty to one .
The question of Annual Parliaments was also carried unanimously .
Mr. Mitchell then moved , that votes should be taken by ballot  this was opposed also by Mr. Cobbett and others , but on a division it was carried by a majority of more than two to one .
When I held my hand up for it , Mr. Cobbett turned to me and said very earnestly , `` What !
do you support the ballot too ? ''
I answered `` Yes , most certainly , to its fullest extent . ''


These points being decided , and some minor resolutions being passed , the meeting was adjourned  but , as I afterwards found , only to assemble again the next day , where the Major was at his post in the chair , passing various resolutions , which of course I expected would be finally settled that evening .
We were , however , surprised to find that the meeting was adjourned to the King 's Arms , Palace Yard , opposite Westminster Hall , where it was expected they ( the delegates ) would assemble from day to day till the Parliament met .
This was thought by Mr. Cobbett , as well as by myself , to be not only a useless but a dangerous proceeding  useless , because the main question upon which the delegates met was settled  and dangerous , because it would be taken advantage of by the Government , which would construe such meetings , so continued , into an attempt to overawe the Parliament .
Mr. Cobbett declared he would not go near them again  in fact , he had not attended the second day  and he added , that they would all be apprehended , for holding their meetings for an illegal purpose .
He and I and Mr. Hulme all agreed , therefore , that as we had arranged those points to deliberate upon which we had been assembled , it was very desirable to dissolve the meeting , but to stir a single step to accomplish this end , Mr. Cobbett positively refused .
Mr. Hulme and myself , however , attended , and after the Major had got some of his resolutions passed , I moved that the meeting should be dissolved , and urged my reasons for the measure .
Mr. Hulme seconded my motion , and a warm debate ensued , which was maintained with great spirit on both sides , for the dissolution was strongly opposed .
However , when the question was put , my motion was carried by a very considerable majority , and the far-famed delegate-meeting was dissolved .
It is a curious fact that Mr. Cobbett never noticed these proceedings in his Register .


In the evenings of these meetings , many of the delegates assembled at the Cock , in Grafton-street , by invitation , to meet Dr. Watson , Pendrill , and others of the Spenceans .
It appears that they were taken there by ONE CLEARY , an Irishman , who had been an attorney 's clerk in Dublin , and who had contrived to be employed as the secretary of the Hampden Club , and who , as private secretary of Major Cartwright , attended the delegate meetings .
These private meetings , at the Cock in Grafton-street , took place unknown to me , and were afterwards made a pretence for suspending the Habeas Corpus Act  and , strange to relate , warrants were issued out , by the Secretary of State , against every one of the persons who attended those meetings , except the said Cleary .


The delegates , as we have already seen , were in town  they had brought up with them petitions , signed by half a million of men , and they were anxious to place them in the hands of some Member of Parliament , who would present them and support the prayer of their petitions .
But such a man was not easily to be found .
Sir Francis Burdett had promised the Major to come to town in time to present these petitions , or at least some of them , as soon as Parliament met  but when he found that the delegates who had been assembled in his name had declared for Universal Suffrage , and that the petitions in London likewise mostly prayed for Reform upon the principle of Universal Suffrage , he declared that he would not support the prayer of them , neither had he arrived in town on the day previous to the meeting of Parliament .


On the failure of Sir Francis to come forward , Lord Cochrane had been applied to by the Major and Mr. Cobbett , to present these petitions  but he had declined to act in opposition to his colleague , Sir Francis Burdett  every effort had been tried to induce him to do so , but they had been tried in vain .
At length I hit upon a plan , which I proposed to Mr. Cobbett .
It was this -- that on the day when the Parliament met , I would collect ten or twenty thousand people in the front of Lord Cochrane 's house , which was in Old Palace Yard , and thus cut off his Lordship 's access to the House , unless he would take in some of the petitions .
I shall never forget Cobbett 's look .
`` What ! ''
said he , `` would you besiege the man in his own house ? ''
I answered , that desperate cases required desperate remedies .
`` Aye !
aye ! ''
said he , `` that is very pretty talking , it is like belling the cat .
Suppose such a thing likely to succeed with his Lordship , how the devil would you contrive to collect such a number of people there , without his knowing it , so as to avoid them , if he pleased ? ''
I replied , `` leave that to me .
If you will go to his Lordship 's house about one o'clock , and detain him at home , by endeavouring to persuade him to present the petitions , I will undertake to bring ten thousand people to the front of his house by two o'clock , '' -- the House of Commons being to assemble at three .
In fact , there appeared no other alternative  for on the next day the Parliament was to meet , and we had not yet one single Member of Parliament who would present our petitions , all being unwilling , because they prayed for Universal Suffrage .
After making a hundred excuses , Lord Cochrane had absolutely refused to present them  at least he refused to support the prayer of the petitioners .
There being no other chance of accomplishing our purpose , Mr. Cobbett at length adopted my plan , and agreed to make the attempt as a sort of forlorn hope , and accordingly he promised to be at his Lordship 's house at the time appointed .


I knew that great numbers of people would be collected , in and about Parliament-street , at that time , to see the Prince Regent go down to the House , to open the Session of Parliament .
I therefore made an arrangement with all the delegates in town , to meet me at the Golden-Cross , Charing-Cross , a quarter before two o'clock , and requested that each man would bring with him his rolls of parchment , containing the petitions .
This they all complied with , and met me at the time appointed , in number about twenty  it might be more or less .
I informed them that I wished them to march , two and two , down Parliament-street , into Palace-yard , to the door of Lord Cochrane 's house , who I had reason to hope would present their petitions , and I begged them to follow me .
I then requested my friend Cossens to unroll a few yards of the Bristol petition , which I took in my hand , and proceeded down Parliament-street , at the head of the delegates .
The people stared at such an exhibition  and I announced that the delegates were going down to Palace-yard , to get Lord Cochrane to present their petitions .
This information was received with huzzas , and the people ran forward to communicate the intelligence to others , so that before we had got opposite the Horse Guards , we were attended by several thousand people , cheering us as they went along .
When we arrived at the front of Lord Cochrane 's house , there was the largest assembly that I ever saw in Palace-yard , all believing that his Lordship had undertaken to present our petitions .


I knocked at the door , and gained immediate access to his Lordship , with whom , as I expected , I found Mr. Cobbett .
He asked what was the matter ?
I told him that the people had accompanied the delegates , to request his Lordship to present their petitions  to which he replied , `` that Mr. Cobbett had been using every argument in his power to prevail upon him to do it , but he could not take such a step without consulting his colleague , Sir Francis Burdett . ''
A great deal was now urged by us to induce him to comply , in which we were most heartily joined by his lady , but all was to little purpose .
At length , I led him to the window , and requested him to address twenty thousand of his fellow-countrymen , and tell them himself that he refused to present their petitions  for that I certainly would never inform them of any such thing .
Our appearance at the window drew forth some tremendous cheers .
`` There , '' said I , `` my Lord , refuse their request , if you please  but if you do , I am sure that you will regret it as long as you live .
Besides , '' added I , `` I deny the possibility of your getting from your house , without your previously consenting to present their petitions . ''
At length we carried our point , and his Lordship agreed that he would take in the Bristol petition , which was the largest , the roll of parchment being neatly the size of a sack of wheat , and containing twenty-five thousand signatures .
It was rolled upon a bundle of sticks , tightly bound together , as an emblem of the strength of an united people .
His Lordship also now agreed to move an amendment to the address , which had been previously drawn up , in hopes that he might be prevailed on to do so .
The moment that his Lordship yielded to our entreaties , I flew down stairs to the door , and announced the intelligence to the assembled multitude , who received it with loud and long continued acclamations , which made Old Palace-yard and Westminster-Hall ring again .
I then proposed that the delegates should carry his Lordship in a chair , from his house to the door of Westminster-Hall , if the people would make a passage to allow him to proceed thither in that way .
This suggestion was instantly adopted  an arm chair was provided and placed at the door , in which his Lordship was seated , with the Bristol petition and the bundle of sticks rolled up in it .
In this manner he was carried by the delegates across Palace-yard , myself leading the way  and he was set down at the door of the House , amidst the deafening cheers of the people , who , at my request , immediately dispersed in peace and quietness to their homes .


As the Prince Regent returned from opening the Session of Parliament , some gravel or a potatoe was thrown at his carriage , the window of which was cracked .
This the Courier and the venal press made a great noise about the next day  and Lord James Murray , who was in the carriage with the Prince Regent , attended in his seat in the House of Commons , in the evening , and stated that the Prince Regent had been fired at , on his way from the House  and the ball had passed through the window of his coach .
This caused a great sensation in the House , and the outrage was attributed to the Reformers , not one of whom do I believe was present  at any rate not one of the delegates was there .
This greatly assisted the Ministers to carry their intended measures through both Houses  that of suspending the Habeas-Corpus Act , and that of passing the Seditious Meetings Bill .


Lord Cochrane presented the Bristol petition , and moved the following amendment to the address , which , as a vindication of the conduct of the Reformers , I will here record .


`` That this House has taken a view of the public proceedings throughout the country , by those persons who have met to petition for a Reform of this House , and that , in justice to those persons , as well as to the people at large , and for the purpose of convincing the people that this House wishes to entertain and encourage no misrepresentation of their honest intentions , this House , with great humility , beg leave to assure his Royal Highness , that they have not been able to discover one single instance , in which meetings to petition for Parliamentary Reform have been accompanied with any attempt to disturb the public tranquillity  and this House further beg leave to assure his Royal Highness , that in order to prevent the necessity of those rigorous measures , which are contemplated in the latter part of the speech of his Royal Highness , this House will take into their early consideration the propriety of abolishing sinecures and unmerited pensions and grants , the reduction of the civil list , and of all salaries which are now disproportionate to the services , and especially , that they will take into their consideration the Reform of this House , agreeably to the laws and constitution of the land , this House being decidedly of opinion that justice and humanity , as well as policy , call at this time of universal distress , for measures of conciliation , and not of rigour , towards a people who have made so many and such great sacrifices , and who are now suffering , in consequence of those sacrifices , all the calamities with which a nation can be afflicted . ''


It is a melancholy subject for reflection , that there was not ONE man to be found in the House that would even SECOND this amendment , which was neither more nor less than a true account of the proceedings of the Reformers throughout the country  and in consequence of this , the motion fell to the ground without a division .
Lord Cochrane continued night after night to present these petitions , brought up by the delegates  and the most remarkable event of these times was , that the very night that Lord Cochrane presented the petition from Bath , which especially pointed out the enormous sums annually received by their Recorder , Lord Camden , and which prayed for the abolition of his enormous sinecures  that very night a message was brought down to the House , and it was announced by one of the Ministers that Lord Camden had actually resigned his enormous sinecure of Teller of the Exchequer , which did not amount to less than thirty-five thousand pounds a year .
No one will doubt that this act of his Lordship was occasioned solely by the resolutions and the petition passed at the Bath meeting .
He well knew that Lord Cochrane had presented the Bristol petition , and had stated in the House that he had several other petitions to present  and amongst the number that from Bath , signed by upwards of twenty thousand persons .
To prevent , therefore , the discussion which was likely to arise from the presentation of this petition , he anticipated the prayer of it , by resigning his sinecure of Teller of the Exchequer .
How often have we been asked by the tools of corruption , what good was there in holding public meetings !
We have been everlastingly told that these great public meetings , and the violent petitions passed at them , did a great deal of harm , but that they never produced any good .
What these knaves mean by this is , that the House of Commons never attended to the prayers and petitions of the people , and that therefore it was of no use to persevere in petitioning .
This , as far as it goes , is very true  the House of Commons never did attend to the petitions of the people for Reform  but yet I boldly answer , that petitioning has done some good  that the petition of the first Spafields meeting obtained four thousand pounds from the droits of the Admiralty , for the suffering poor of Spital-fields and the metropolis .
This was some good .
Again , I say , that the petition and the resolutions passed at the Bath meeting , caused Lord Camden to surrender thirty-five thousand a year to the public .
This alone was some good .
Nor must we stop here .
Almost all the petitions in which I was ever concerned , petitioned for the abolition of all sinecure and useless places , and unmerited pensions  and I always particularly denounced the sinecures of the late Marquis of Buckingham , the other Teller of the Exchequer , and prayed and petitioned for its abolition .
At the death of the old Marquis it was abolished .
Does any man of sense and candour believe , for a moment , that this would have ever been done to this hour , if it had not been for the prayers , petitions , and remonstrances of the people ?
Here , then , is another saving of upwards of thirty thousand pounds a year .
-- Therefore , I say , that the great public meetings have done a great deal of good  and those who promoted them have rendered very considerable service to the country , although they have themselves been the victims of that system of tyranny and oppression , which , in these two instances alone , has had its plunder curtailed in more than sixty thousand pounds a year .
Add to all this , that the Prince Regent surrendered fifty thousand pounds per annum to the public exigencies .
Will any man say that the Regent would have done this , had it not been for the great public meetings held in Spafields and other places ?
and was this nothing ?
Again , Mr. Ponsonby resigned his Chancellor 's pension of four thousand pounds a year .
Is this nothing ?
Here I have shown that , within three months of the great meeting first held in Spafields , and between the second and third meeting which was advertised , no less a sum than NINETY THOUSAND POUNDS A YEAR was surrendered for the public exigencies  and was this doing nothing ?
To be sure , five persons had been found guilty of rioting on the day of the second Spafields meeting , and Cashman was sentenced to death  but this had nothing to do with the meeting itself , which met only for the purpose of petitioning Parliament , and peaceably separated , after agreeing to a petition , which was signed by twenty-four thousand persons , praying for Reform , and the abolition of all sinecures , and a reduction of the public expenditure  which petition had been presented , and received by the House of Commons , before these surrenders and resignations of these large sums were made .
To be sure , Lord Sidmouth had delivered in the House of Lords a message from the Prince Regent , laying before Parliament the famous green bag , full of precious documents , got up to prove that sedition , conspiracy , and rebellion were close at hand  and that treasonable practices existed in London , and in various parts of the kingdom : upon which a committee was appointed by the Ministers , in both Houses of Parliament , to examine and report upon the contents of the said bag .
The result of this was , that Mr. Evans , of Newcastle-street , the Spencean , and his son , were arrested on a charge of high treason !


About this time I received a letter from the Reformers of Portsmouth , requesting me to attend and preside at a public meeting , which they wished to hold in or near that town , to petition for Reform .
I showed this letter to Mr. Cobbett , who said , `` I know these people  I will answer that letter for you , and arrange with them all about their meeting .
As you are so much engaged in other matters at this time , I will take this trouble off your hands , and you will have nothing to do but to attend the meeting when the day is appointed . ''
This offer I cheerfully accepted , and I thought no more of the business till I saw it publicly announced that a meeting would be held on Portsdown-Hill , on the 10th day of February , the very day that was fixed for holding the third Spafields meeting  and that was done without consulting or saying a word to me upon the subject , although I was the only person written to by the people of Portsmouth .
It did certainly strike me at the time , that there appeared to be a good deal of trickery and management made use of to keep me from this meeting .
As , however , I was never jealous of any one myself , I had no suspicion that my friends were jealous of me , and I took no notice of it , though I was sorry to find that to the people who met on Portsdown , no apology or explanation was made for my absence , or at least for the meeting being held on the day that I was at Spafields  and I have reason to think that the people of Portsmouth , who first invited me , were very much disappointed at my not being present , and that they felt themselves slighted by me , which , I assure them , was the farthest thing in the world from my wish or intention .


While my friends were acting in this manner , my enemies were not idle , and the agents of Government , in order to injure me in the opinion of the public , not only vilified and abused and libelled me from day to day , in the public newspapers , but they actually caused a placard to be printed and posted all over the metropolis , which was headed `` Mr. Hunt hissed out of the City of Bristol , '' and contained all sorts of infamous falsehoods and scurrilous abuse .
It appeared from the newspapers that a boy , of the name of Thomas Dugood , had been committed to prison , by a Police Magistrate , for having pulled down one of these posting-bills .
I immediately set about an inquiry , to find out the poor boy , to endeavour to relieve him from his imprisonment , and to gain him some redress for the persecution which he had suffered .
To discover where the boy was , I went to the Police Office , and , after a great deal of shuffling , I was directed to Coldbath-fields Prison , which , as I subsequently found , was the wrong gaol , the boy having been committed to the New Prison .
In the mean time , however , finding that I was resolved to go to the bottom of the business , they had released the boy .
At length I found him out at his lodgings , and learned from him that he had been confined for several days among the vilest felons .
I took him to the Police Office , to identify the Magistrate that committed him , and there I caused the police officer , Limbrick , to be placed at the bar , for robbing the boy of his books and money at the time he was apprehended .
The inquiry ended in the said police officer returning the boy his books and money , and confessing that he was ordered to attend the posting of the said bills , and to protect them from being pulled down after they were posted .
The bills were printed at the office of the Hue and Cry , near Temple-bar , and an agent of the Government paid the bill-sticker a large sum for the posting of them in the night .
Finding that I could get no redress for the boy at the Police Office , I took him into the Court of King 's Bench , and appealed to the Judges .
But Lord Ellenborough could do nothing for him .
By the stir which I made , however , the case got into all the papers , and the conduct of the Government was completely exposed .
I then caused a petition from Dugood to be presented to the House by Lord Folkestone , and another petition of my own , by Lord Cochrane .
The Under Secretary of State , Mr. Hiley Addington , promised that the conduct of the Police Magistrate should be inquired into  but ultimately it was ascertained that Lord Sidmouth had no power to interfere .
The Magistrate , Mr. Sellon , who had committed the boy , was not a Police Magistrate , but a Magistrate of the county of Middlesex  therefore his Lordship could not interfere , and the boy must , forsooth , proceed at law against the Magistrate .
I shall here insert the petitions that were presented to the House , which will place this transaction in a clear point of view before my readers , and will show them to what meanness the Government submitted , in order to injure my character with the public , and to destroy the influence which they discovered that I had over the people .
This transaction will speak for itself without any further comment of mine .
`` To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , in Parliament assembled .


`` The Petition of Thomas Dugood , of the Parish of St. Paul , Covent-Garden , in the City of Westminster ,


`` HUMBLY SHEWETH ,


`` That your petitioner is a parentless and friendless boy , seventeen years of age , who , until lately seized by two Police Officers and sent to prison by the police , obtained the honest means of living by the sale of Religious and Moral Tracts , which he used to purchase of Mr. Collins , of Paternoster-row .


`` That your petitioner has , for more than four months last past , lodged , and he still lodges , at the house of Keeran Shields , who lives at No. 13 , Gee 's - court , Oxford-street , and who is a carter to Mr. White , of Mortimer-street , and who is also a watchman in Marybone parish .


`` That your petitioner has never in his life lived as a vagrant , but has always had a settled home , has always pursued an honest and visible means of getting his living , has always been , and is ready to prove that he always has been an industrious , a peaceable , sober , honest , and orderly person .


`` That , on the 10th of January , 1817 , your petitioner , for having pulled down a posting bill , entitled , `` Mr. Hunt hissed out of the City of Bristol , '' was committed by Mr. Sellon to the New Prison , Clerkenwell , where he was kept on bread and water and compelled to lie on the bare boards until the twenty-second of the same month , when he was tied , with about fifty others , to a long rope , or cable , and marched to Hicks 's Hall , and there let loose .


`` That your petitioner has often heard it said , that the law affords protection to the poor as well as to the rich , and that , if unable to obtain redress any where else , every subject of his Majesty has the road of petition open to him  therefore your petitioner , being unable to obtain redress in any other manner for the grievous wrongs done him by the Magistrate of the police , most humbly implores your Honourable House to afford him protection and redress , and to that end he prays your Honourable House to permit him to prove at the bar of your Honourable House all and several the allegations contained in this his most humble petition .


`` And your petitioner will ever pray .


`` THOMAS DUGOOD . ''
`` To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , in Parliament assembled .


`` The Petition of Henry Hunt , of Middleton Cottage , in the County of Southampton ,


`` HUMBLY SHEWETH ,


`` That your petitioner , being ready to prove at the bar of your Honourable House , that there has been carried on a conspiracy against his character , and eventually aimed at his life , by certain persons , receiving salaries out of the public money , and acting in their public capacity , and expending for this vile purpose a portion of the taxes  and there being , as appears to him , no mode of his obtaining a chance of security , other than those which may be afforded him by Parliament , he humbly sues to your Honourable House to yield him your protection .


`` That your petitioner has always been a loyal and faithful subject , and a sincere and zealous friend of his country .
That , at a time , during the first war against France , when there were great apprehensions of invasion , and when circular letters were sent round to farmers and others to ascertain what sort and degree of aid each would be willing to afford to the Government in case of such emergency , your petitioner , who was then a farmer in Wiltshire , did not , as others did , make an offer of a small part of his moveable property , but that , really believing his country to be in danger , he , in a letter to the Lord Lieutenant , the Earl of Pembroke , freely offered his all , consisting of several thousands of sheep , a large stock of horned cattle , upwards of twenty horses , seven or eight waggons and carts with able and active drivers , several hundreds of quarters of corn and grain , and his own person besides , all to be at the entire disposal of the Lord Lieutenant  and this your petitioner did without any reserved claim to compensation , it being a principle deeply rooted in his heart , that all property , and even life itself , ought to be considered as nothing , when put in competition with the safety and honour of our country .
And your petitioner further begs leave to state to your Honourable House , that , at a subsequent period , namely , in the year 1803 , when an invasion of the country was again apprehended , and when it was proposed to call out volunteers to serve within certain limits of their houses , your petitioner called around him the people of the village of Enford , in which he lived , and that all the men in that parish ( with the exception of three ) capable of bearing arms , amounting to more than two hundred in number , immediately enrolled themselves , and offered to serve , not only within the district , but in any part of the kingdom where the enemy might land , or be expected to land , and this offer was by your petitioner transmitted to Lord Pembroke , who expressed to your petitioner his great satisfaction at the said offer , and informed him , that he , would make a point of communicating the same to his Majesty 's Ministers .


`` That your petitioner , still actuated by a sincere desire to see his country free and happy , and holding a high character in the world , has lately been using his humble endeavours to assist peaceably and legally in promoting applications to Parliament for a Reform in your Honourable House , that measure appearing to your petitioner to be the only effectual remedy for the great and notorious evils under which the country now groans , and for which evils , as no one attempts to deny their existence , so no one , as far as your petitioner has heard , has attempted to suggest any other remedy .


`` That your petitioner , in pursuit of this constitutional , and , as he hopes and believes , laudable object ( an object for which , if need be , he is resolved to risk his life against unlawful violence ) lately took part in a public meeting of the City of Bristol , of which he is a freeholder  and that though a large body of regular troops and of yeomanry cavalry were placed in a menacing attitude near the place of our meeting , the meeting was conducted and concluded in the most peaceable and orderly manner , and the result of it was a petition to your Honourable House , voluntarily signed by upwards of twenty thousand men , which petition has been presented to , and received by , your Honourable House .


`` That your petitioner , who had met with every demonstration of public good-will and approbation in the said city , was surprised to see in the public newspapers an account of a boy having been sent to gaol by certain Police Officers and Justices , for having pulled down a posting-bill , which alleged your petitioner to have been hissed out of the City of Bristol , and containing other gross falsehoods and infamous calumnies on the character of your petitioner , calculated to excite great hatred against your petitioner , and to prepare the way for his ruin and destruction .


`` That your petitioner , who trusts that he has himself always acted an open and manly part , and who has never been so base as to make an attack upon any one , who had not the fair means of defence , feeling indignant at this act of partiality and oppression , came to London with a view of investigating the matter , and this investigation having taken place , he now alleges to your Honourable House , that the aforesaid posting-bills , containing the infamous calumnies aforesaid , were printed by J. Downes , who is the printer to the Police  that the bill-sticker received the bills from the said Downes , who paid him for sticking them up  that the bill-sticker was told by the said Downes , that there would be somebody to watch him to see that he stuck them up  that Police Officers were set to watch to prevent the said bills from being pulled down  that some of these Bills were carried to the Police-office at Hatton Garden , and there kept by the officers , to be produced in proof against persons who should be taken up for pulling them down  that Thomas Dugood was seized , sent to gaol , kept on bread and water , and made to lie on the bare boards from the tenth to the twenty-second of January , 1817 , when he was taken out with about fifty other persons , tied to a long rope or cable , and marched to Hicks 's Hall , where he was let loose , and that his only offence was pulling down one of those bills  that a copy of Dugood 's commitment was refused to your petitioner  that your petitioner was intentionally directed to a wrong prison to see the boy Dugood  that the Magistrate , William Marmaduke Sellon , who had committed Dugood , denied repeatedly that he knew any thing of the matter , and positively asserted that Dugood had been committed by another Magistrate , a Mr. Turton , who Mr. Sellon said , was at his house very ill , and not likely to come to the office for some time .


`` That your Honourable House is besought by your petitioner , to bear in mind the recently exposed atrocious conspiracies carried on by officers of the Police against the lives of innocent men , and your petitioner is confident that your Honourable House will , in these transactions , see the clear proofs of a foul conspiracy against the character and life of your petitioner , carried on by persons in the public employ , appointed by the Crown , and removable at its pleasure , and that this conspiracy has been also carried on by means of public money .


`` And , therefore , as the only mode of doing justice to the petitioner and to the public in a case of such singular atrocity , your petitioner prays your Honourable House that he may be permitted to prove ( as he is ready to do ) all and singular the aforesaid allegations at the Bar of your Honourable House , and that if your Honourable House shall find the allegations to be true , you will be pleased to address his Royal Highness to cause the aforesaid Magistrate to be dismissed from his office .


`` And your petitioner shall ever pray .


`` H. HUNT . ''


The day of the third Spafields meeting arrived , and I drove to town in my tandem , and put up at the British Coffee-house livery-stables , in Cockspur-street , where I had for several years before gone with my horses .
My trunk was , as usual , taken into a bedroom , where I meant to change my dress previously to my going to the meeting .
I had first to walk into Fleet-street on business , and when I got there , I saw nine pieces of artillery drawn over Blackfriars-bridge , which proceeded up Fleet-market towards Spafields , attended by a regular company of artillery men from Woolwich .
I had called on Major Cartwright as I drove into town , and he informed me that he had heard , from good authority , that a Cabinet Council had been held on Saturday , and that LORD CASTLEREAGH had proposed to disperse the intended meeting by military force , but that the other Cabinet Ministers had opposed this measure , and that at length CASTLEREAGH retired , muttering vengeance , and adding that he would take the responsibility upon himself .
The Major spoke with great earnestness and feeling , while , if I recollect right , I treated his information rather lightly , saying , that if they killed me I hoped the Major would write my epitaph .
When , however , I saw the artillery pass up Fleet-market , in a direction for Spafields , the place of meeting , I began to think more seriously of the matter  but , as I was about to do that which my conscience approved of , and as I knew that I should not violate any law , I returned towards my inn , certainly in a serious mood , yet determined to do my duty .
Not one man that I knew in the whole metropolis would or did accompany me .
I called at Cobbett 's lodgings , in Catherine-street , and asked the young ones , rather sarcastically , if they meant to attend the meeting ?
to which they answered , that their father had left positive orders that they should not go over the threshhold of the door that day .
When I got to my inn , in Cockspur-street , I ordered my servant to get my horses ready , and I went to my bedroom to put on a clean shirt , but I was surprised to find that my trunk had been removed .
I rung the bell several times before any one came  at length the Boots appeared , instead of the chambermaid , and I demanded the reason of my trunk being removed .
He either knew or pretended to know nothing of the matter , but said he would inquire .
After he had been absent for some time , I rung again , upon which a stranger appeared , a person whom I had never seen before .
He said he was the master of the house , and he had ordered my trunk to be removed  to which he added , that I should not sleep in his house , as it would drive away his best customers .
I told him I had slept there occasionally for many years , and was always treated with civility  and drawing out my purse , I said that as he was a stranger I would immediately pay him whatever he might demand for the use of the room .
He still , however , persisted that I should leave his house .
I demanded my trunk , and declared I would dress there first  he swore I should not , and made an effort to hustle me out of the room .
I then told him to keep his hands off , or I would thrash him  upon which he put himself into a boxing attitude , and offered to fight me .
He was a little insignificant creature , and I was just upon the point of kicking him out of the room , when I saw a fellow peeping round the corner of the door .
It immediately struck me that this was a trap to get me into a scrape , and I paused and drew back in consequence .
I told the little gentleman , who said his name was Morley , that I would meet him and talk over the matter at any other time  but , as I was at present engaged , I asked him as a favour to let me have my trunk to dress , and I would leave his house in ten minutes .
It was agreed that we should meet at Mr. Jackson 's rooms , some day in the following week .
Thither I went at the time appointed , with perhaps the worst second in the world , Mr. Cobbett .
When I got there each told his story , and Jackson proposed that we should go into the fields to settle the dispute , but this was not assented to by either Mr. Morley or myself , and Mr. Cobbett was vehement against my having any thing to do with my antagonist .
The affair , therefore , terminated with some smart words , without either of us offering to fight .
This affair was , however , blazoned forth in all the morning papers , which , in utter defiance of truth , asserted that I had behaved ill to a man of the name of Morley , who kept the British Coffee-house in Cockspur-street  that we had met by appointment at Jackson 's , and that I had refused to fight him .
Supposing that I had done so , I should , under all the circumstances , have been perfectly justified  but it was no such thing , the fellow never offered to fight me at any other time but in his own house , where , if I had struck him , I am thoroughly convinced that a police-officer was in attendance , to take me into custody for assaulting a man in his own house  consequently , I should have been detained till the time of the meeting in Spafields had passed  and it would have been made a pretty handle of in the papers the next day , when the public would have been told that , instead of my attending the meeting in Spafields , I had been taken to Bow-street , and detained in custody , for assaulting the landlord of the inn at which I had put up .
All that I shall add upon the subject is , that on no occasion in my life did I ever turn my back upon two such men as Mr. Morley .


At the time appointed I arrived at the meeting , which was much larger than either of the former meetings .
Resolutions were passed , and a petition was unanimously agreed to , praying for Reform , c. which petition was placed the same evening in the hands of Lord Folkestone , by Mr. Clarke , who had been for the third time our chairman  and which petition was presented to the House of Commons the same night , by his Lordship .
I was accompanied by the people to Hyde-Park Corner , where I took my leave of them , and returned to my house at Middleton Cottage  the whole of these three meetings in Spafields having been held in the most peaceable and orderly manner , without the least disturbance , or one single breach of the peace having been committed by any person that attended it , notwithstanding all the infamous falsehoods that were published in the newspapers to the contrary .
The truth is , that I have seen ten times more disturbance , disorder , and tumult , at one Common-Hall , in the city of London , where the Lord Mayor presided , than there was at all these meetings put together .


While these things were going peaceably on out of doors , and petitions were daily and numerously pouring in from all parts of the kingdom , particularly from the North of England , and from Scotland , the two Houses of Parliament were in their way not inactive .
The committees that were appointed made their report , and bills were immediately brought in to suspend the Habeas-Corpus Act , and to prevent seditious meetings  which bills were , with very faint opposition , agreed to .
It ought not to be forgotten , that on this occasion the Whigs took a most prominent part against the people , and that they were quite as loud and as violent against the Reformers as the Ministers were .
To be sure the people had committed one inexpiable crime .
They had by their steady , peaceable , and persevering conduct , frightened the Whig leader , Mr. Ponsonby , out of his sinecure of 4,000 l. per annum , which he held in consequence of his having been Lord Chancellor of Ireland , during the Whig administration , in the year 1807 .
The cunning Scotchman , Erskine , who had been for the same short period Lord Chancellor of England , was also pressed very hard to follow the example of his Irish friend  but Sawney was of a more tenaciously grasping nature , and he stuck to the ship , determined to partake of the plunder as long as she would swim .
It was for this that the Whigs wreaked their malice upon the Reformers , and that Mr. Brougham and his confederates appeared to run a race every night which should most abuse and calumniate them .


The plot being ripe , Watson , Thistlewood , Preston , and Hooper , were committed to the Tower for high treason .
On the other hand , meetings were held in Westminster , and in the city of London , to petition against the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act .
The following petition of mine was also presented to the House of Lords , by Lord Holland .
I was below the bar at the time his Lordship presented it , immediately before Lord Sidmouth rose to move the passing of the Seditious Meetings Bill , and I shall never forget the look that his Lordship , the Secretary of State , gave me  for I stood right in front of the bar , and within a few yards of him .


`` To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , in Parliament assembled .


`` The Petition of Henry Hunt , of Middleton Cottage , in the County of Southampton , `` HUMBLY SHEWETH ,


`` That your petitioner , who had the honour to be the mover of the petitions at the recent meetings held in Spafields , one of which petitions has been received by his Royal Highness the Prince Regent , and two of which petitions have been presented to , and received by , the Honourable the House of Commons , has read , in the public prints , a paper entitled a Report of the Secret Committee of your Right Honourable House , and which Report appears to your petitioner , as far as his humble powers of disentanglement have enabled him to analyse the same , to submit to your Right Honourable House , as solemn truths , the following assertions  to wit :


`` That the first public meeting in Spafields , which had for its ostensible object a petition for relief and Reform , was closely connected with , and formed part of , a Conspiracy to produce an insurrection for the purpose of overthrowing the Government .


`` 2 .
That Spafields was fixed upon as the place of assembling , on account of its vicinity to the Bank and the Tower  and that , for this same reason , ` care was taken to adjourn the meeting to the 2d of December , by which time it was hoped that preparations for the surrection would be fully matured . '


`` 3 .
That , at this second meeting , flags , banners , and all the ensigns of insurrection , were displayed , and that , finally , an insurrection was begun by persons collected in the Spafields , and that notwithstanding the ultimate object was then frustrated , the same designs still continue to be prosecuted with sanguine hopes of success .


`` 4 .
That a large quantity of Pike-heads had been ordered of one individual , and that 250 had actually been made and paid for .
`` 5 .
That Delegates from Hampden Clubs in the Country have met in London , and that they are expected to meet again in March .


`` That , as to the FIRST of these assertions , as your petitioner possesses no means of ascertaining the secret thoughts of men , he can not pretend to assert , that none of the persons , with whom the calling of the first Spafields meeting originated , had no views of a riotous or revolutionary kind  but he humbly conceives , that a simple narrative of facts will be more than sufficient to satisfy your Right Honourable House , that no such dangerous projects ever entered the minds of those who constituted almost the entire mass of that most numerous meeting .
Therefore , in the hope of producing this conviction in the mind of your Right Honourable House , your petitioner begs leave to proceed to state : that he , who was then at his house in the country , received , a short time before the 16th of November last , a letter from Thomas Preston , Secretary of a Committee , requesting your petitioner to attend a public meeting of the distressed inhabitants of the metropolis , intended to be held in Spafields on the day just mentioned  that your petitioner thereupon wrote to Thomas Preston to know what was the object of the intended meeting  that he received , in the way of answer , a newspaper called the Independent Whig , of November 10th , 1816 , containing an advertisement in these words  to wit : ` At a meeting held at the Carlisle , Shoreditch , on Thursday evening , it was determined to call a meeting of the distressed Manufacturers , Mariners , Artizans , and others of the Cities of London and Westminster , the Borough of Southwark , and parts adjacent , in Spafields , on Friday , the 15th instant , precisely at 12 o'clock , to take into consideration the propriety of petitioning the Prince Regent and Legislature , to adopt immediately such measures as will relieve the sufferers from the misery which now overwhelms them .
( Signed ) JOHN DYALL , Chairman , THOMAS PRESTON , Secretary . '
That your petitioner , upon seeing this advertisement , hesitated not to accept of the invitation  that he attended at the said meeting  that he there found , ready prepared , a paper , called , to the best of his recollection , a memorial , which some persons , then utter strangers to him , proposed to move for the adoption of the meeting  that your petitioner , perceiving in this paper , propositions of a nature which he did not approve of , and especially a proposition for the meeting going in a body to Carlton House , declared that he would have nothing to do with the said memorial  that your petitioner then brought forward an humble petition to the Prince Regent , which petition was passed by the meeting unanimously , and which petition , having been by your petitioner delivered to Lord Sidmouth , that Noble Lord has , by letter , informed your petitioner was immediately laid before his Royal Highness the Prince Regent .
And your petitioner here begs leave further to state , upon the subject of the aforementioned memorial , that John Dyall , whose name , as Chairman of the Committee who called the meeting ( and of which Committee Thomas Preston was Secretary ) , having , before the meeting took place , been called before Mr. Gifford , one of the Police Magistrates , had furnished Mr. Gifford with a copy of the said memorial , and that that copy was in the hands of Lord Sidmouth at the moment when the meeting was about to assemble , though ( from an oversight , no doubt ) neither the Police Magistrates nor any other person whatever gave your petitioner the smallest intimation of the dangerous tendency or even of the existence of such memorial , or of any improper views being entertained by any of the parties calling the meeting , though it now appears , that the written placards , entitled `` Britons to Arms , '' are imputed to those same parties , though it is notorious that that paper appeared in all the public prints so far back as the month of October , and though , when your petitioner waited on Lord Sidmouth with the petition of the Prince Regent , that Noble Lord himself informed your petitioner , that the Government were fully apprized before-hand of the propositions intended to be brought forward at the meeting .
So that your petitioner humbly begs leave to express his confidence that your Honourable House will clearly perceive , that if any insurrection had taken place on the day of the first Spafields meeting , it would have been entirely owing to the neglect , if not connivance , of those persons who possessed a previous knowledge of the principles and views of the parties with whom that meeting originated .


`` With regard to the SECOND assertion , namely , that ` care was taken to adjourn the meeting to the 2d of December , ' your petitioner begs leave to state , that it will appear upon the face of the proceedings of that day , that there was nothing like previous concert or care in this matter  for , that a resolution first proposed to adjourn the meeting to the day of the meeting of Parliament , and then to meet in Palace-yard , of course not so much in the vicinity of the Bank and the Tower  and that when this resolution was awarded so as to provide for a meeting on the 2d of December on the same spot , it was merely grounded on the uncertainty as to the time when the Parliament might meet .
Your petitioner further begs leave to state here , as being , in a most interested manner , connected with this adjournment of the meeting , that , when your petitioner waited on Lord Sidmouth with the petition to the Prince Regent , he informed his Lordship that the meeting was to re-assemble on the 2d of December , when your petitioner had engaged to carry his Lordship 's answer and deliver it to the adjourned meeting , and that his Lordship , so far from advising your petitioner not to go to the said meeting , so far from saying any thing to discourage the said meeting , distinctly told your petitioner , that your petitioner 's presence and conduct appeared to his Lordship to have prevented great possible mischief .
Whence your petitioner humbly conceives , that he is warranted in concluding , that there did , at the time here referred to , exist in his Lordship no desire to prevent the said meeting from taking place .


`` Your petitioner , in adverting humbly to the THIRD assertion of your Secret Committee , begs to be permitted to state , that the persons who went from Spafields to engage in riot on the 2d of December , formed no part of the meeting called for that day  that these persons came into the fields full two hours before the time of meeting  that they left the fields full an hour before that time  that they did not consist , at the time of leaving the fields , of more than forty or fifty individuals  that they were joined by sailors and others , persons going from witnessing the execution of four men in the Old Bailey  that your petitioner , who had come up from Essex in the morning , met the rioters in Cheapside  that he proceeded directly to the meeting , which he found to be very numerous  that there a resolution was immediately proposed by your petitioner , strongly condemning all rioting and violence , which resolution passed with the most unanimous acclamations  that a petition , which has since been signed by upwards of 24 thousand names , and received by the House of Commons , was then passed  and that the meeting , though immense as to numbers , finally separated , without the commission of any single act of riot , outrage , or violence .
And here your petitioner humbly begs leave to beseech the attention of your Right Hon. House to the very important fact of a third meeting having taken place on the 10th instant , on the same spot , more numerously attended than either of the former  and that , after having agreed to a petition , which has since been received by your Hon. House , the said meeting separated in the most peaceable and orderly manner , which your petitioner trusts is quite sufficient to convince your Honourable House that if , as your Secret Committee reported , designs of riot do still continue to be prosecuted with sanguine hopes of success , these designs can have no connection whatever with the meetings for retrenchment , relief , and Reform , held in Spafields .


`` That as to the pike-heads , your petitioner begs leave to state to your Right Honourable House , that while he was at the last Spafields meeting , an anonymous letter was put into the hands of your petitioner 's servant , who afterwards gave it to your petitioner  that this letter stated that one Bentley , a smith , of Hart-street , Covent-Garden , had been employed by a man , in the dress of a game-keeper , to make some spikes to put round a fish-pond  that the game-keeper came and took a parcel away and paid for them  that he came soon afterwards and said the things answered very well , and ordered more to be made  that , in a little while after this , the said Bentley was sent for to the Bow-street Office , and , after a private examination , was desired to make a pike , or spike , of the same sort , and to carry it to the office , which he did .
That your petitioner perceives that the information which it contains may possibly be of the utmost importance in giving a clue to the strict investigation , which he humbly presumes to hope will be instituted by your Honourable House into this very interesting matter .


`` That as to the FIFTH assertion , that Delegates have assembled in London , from Hampden Clubs in the country , your petitioner has first to observe , that these persons never called themselves Delegates , and were not called Delegates by any body connected with them  that they were called , and were , ` Deputies from Petitioning Bodies ' for Parliamentary Reform  that your petitioner was one of them , having been deputed by the petitioners at Bristol and Bath  that these Deputies met three times , and always in an open room , to which newspaper reporters were admitted  that an account of all their proceedings was published  that they separated at the end of three days , not upon a motion of adjournment , but of absolute dissolution , which motion was made by your petitioner , who is ready to prove that your Committee has been imposed upon as to the tact that these Delegates , or Deputies , are expected to meet again in March .


`` That your petitioner is ready to prove at the Bar of your Right Honourable House , all the facts and allegations contained in this petition , and that he humbly prays so to be permitted there to prove them accordingly .


`` And your petitioner will ever pray .


`` HENRY HUNT . ''


As soon as this petition was read , Lord Sidmouth rose , apparently very much disconcerted , another petition having been presented previously from Cleary , the secretary of the Hampden Club , denying , and offering to prove the falsehood of , many of the statements in the Report of the Committee .
His Lordship made a long and violent speech against the measures and views of the Reformers , and called upon the House to put them down , or the Constitution and Government of the country would be soon overthrown .
He never attempted to controvert or deny one word that was contained in my petition , just presented  but he said , that the Government of this country had often to contend with discontented and turbulent men  `` but those who took the lead in these meetings , although their steps were directed with caution , yet ( turning round and looking me full in the face ) THEY WERE MEN OF MOST EXTRAORDINARY ENERGY , and PURSUED THEIR COURSE WITH AN INFLEXIBLE PERSEVERANCE AND COURAGE that was worthy a better cause . ''
This was said in the most lofty tone , and so evidently directed to me , that it drew all the eyes in the House upon me  and it was with considerable difficulty that I could resist the inclination I felt to declare , that it was impossible there could be a better cause than that of contending for the freedom of the whole people .
His Lordship , in alluding to cheap seditious publications , such as Cobbett 's and Sherwin 's Registers , and Wooler 's Dwarf , which at this time were published at twopence each , in great numbers , lamented that the law officers of the Crown could find nothing in them that they could prosecute with any chance of success .
Cobbett 's Register alone , at this period , attained a sale of fifty thousand copies a week .
The Bill was passed , with very little opposition , to prevent any public meeting being held to petition for Reform , or any alteration in the government or constitution of the country , without its being called with the concurrence of the magistrates , c. c.  which was nothing more or less than prohibiting all public meetings , except such as the corrupt tools of Government chose to sanction .
While the Acts were in progress , a public county meeting was called by the Sheriff of Hampshire , upon a requisition , signed by the Marquis of Winchester , the Marquis of Buckingham , old George Rose , Lord Palmerston , Mr. Sturges Bourne , Lord Malmsbury , Lord Fitzharris , and all the great Tory leaders of the county , `` to consider of an address to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent , on the outrageous and treasonable attack made upon his Royal Highness , on his return from opening the session of Parliament . ''
The meeting was held on the 11th of March .
Sir Charles Ogle moved an address , which was seconded by Mr. Asheton Smith  both did this in dumb show , for not one word that they said could be heard .
Lord Cochrane moved an amendment , which was opposed by Mr. Lockhart  and as the Sheriff refused to put his Lordship 's amendment , declaring it to be irregular , Mr. Cobbett addressed the assembled thousands , and moved an amendment , which I seconded .
This amendment merely proposed to add , after the word Constitution , in the original address , `` as established by Magna Charta , the Bill of Rights , and the Act of Habeas Corpus , for which our forefathers fought and bled . ''
This amendment Mr. Lockhart and his gang declared to be most seditious and wicked , and the Sheriff , a little whipper-snapper fellow , of the name of Fleming , absolutely refused to put it to the meeting .
A show of hands took place upon the original ministerial address , and , as far as my judgment went , it was lost by a considerable majority .
The Sheriff , however , decided that the address was carried by three to one  but when a division was called for , the Sheriff retired in haste from the meeting , amidst the yells and groans of the multitude , and the Under-Sheriff actually threatened to take Lord Cochrane and myself into custody , if we offered to address the meeting any more .


The Seditious Meeting Act had not yet received the Royal Assent , but these worthies knew the clauses which it contained , and the perpetual Under-Sheriff , a Mr. Hollis , appeared determined to act upon it by anticipation .
Perhaps there never was such a disgraceful scene before exhibited at a public meeting in England .
The most foul , the most unfair , the most outrageous , and most blackguard conduct was resorted to by the ministerial tools and dependants of the county , amongst whom were all the parsons , all the half-pay officers , and all the dependants of the corrupt corporations of Andover and Winchester .
A person of the name of Loscomb , and another , Feston , of Andover , the former one of the Andover corporation , the latter a half-pay lieutenant , were eminently conspicuous as the brazen tools of those who called the meeting .
Such a scene of riot , confusion , and uproar had never , I believe , disgraced a county meeting .
These ministerial dependants appeared determined to carry every thing with a high hand , now that they found laws were passing to justify and protect arbitrary and corrupt power .


On the 12th of this month , the sailor Cashman was executed at the front of Beckwith 's , the gunmaker 's , shop , on Snow-hill .
Nothing will show the distressed situation of the poor and friendless better than the answer which Cashman made to the Judge , after he was found guilty , upon being asked `` why sentence of death should not be passed upon him . ''
His memorable words were : --


`` My Lord -- I hope you will excuse a poor friendless sailor for occupying your time .
Had I died fighting the battles of my country I should have gloried in it : but I confess that it grieves me to think of suffering like a robber , when I can call God to witness that I have passed days together without even a morsel of bread rather than violate the laws .
I have served my King for many years , and often fought for my country .
I have received nine wounds in the service , and never before have been charged with any offence .
I have been at sea all my life , and my father was killed on board the Diana frigate .
I came to London , my Lord , to endeavour to recover my pay and prize-money , but being unsuccessful , I was reduced to the greatest distress , and being poor and pennyless , I have not been able to bring forward witnesses to prove my innocence , nor even to acquaint my brave officers , or I am sure they would all have come forward in my behalf .
The gentlemen who have sworn against me must have mistook me for some other person ( there being many sailors in the mob )  but I freely forgive them , and I hope God will also forgive them , for I solemnly declare that I committed no act of violence whatever . ''


Cashman , who had been accustomed to witness scenes of death , met his fate with determined courage , exclaiming , `` Huzza , my boys , I 'll die like a man ! ''
Calling to the executioner , he said , `` Come , Jack , let go the jib-boom . ''
`` Now , my lads , give me three cheers when I trip . ''
The few remaining seconds of his existence he employed in similar addresses , and at the instant when the fatal board fell from beneath his feet , he was cheering .
This exhibition was calculated to harden the distressed inhabitants of the metropolis who witnessed his execution , and thousands felt and exclaimed that it was much better and easier to encounter death in such a way than to endure the lingering torture of being starved to death .
The multitude did not fail to shower down their deepest execrations against all those who were concerned in this affair , and the public were so exasperated at what was justly called the murder of this man , that , had the poor fellow shewn any disposition to avoid that death which he appeared rather to court , there is little doubt but he would have been rescued , in spite of the host of constables and police officers that attended the execution .


A system of terror was now the order of the day .
The reader will bear in mind that a Bill had passed both Houses of Parliament , and only waited for the Royal Assent , to make it death to attend any seditious meeting  at least to make it death not to disperse when ordered by any Magistrate or public officer .
It was under such auspices that a public county meeting for Wiltshire was called , and appointed to be held at Devizes .
This meeting was called , as in Hampshire , by the great aristocratical leaders of both the Whig and Tory factions .
It will be remembered that I had given Mr. Cobbett a freehold , to enable him to take part in the Wiltshire county meetings , all of which , that had been subsequently held , he had attended with me , and at all these Wiltshire county meetings the resolutions and petitions proposed by myself and Mr. Cobbett had been invariably carried .
The meeting now in question was to be convened the latter end of March , or the beginning of April .
On my leaving London , Mr. Cobbett had promised to meet me at Devizes , on the day appointed .
I went to Devizes , with my friend Mr. William Akerman , of Potney , at whose house I had slept the preceding night .
When we arrived at the Castle Inn , the place of rendezvous , I was surprised to find that , though it was rather late , my friend Cobbett had not arrived  yet , so thoroughly convinced was I that he would not disappoint me , that I was determined to wait at the inn for him , and not to go to the Town-hall , the place of meeting , till he joined me .
As I wished to know what time the business was to commence , Mr. Akerman , at my request , went down to the Bear Inn , where the Sheriff and my Lord Pembroke , with all those who had called this meeting to address the Prince Regent upon his miraculous escape from the potatoe ( which I had now ascertained was thrown by Mr. JOHN CASTLES ) , had assembled .
He very soon came back , almost out of breath , to inform me , that the party , with the Sheriff at their head , were just proceeding to the Hall  and with a loud laugh he informed me that the Courier newspaper , which had just arrived in the coffee-room of the Bear Inn , had an article in it which stated that `` COBBETT WAS ARRIVED AT LIVERPOOL , AND HAD TAKEN HIS PASSAGE FOR AMERICA '' `` I at once , '' said he , `` declared this to be an infamous lie , and I offered to bet any of the party 50l. , which I put on the table , that Mr. Cobbett would be in Devizes , and attend the meeting , within one hour from that time . ''
Fortunately for my friend Akerman , not one of the gang assembled had confidence enough in the rascally Courier to induce them to take the bet  had they done so , my friend would have lost his 50l .
note .


I was thunderstruck for a moment , as Mr. Cobbett had never given me the slightest intimation of his intention , and till I saw the Courier I could not believe it possible that any man could act so treacherously towards one for whom he had expressed , not only in public but in private , the most unbounded confidence .
For the first time it now occurred to me , that there was something mysterious in Mr. Cobbett 's conduct when I last saw him , which was a few days before in London .
It was , however , of no use to ponder or to despair , and therefore , I jumped up out of my chair , in which I had been almost riveted by the unexpected intelligence , and earnestly inquired of Mr. Akerman if he had actually made the bet .
He replied , `` no one would accept it , or I should most willingly have made it . ''
`` Well , '' said I , `` I am glad that none of the villains had confidence in the rascally Editor of the Courier , but whether it be true or false , I will go to the meeting . ''
It is much more easy for the reader to imagine what were the sensations which I felt as I walked to the meeting , than it is for me to describe them .
I had for many years acted in strict union with Mr. Cobbett , both in Wiltshire and Hampshire , at all the public meetings that had been held in these counties  I had placed implicit and unbounded confidence in him , and I thought that on his part such feelings had been reciprocal  but a thousand occurrences which hitherto had made no impression on me now rushed upon my mind , and half convinced me that I had been deceived .


We reached the Town-hall soon after the business of the day was begun  it was crammed to suffocation , and a great many persons who could not gain admission , were standing at the outside .
By the assistance of my friend Akerman , I contrived to get near enough to the entrance of the hall , to expostulate with the Sheriff , for attempting to hold a county meeting in such a confined situation  adding , that a great number of people were totally excluded , and amongst that number was Mr. Richard Long , one of the Members for the county .
Upon this , Mr. Long replied , that he was very well off , and that he did not wish to gain admittance .
This , to be sure , caused a great laugh , but I persevered by moving an adjournment , and after a great deal of noise and squabbling , the Sheriff agreed to adjourn the meeting to the Market-place , whither we proceeded , and Mr. Sheriff Penruddock took his station upon the steps of the Market-cross , where he was surrounded by such a gang of desperadoes as never disgraced a meeting of highwaymen and pickpockets in the purlieus of St. Giles 's .
This gang was headed by the notorious John Benett , of Pyt-House , from whom they took the word of command , when to be silent and when to bellow , hoot , hallow , and make all sorts of discordant vulgar noises , such as would have degraded and lowered the character of a horde of drunken prostitutes and pickpockets , in the most abandoned brothel in the universe .
-- The plan of operations had been previously arranged , and a set of wretches had hired themselves , to play the most disgraceful and disgusting part .
Lord Pembroke , the Lord Lieutenant of the county , had ordered and commanded all his tenantry , and even his tradesmen , to attend the meeting to oppose HUNT .
A butcher at Wilton , who served his Lordship 's family with meat , pleaded his previous engagements on business of importance , as an excuse for his non-attendance  but he was informed by his Lordship 's agent , that if he did not appear at Devizes , to oppose any proposition that was made by Hunt , he should never serve the family at Wilton-house with another joint of meat .
The gang thus raked together was led on by regular leaders  Black Jack , alias the Devil 's Knitting Needle , was commander in chief  Bob Reynolds , a scamping currier of Devizes , who was a sort of lickspittle to Old Salmon , the attorney , was bully major  and a jolter-headed farmer , of the name of Chandler , who lived on the Green , was captain of a gang of little dirty toad-eaters of the corporation  in fact , every scamp who lived upon the taxes -- every scrub who had an eye to a place -- and every lickspittle of the corrupt knaves of the corrupt and vile rotten-borough of Devizes , took a part in these un-Englishman-like , partial , cowardly , and disgraceful proceedings .
Every expectant underling , every dirty , petty-fogging scoundrel showed his teeth , opened his vulgar mouth , and sent forth the most nauseous and disgusting ribaldry .
A time-serving , place-hunting , fawning address to the Prince Regent was moved by some person .
It was stuffed with all sorts of falsehoods , and was supported by John Benett , of Pyt-House , in an address to the people , which contained nothing but a violent , dastardly , and unmanly attack upon me , attributing to me all the disturbances that had taken place in London , and roundly asserting that I was the cause of Cashman 's being brought to the gallows .
By the independent portion of the meeting , this harangue was listened to with considerable impatience  but he had , nevertheless , every sort of fair-play shown him , from their natural conviction , that , as I was present , I should have an opportunity of replying to these infamous charges : it was this conviction alone that procured him a hearing , and gave him an opportunity of uttering such diabolical and premeditated falsehoods .
But the fellow knew that he was safe , and that he could lie and abuse with impunity .
He knew that his dirty hirelings would protect him against a reply from me , and he , therefore , gave a-loose to a most malignant spirit .
The moment that I attempted to speak , the yell began .
About fifty or sixty , or perhaps one hundred , out of two or three thousand persons assembled , commenced a bellowing and braying like so many of their four-legged brethren , and they were so well marshalled , and acted so well in concert , that it was impossible for the great majority of the people to gain me a hearing .
At length the Sheriff , Hungerford Penruddock , Esq. who looked ready to faint with shame at what he was about to do , dissolved the meeting , and ordered the Riot Act to be read , which , I believe , little whiffling Mr. Salmon made a sort of dumb-show or pretence to do , and then immediately gave orders to have me taken into custody .
Now began such a contest as was seldom if ever seen  the descendants of a petty-fogging attorney , a bankrupt tailor , a usurious splitfig , c. c. c. William H -- s , William S -- n , Stephen N -- t c.. who were members of the corporation , and now become great men , ( good Lord , what would their forefathers have said to have heard this ? )
aided by Reynolds , Chandler , and Co. made a desperate effort to seize me , but all their attempts were in vain  the gallant , brave , and kind-hearted people of Wiltshire surrounded me with an impenetrable phalanx  they formed an irresistible bulwark with their persons , which proved an impregnable barrier against all the assaults of the constables , bullies , and blackguards , that were urged on by the Mayor and his myrmidons -- a `` matchless crew . ''
I was hoisted upon the shoulders of those who stood in the centre of this brave phalanx , and had a perfect view of all their operations .
The gang repeatedly returned to the charge upon the people , with staves and clubs , but the people stood as firm as rocks , upon whom they never made the slightest impression , the people all the while acting solely on the defensive .
At length , two ruffians , Reynolds and Chandler , seized my brother by the collar , one on each side  he was standing as a spectator , taking no part but that of looking on .
My brother smiled at first , but finding them in earnest , and being surrounded by the whole gang , who began to drag him off , he let fly right and left , and , as if they had been shot , the two bullies fell like slaughtered calves upon the ground , and before the people could get to his assistance , the whole cowardly gang had taken flight .
This all occurred in the Market-place , in the front of the Bear-inn , where the Sheriff and the notable founders and supporters of the infamous time-serving petition were assembled , and from the windows of which they had the mortification of witnessing the defeat , the disgrace , and the complete routing of their hirelings , and the victory of the people , who , instead of taking advantage of their success  instead of inflicting summary vengance upon those who had assaulted them in such a cowardly manner  instead of chastising those who had conducted themselves in such a partial , corrupt , unmanly , and disgraceful way  they peaceably bore me off to my inn .
The pot-valiant Jack-in-office , Mr. Mayor , soon after followed us , with a fresh posse of constables , and repeated the reading of the Riot Act under my window , amidst the jeers , the scoffs , the hootings , and the execrations of the people , who had committed no act of riot , or breach of the peace , to justify such a measure .
From the window of the Castle-inn , where I was dining with some friends , I addressed the people , and they peaceably dispersed , although they kept a good look-out to see that there was no attempt made to annoy or interrupt me .
Had any attempt of that sort been made , I believe , from what I have since heard , that the consequences might have proved very serious to those who had been concerned in it .


One circumstance that occurred in the evening afterwards is worth recording .
One of my tenants , Mr. George Jones , who keeps the George Inn , in Walcot-street , Bath , had driven his niece up to Devizes in the morning , for the purpose of seeing me on some business , and also to attend the meeting .
As an Englishman , he of course wished for a fair hearing of both parties , and standing near the bullies Bob Reynolds and his brother , at the time they were conducting themselves so foully towards me , he admonished them in a way which they did not appear to relish .
Mr. Jones drove home in his gig , in the evening , with his niece , and just as they were entering Melksham , they passed Reynolds 's brother , who resided there at the time , in the capacity of a paid serjeant of the Melksham troop of yeomanry .
As soon as Mr. Jones had passed him , Reynolds rode up to the back of the gig , and , without giving him any notice , coward and assassin like , he struck him a heavy blow on the back of his head , with a thick bludgeon .
Fortunately Mr. Jones wore a high-crowned stout beaver , which saved his head , but the crown of the hat was severed in two by the blow .
Jones no sooner recovered himself , than he turned-to , and with his gig whip he gave a sound flogging to the dastardly ruffian , who sued in vain for mercy , till the whip was completely demolished .
Some gentlemen , who happened to be passing at the time , and saw the whole transaction , offered to give Mr. Jones their address , and recommended him to take legal proceedings against the villain , they vollunteering their services as witnesses .
But Mr. Jones very coolly replied , `` I have taken summary redress , and paid the fellow in his own coin  therefore it will be only necessary to give such a scoundrel ` rope enough and he will hang himself . ' ''
Mr. Jones 's observation was not only very just , but most prophetic .
The loyal and the worthy Mr. Reynolds , a few months afterwards , to save Jack Ketch the trouble , put an end to his own existence , by hanging himself in a malt-house .
If what I hear of another of them be true , it is not very improbable that he may soon follow his example .


As I drove home in the evening from this meeting , I could not avoid seriously reflecting upon the critical situation in which I was placed by my friend Mr. Cobbett having deserted me , and stolen away to America .
I had been constantly and faithfully acting with him for many years , up to the very hour of his flight , for I had now no doubt in my mind that the report in the Courier was true .
I felt indignant and mortified in the extreme , at this desertion on the part of my friend , at such a moment , and without his ever having given me the slightest reason to suspect him of any such intention .
My first resolve was this : -- let what will come I will never fly my country , never desert my countrymen in the hour of peril .
The Habeas Corpus Act was suspended , the Seditious Meetings Bill had been passed and received the Royal Assent .
Many of the brave Reformers of Lancashire had , in consequence , been arrested and thrown into dungeons , particularly those who had attended in London at the delegate meeting  therefore I expected to share the same fate , but still I made up my mind to this , that I would never run from the danger  and , as I never secreted myself , but was always to be met with any day , and every day , I was also resolved that no one should with impunity treat me in the way in which Messrs. Knight , Bamford , Healy , and others had been treated .
They had not merely been arrested , but their houses had been broken into , and they had been dragged out of their beds in the dead of the night , and hurried away in irons to the dungeons of the Boroughmongers .


When I reached home I informed my family of what it was possible might happen , and this I did , not to alarm them , but to put them upon their guard , that they might not lose presence of mind in case of any nocturnal assault being made upon my house .
In my own mind I had firmly settled how to act : if any messenger from the Secretary of State 's office came to apprehend me in the day time , I should attend him very quietly and peaceably  but if any nocturnal visit was intended me by the officers of the ministers , I was determined to resist and to defend my house to the last moment  because by so doing they would leave themselves without the shadow of an excuse , as they always knew when and where I was to be found in the face of day .
Desperate as this plan may appear in the eyes of many , it was that on which I was determined to act .
I took with me every night into my bed-room a brace of loaded pistols , that never missed fire , and my double-barrelled gun , charged and fresh primed  and any number of men less than four would not have gained admittance alive into my house in the night time .
I had violated no law , I had committed no breach of the peace , and I was resolved that I would maintain the right of an Englishman 's house being his own castle , in spite of Seditious Meeting Bills , or the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act .
Fortunately , my coolness and determination were never put to the test .
I , however , never went to bed for many weeks without expecting the enemy , and cautioning my family not to be alarmed in case of any nocturnal visit being paid me .


Mr. Cobbett 's leave-taking address was published , in which he pretty clearly intimated what would be the fate of every man that remained in the country , who had been an active leader of the people in promoting petitions for Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot  and he avowed the dread of a dungeon to be the cause of his leaving the country !
As he had never communicated the slightest hint to me of his intention , so he never made the slightest allusion to me in his leave-taking address , any more than as if he never had such a friend .
This , at the moment , I considered as most unkind , unfeeling , and treacherous .
But , upon reflection , I esteem it the highest compliment that he could have paid me  for it clearly proves that he knew the honesty of my nature too well , to expect that I should have ever sanctioned so dastardly , so thoroughly unmanly a proceeding as that of flying from my country , and abandoning the Reformers to the uncontrolled malice of their enemies , and that , too , at such a moment of difficulty and danger .


Yet , doubly wounded as I was by the conduct of Mr. Cobbett , wounded both personally and as a friend of the people , I , nevertheless , soon endeavoured to find at least some excuse for him , and I made up my mind not to act the same part towards him which he had done towards me .
Real friendship is not easily alienated from its object .
On the very first opportunity , therefore , I rode over to Botley , to make inquiries about his circumstances , and , if possible , to serve my friend , notwithstanding his desertion of me .
I found that Mr. Tunno , the mortgagee , had taken possession of his estate , and that the landlord of the farm which he occupied , and of the house in which he had lived , had seized for rent  and , as might naturally be expected under such circumstances , every thing was going , or rather gone , to rack  all his family had abandoned the place , and were in London .
I called upon the only person in Botley that used to be intimate with him , from whom I received such an account as made me form a worse opinion of mankind than I had ever before entertained .
He spoke in opprobrious terms of his former acquaintance , saying that he , Cobbett , had run away in every one 's debt , and , with an oath , ( most brutally , as I felt it ) he declared `` hanging was too good for him . ''
I never spoke to this man afterwards  neither was I deterred by his language from proceeding in my endeavours to serve my absent friend .
I therefore rode on to Mr. Hinxman 's , of Chilling , near Titchfield , who had been for some time a friend of Mr. Cobbett 's  and when I got there I was much delighted to find him as zealous for him as he had been .
He was not merely a professing friend , but he wished to show his friendship by deeds as well as words , and he had been devising the best means of showing his friendship .
As the result of his reflections , he put into my hands an address , which he had drawn up , to the people of England , proposing a subscription of one shilling each person , to pay off the debts of Mr. Cobbett , and thus to enable him to return to his country , free from pecuniary embarrassments .
This address was penned in a masterly style , and in every sentiment which it contained , I fully concurred .
I promised to do every thing that lay in my power to promote its object , and to attend a public meeting , which was to be called at the Crown and Anchor , for the purpose of promulgating it  and I agreed to take the chair upon the occasion , provided that Major Cartwright and Lord Folkestone declined the offer of it , which was , in the first instance , to be made to them .
With the firm impression on my mind that this plan would be carried into full effect , I left Mr. Hinxman , perfectly satisfied with the result of my journey of three days to serve my friend .
Mr. Hinxman sent his address to London , as proposed  but the parties applied to immediately put a negative on the proposition , assigning as a reason , that it would be establishing a very bad precedent , to raise a subscription amongst the Reformers to pay the debts of a man who had deserted the cause of the people , by flying from the country at a moment of peril and difficulty  and thus at once was a stop put to the laudable intentions of Mr. Hinxman .
There was , indeed , no possibility of giving any satisfactory answer to such a reason , and the project was in consequence altogether abandoned .
By this time upwards of SIX HUNDRED PETITIONS had been presented to the House of Commons , praying for retrenchment , a reduction of the army , and for a RADICAL REFORM IN PARLIAMENT .
These petitions were signed by nearly a million and a half of people .
The only answer that was given to them was , as the reader has already seen , passing the Seditious Meetings Bill , and the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act .
These petitions were suffered silently to be laid upon the table of the House  nothing that they prayed for was ever granted , and so far from the Honourable House , or any of its members , ever answering the allegations contained in them , they never even condescended to discuss any of the matters contained in them .


Although Mr. Cobbett , the great literary champion of the Radical Reformers , had deserted and fled to America , yet others sprung up .
About this period Mr. Wooler began to publish his Black Dwarf , and Mr. Sherwin published his Weekly Register .
These were two bold and powerful advocates of Reform , and Mr. Wooler , as well as Mr. White , of the Independent Whig , lasbed Mr. Cobbett most unmercifully for his cowardice in flying his country , and abandoning the Reformers at such a critical moment .
Mr. Wooler was excessively severe , and he laid it on with an unsparing hand .
I lost no opportunity to vindicate the character of my absent friend , and in doing this I attacked Mr. Wooler as violently as he attacked Mr. Cobbett , for which Mr. Wooler denounced me as a spy of the Government !


Some time in May , 1817 , a Count Maubrueil was tried at Paris for robbing the Queen of Westphalia , when it came out that he had been hired by an accredited agent to assassinate the Emperor Napoleon , on his journey to Elba .
Maubrueil afterwards published in London the details of this transaction .
On the 17th of May , Messrs. Watson , Thistlewood , Hooper , and Preston , were brought into the Court of King 's Bench , to plead to charges of high treason .
Mr. Hone also appeared , and complained of the illegality of his arrest on Lord Ellenborough 's warrant .
On the 30th of May , the Right Honourable Charles Abbott resigned the situation of Speaker of the House of Commons , and Mr. Manners Sutton was chosen in his place .
On the 6th of June , Mr. Wooler was tried for a libel on Ministers  he was acquitted in consequence of doubts having arisen respecting the validity of the verdict of guilty delivered in by the foreman of the jury , although some of them were not agreed in the verdict .


On the 9th of June , Messrs. Watson , Thistlewood , Preston , and Hooper , were conveyed from the Tower , where they had been confined , to the Court of King 's Bench to be tried for high treason .
Watson was tried first .
His trial lasted seven days , at the end of which he was acquitted .
The Attorney-General then gave up the prosecution against the others .
The principal witness called by the Crown was the famous Mr. John Castles , the worthy gentleman who feigned asleep in my room at the Black Lion , Waterlane , on the evening after the first Spafields meeting , and the same worthy who met me in Cheapside , as I was driving to the second meeting on the second of December , and who kindly invited me to go to the Tower with him , which he assured me was in the possession of young Watson .
What follows is curious and worthy of notice .
It was publicly known that Castles was to be the principal witness against his former associates .
I therefore sent a gentleman , to inform the attorney for the prisoners , that I had become acquainted with certain circumstances , relating to this Mr. Castles , which would be of infinite service to his clients .
This message was sent a fortnight before the time fixed upon for their trial  but the 9th of June approached without my having received any answer .
I sent a second message , by another person  but , as no notice was taken of it , I sent a third person , on the 8th , to say that I was in town , and unless it was intended to hang the prisoners , I expected that I should be subpoened , and that I was come to town on purpose to give my evidence .
In fact , this third message rather conveyed a demand than a request , and I was next morning subpoened .


Another very extraordinary circumstance made up part of this transaction .
Mr. Brougham had been applied to , and I understood had positively refused to become counsel for the prisoners , and Mr. Wetherell and Mr. Copley were retained  the former a most decided rank thick and thin supporter of the Ministers  the latter , as I was informed , not only a decided opponent of the Ministers , but an avowed Republican in principle .
Mr. Samuel Shepherd was Attorney , and Mr. Gifford Solicitor-General  and they of course were counsel for the prosecution .
When I saw Mr. Wetherell at his chambers , which was in the evening of the 9th , after the first day 's proceedings were over , and stated to him what I knew of Castles , he at once declared that my testimony would be most important , and would most likely save the lives of the prisoners  and he expressed great astonishment that this had never been communicated to him before .
From what I stated to him , he was enabled to draw out of Mr. Castles ' own mouth , in cross-examination , the full proof of his own infamy , which he never could have done without it .
After I had given my testimony in court , I saw plainly that the jury had made up their minds to acquit the doctor , who was the first and only one put upon his trial .
At the end of seven days , the time Watson 's trial lasted , the jury returned a verdict of not guilty , and the Attorney-General then gave up the prosecution against the other three prisoners .
It is very curious that it was never communicated to the prisoners that I was in attendance to give evidence on their behalf  but when they saw me in court , they actually thought that I was subpoened as an evidence for the Crown against them .


Lord Sidmouth now brought in a Bill for the further suspension of the Habeas-Corpus Act .
In the House of Commons , Sir Francis Burdett called the attention of its Members to the conduct of Oliver , the spy , and of others who had been employed by Government , and who had excited distressed persons to riot in the North .
The county of Middlesex petitioned in vain against the renewal of the Habeas-Corpus Act .
The Bill passed , and Parliament was prorogued by the Prince Regent on the 12th of July .


On the 31st of July , a public dinner was given at the Crown and Anchor , to celebrate the acquittal of Watson , Thistlewood , Preston and Hooper , at which dinner I was in the chair , and upwards of a hundred persons sat down to it .
Hooper very shortly after died  he fell a victim to a cold which he caught in prison .


Such was the increasing distress of the people in the metropolis , that the Old Bailey Calendar contained above 400 prisoners for trial  forty-five more than were ever before known .
In this year , 1817 , the Bank of England prosecuted one hundred and twenty-four persons for forgery , or uttering forged notes .
This speaks for itself , and shews the state of society produced by the Pitt system .
On the 22d of September the Bank of England announced their intention of paying in cash all their small notes issued before the first of January 1817 .
This was a beginning of calling in one pound Bank of England notes .


In this year the Common Hall of the City of London had petitioned against the passing of the suspension of the Habeas-Corpus Act , and they had instructed their members to support the prayer of their petitions , by opposing the measure .
As usual , their members set the prayers of the Livery at defiance , and supported the Bill  at least Curtis and Atkins did  and as for Alderman Combe , the Whig Member , he was not in the House during any of the debates .
When the Common Hall assembled the next time , the Waithmanite faction intended to move a vote of censure against Curtis and Atkins , for not attending to the instructions of their constituents  and of course they contrived to procure from Alderman Combe a letter to be read in the Hall , apologising for his non-attendance in his place in the House of Commons , in consequence of very ill health , which had prevented his attendance there ever since he had been last elected , and which , in all probability , would prevent his attending there any more .
This game had been carried on for a long time by the Waithmanites , and I had made up my mind , whenever an occasion should offer , to enter my protest against the City of London being represented by a person who never attended the House , and who was rendered incapable of doing so from ill health .
I had several times carried some resolutions in my pocket , to the meetings of the Livery , but no opportunity had offered for me to bring the subject forward before .
As soon as this letter was read from Alderman Combe , which stated his inability to attend in his place , c. c. , I told Sir Richard Phillips , who was standing near me upon the hustings , that , as soon as the usual vote of thanks was moved to Alderman Combe , I should move some short resolutions , which I shewed him , as an amendment : `` 1st , thanking the Alderman for his past honourable services : 2nd , sympathizing with him on his illness , and lamenting the cause of his incapacity to attend the House of Commons : and 3rd , respectfully calling upon him to resign his seat , to give the Livery an opportunity of electing an efficient Member of Parliament as their representative , in his stead . ''
I asked Sir Richard if he would second these resolutions  he replied no , he could not , but he would ask Mr. Waithman to do it  and away he went in the honesty of his heart , and told Mr. Waithman that I was going to move such resolutions as an amendment to the usual vote of thanks to Alderman Combe , and he very innocently asked him if he would second them ?
I shall never forget the city hero 's look  be turned round as if he would have bit Sir Richard 's nose off , and in a whisper that I could hear all across the hustings , replied , `` NO it is meant to cut my throat . ''
Sir Richard , surprised and mortified at the mistake which he had unintentionally made , returned me the resolutions , without saying a word , as he saw that I had heard Waithman 's answer , which I was laughing at most heartily .
I knew that Mr. Waithman would not have joined me in any measure , even if it had been to save the City of London from an earthquake , or its citizens from the greatest of all calamities , a famine  but at the first view of the thing , I did not perceive how this amendment was calculated to injure or cut the throat of Mr. Waithman .
The dread of this mighty sacrifice did not , however , deter me from doing my duty .
The vote of thanks having been moved to Alderman Combe , I stepped forward and proposed my resolutions as an amendment  this I did in the most respectful and handsome manner towards the Alderman , giving him much greater credit for his past exertions , as our City Member , than he in fact ever merited .


I had never consulted one single individual as to the propriety or the policy of this measure , and it was by mere accident that I mentioned it upon the hustings to Sir Richard Phillips  therefore , I was not prepared with any one to second my proposition , but it was , nevertheless , received by the Livery with strong marks of approbation .
Never were resolutions more appropriate , or that came more pat to suit the occasion .
I saw that this was a happy opportunity to appeal to the honest sentiments of the Livery , and I seized it , as an act of justice to them and to the public , without the slightest intention to annoy or injure Mr. Waithman , and without the slightest intention of gratifying the factious views of any party .
It certainly struck me , and it had all along struck me , that if Mr. Alderman Combe could be prevailed upon to resign during the second mayoralty of my worthy friend Alderman Wood , the latter would be selected by the citizens of London as his successor , without the chance of a successful opposition against him  but I had never given him the most remote hint of my thoughts or designs , neither did I expect that the friends of Waithman , amongst the Livery , would be prevailed upon to do any thing that was likely to promote the election of Alderman Wood .
All that under such circumstances I ever considered was , how best to perform my duty , when I was before the public , either at a meeting of the people in Spafields , or in Palace-yard , or at a meeting of my fellow Liverymen in the Guildhall .
I never personally cared whether my motions were carried , or whether they were rejected , my main object , being to perform my duty boldly and conscientiously .
This I did on the occasion to which I have alluded , without knowing whether any one would second my proposition or not .


Before , however , any one could came forward as my supporter , Mr. Waithman presented himself to the Livery , and endeavoured , by every art that he was master of , to prevail upon the citizens not to countenance my proposition .
His own little gang attempted to get him cheered , but all their efforts proved fruitless .
He coaxed , he wheedled , he begged , and he prayed  when that did not take , he blustered , bullied , and threatened them , but all would not do  he bullied one moment , and cringed the next , with equal ill success .
He and his friends began to feel for once that the force of truth was likely to prevail over fraud , trickery , and cunning .
At last , when he found that none of these had a chance of prevailing , he turned about and resorted to tactics .
He declared that the proposition was irrelevent , that the Livery were taken by surprise , that they were not assembled for any such purpose , and that another Common-Hall ought to be convened , on purpose to take my resolutions into consideration  and he boldly called upon the Lord Mayor , Wood , to prohibit the resolutions being put to the Livery .
I never saw Mr. Waithman labour so hard in my life  if his existence had been at stake , he could not have shown more anxiety .


The Lord Mayor now came forward , and in the most unequivocal manner declared that the resolutions were not only perfectly in order , but that he considered them most proper to be submitted to the consideration of the committee upon that occasion .
I thought Waithman would have bursted a blood-vessel with rage and mortification at this decision of the Lord Mayor , who was not to be bullied out of doing his duty honestly , particularly when he saw that it received the sanction of so great a portion of his fellow-citizens .
The question was at length put , and the resolutions were carried by a very large majority , amidst such a round of cheers as I seldom ever heard in the Common-Hall .
I then moved that the Lord Mayor be requested to convey the resolutions of the Livery to Mr. Alderman Combe , as soon as he could conveniently do so , and also to call another Common-Hall , to communicate the answer of the worthy Alderman to his constituents .
This likewise was carried , with a faint opposition from the puny faction that surrounded the mortified and discomfited great little man .
The Lord Mayor then stepped forward , and promised that the wishes of the Livery should be promptly executed  and , after he had given this promise , the meeting broke up .


The Lord Mayor kept his word , and waited upon Mr. Alderman Combe with the resolutions , the same night , before the faction had time to plan any scheme to frustrate the wishes of the Livery .
The result was , that the Alderman was glad of an opportunity of sending in his resignation of an office which he was totally incompetent to fill , and , in the most honourable and patriotic manner , he wrote his formal compliance with the wishes of his constituents , and delivered it into the hands of the Lord Mayor , who immediately offered his services to his fellow-citizens , to supply the vacancy .
They estimated correctly the value of those services , and , in spite of the most pitiful arts , the most diabolical misrepresentations , and the most unblushing falsehoods of the Waithmanite faction to prevent it , the worthy Alderman Wood was unanimously elected , during his second Mayoralty , one of the Representatives in Parliament for the City of London .
I must own that I gloried more in this successful single-handed effort of mine , spontaneously made , and so honourably carried into execution , than I ever did in any public act of my life .
When the Alderman was elected , I addressed my brother Liverymen , and I boldly predicted that he was elected for life  that his conduct in the House of Commons would be such as would secure him a seat for the City of London , as long as human nature would enable him to attend his duty in Parliament .
This was more than five years ago , and I believe that the prediction has not only been made good up to this time , but that it is more likely to be confirmed than ever it was .
Such , however , was the prejudice of a certain party in the city against Radicals , and particularly against me , that the worthy Alderman never dared to thank me publicly for what I had done to serve him .
In truth I never looked for any such thing  I only did my duty  and I had full confidence , whenever the worthy Alderman was called upon , he would not fail to do his duty .
My confidence was not misplaced , as has been fully proved by the conduct of the Alderman , in the case of the persecuted Caroline , the injured Queen of England .
Nor has the worthy Alderman ever flinched from his duty during the persecutions of the `` Captive of Ilchester . ''


In consequence of the diabolical machinations of the villain Oliver , the spy , who was imprudently introduced to the Reformers in the North by Mr. Mitchell , one of the delegates who had attended the Major 's meetings in London -- in consequence of this infamous fellow 's hellish plots , a number of the distressed inhabitants of Derbyshire and Nottingham were instigated to acts of violence and riot , which , although of a most contemptible nature , were magnified by the Government into acts of treason and rebellion .
In pursuance of what had been planned by the villain Oliver and his employers , these deluded men were immediately made prisoners , and committed to Derby Gaol  upon a charge of high treason .
Unfortunately , one Jeremiah Brandreth , who was at the head of those rioters , very wantonly fired a shot at random through the back window of a farm-house , where the inmates had refused to admit them , or to deliver them any arms , which the rioters , scarcely one hundred in number , had demanded .
It so happened that a boy was killed by this random shot , which gave a colouring to the proceedings of the Ministers , and created a great prejudice against these deluded men  and therefore , instead of indicting some of them for a foolish and contemptible riot , and prosecuting Brandreth for murder or manslaughter , the Government proceeded against them for high treason .
This petty riot , which was put down without any military force , was consequently blazoned forth and proclaimed through the country as an insurrection and open rebellion , and great preparations were making to bring the prisoners to trial for high treason , and a special commission was appointed to be held at Derby to try them .
The Ministers had failed in their attempt , in London , to spill the blood of Watson , Thistlewood , c.. whose lives were saved by the honesty of a Middlesex Jury .
The despicable riot in London , ridiculous and contemptible as it was , yet it was ten times more like a premeditated insurrection than the Derbyshire riot  yet an honest Middlesex Jury , with Mr. Richardson , of the Lottery-office , as their foreman , refused to find the instigators of it guilty of high treason .
This having been the case , the Ministers were determined to try their hands at a trial for high treason in the country .
It was , in fact , necessary to bring forward at least some shadow of a pretext for the infamous measures which had been passed by the Parliament , and for the still worse conduct of the Secretary of State , who had thrown such a number of the Reformers into dungeons , the secret dungeons of the Boroughmongers , where they were lingering under the suspension of the Habeas-Corpus Act , without any charge being brought against them , and without being brought to trial , there being nothing to prove against them .
I repeat , that it was necessary to make a show , a pretence , a sort of justification , for these proceedings  and the riot which had taken place at Pentridge , in Derbyshire , was the thing fixed upon for that purpose , as they could not trump up a better .


Brandreth , Turner , Ludlam , and thirty-five or six others , were accordingly thrown into prison , and indicted for high treason .
These poor fellows , thus assailed and immured in a gaol , were without a friend to protect them , and to see that they had a fair trial , and in fact were without the means of paying counsel and witnesses , to enable them to stand any chance of having a fair trial .
In this forlorn and wretched situation , their attention , as a dernier resort , was directed to me .
I was a perfect stranger to every one of them , but they had heard of my exertions in the cause of the people , and they prevailed upon their attorney , Mr. Wragg , of Belper , to write to me , and inform me of their deplorable and forlorn situation , and to request that I would endeavour to raise a public subscription , to enable them to fee counsel , and to pay for bringing their witnesses to the trial , which Mr. Wragg assured me they were totally incompetent to do , they being all poor men , without any money or friends to help them .


I received this letter at Middleton Cottage , where I had been for some time peaceably enjoying the sports of the field .
I showed it to a friend , who was visiting me at the time , and he at once pronounced it to be a trap , to inveigle me into a participation of their crimes .
At any rate , he thought my only prudent course would be , either to take no notice of the letter , or to reply that I knew nothing of the parties , and would have nothing to do with them .
I put the letter into my pocket , and said no more to him upon the subject , as his cold , calculating , prudent advice did not correspond with the feelings of my heart .
My visitors and my family had retired to rest , when I deliberately sat down , and answered the letter of Mr. Wragg by the return of post .
Those who are of the same opinion with my prudent friend will ask , why did you do so ?
I will tell them why .
I said to myself , here are some fellow-creatures in distress , they have not a living soul to aid them  the whole power and weight of the Government are mustered against them  and although they are totally unknown to me , and although I can not countenance or approve of their foolish and wanton proceedings  yet , as the law of England presumes every man to be innocent till he is convicted of guilt , and as they have appealed to ME in their distressing situation , as the only man to whom they can look up for assistance  shall I , because there appears to be personal danger and difficulty in the undertaking , shall I refuse or neglect to do my best to enable them to obtain a fair trial ?
shall I abandon them , and refuse to obey the call of humanity , and , because they are poor and defenceless , turn a deaf ear to the prayer of those that are in trouble and in prison ?
I asked myself these questions , and without a moment 's pause , my tongue obeyed the impulse of my heart , and I exclaimed `` forbid it , Heaven , rather let me perish this instant , than harbour a thought so base , so unfeeling , and so opposite to every act of my life ! ''
I therefore acknowledged Mr. Wragg 's letter , and told him that , although he was a perfect stranger to me , and although the prisoners were all strangers to me , yet my heart would not allow me to entertain any unworthy suspicions of him  and as the lives of our fellow-creatures were at stake , I would do every thing in my power to enable them to obtain a fair trial .
With this view I would , by the same post , write to London , and endeavour to procure a public meeting , for the purpose of raising a subscription to assist them , lamenting , at the same time , my own want of the means to assist them .


Before I went to bed I wrote to Mr. Cleary , who was secretary to Major Cartwright and the Hampden Club , and also a sort of general secretary to the Westminster committee .
I desired him to lay a copy of Mr. Wragg 's letter before some of the patriotic friends of liberty , justice , and humanity , in London , and to get them to call a public meeting , at the Crown and Anchor , on the following Monday , to raise a subscription , to enable the prisoners to fee counsel before their trial , which was to take place at Derby , in the following week .
I added , `` if there should be any hitch or difficulty , still by all means to call the meeting , and I will pay for the room and the advertisements , and take the chair myself , if no other person more eligible offers . ''
I wrote also to Mr. West , the wire-worker , in Wych-street , to the same effect , and to inform him of what I had written to Cleary .
Mr. West was the person who had taken a very decisive , active , and manly part in assisting Dr. Watson and Thistlewood , in getting up their defence , when they were imprisoned under a similar charge  therefore , I thought him the most likely man I knew in London or Westminster to promote such a measure .


The reader will bear in mind that I did not get Mr. Wragg 's letter , urging me to come forward in behalf of these poor fellows , till five o'clock in the afternoon , when I returned home to dinner from shooting  that before I went to bed , I wrote an answer to the attorney of the prisoners , unhesitatingly promising to do all that lay in my power to serve them  and that I also wrote to Mr. Cleary and Mr. West , to procure a public meeting , and , without any reservation on my part , to call it in my name , in the metropolis  and the reader will not fail to recollect , that the HABEAS CORPUS ACT was still suspended , and that the Seditious Meeting Act was in full force .


I received an answer from Mr. Cleary , to say that he had seen the friends of liberty in Westminster , and that the meeting would be appointed , to be held at the Crown and Anchor , as I wished it , on the following Monday , and he would take care to have it advertised , c. I also received a letter from Mr. West , who said he had seen Cleary , and that the meeting would take place , according to my request , on the Monday .
I wrote by return of post , to Mr. Wragg , to inform the prisoners what I had done , and how far I had succeeded and I promised to be at the meeting , and to proceed to Derby in the mail , as soon as the result was known .


On the Sunday , just as I was preparing to set off to London to attend this meeting , I received a letter from Mr. Cleary , to say that he had consulted the friends of liberty in Westminster , who were unanimously of opinion , that it would be highly impolitic to call a public meeting upon such an occasion , in which opinion he fully concurred  and that the worthy Major Cartwright also thought it extremely improper for the Reformers to identify themselves with HOUSE-BREAKERS AND MURDERERS .
Mr. Cleary also added , that the Derby rioters had by their conduct done the greatest injury to the cause of Reform , and that he felt so indignant at them , that , instead of assisting there by a subscription , he could almost GO DOWN AND HANG THEM HIMSELF .
I have not the letter at hand , but this was the substance of it .
I must do Mr. West the justice to say , that he did every thing in his power to procure a meeting , and if he had not , as well as myself , been tricked into the idea that the meeting would be held , he would have called it himself .


I was extremely mortified at being thus defeated in my plan , at being thus swindled out of the meeting .
Cleary 's first letter was evidently written with a view to prevent my going to London , and personally convening the meeting  because he saw , from the manner of my first letter , that I was in earnest , therefore it was necessary to deceive me into a belief that what I was desirous of would be done , as , otherwise , he knew that I would be instantly on the spot to carry it myself into execution .
Well , it was too late now to think of going to London to get a meeting , and , as I had been thus disappointed , it might by most people have been thought sufficient for me to have written a letter to Mr. Wragg , to inform him of the circumstance , and there would have been at once an end to all trouble or expense on my part .
Now I beg the reader to mark what was my conduct .
Instead of abandoning these poor fellows to their fate , and merely writing a letter to say how I had been disappointed by the Westminster patriots , or rather pretended patriots , I ordered my servant to get my horses and gig ready immediately , and I started off the same evening across the country to Newbury , on my road through Abingdon and Oxford , towards Derby .
I arrived at Leicester on the Tuesday evening , previous to the trials commencing on the Thursday following  and what was very curious , Judge Dallas and myself were shown into the same room , at Bishop 's , at the Three Crowns .
Although we did not appear to know each other , great marks of civility were mutually exchanged , and if I had not been otherwise engaged , it is possible we might have spent the evening together  and I have often thought how very curious the conversation might have proved , if we had compared notes .
We were both going the next day to Derby , both going to attend the trials of Brandreth and Co.  but how widely different would it have been found was the object of our journey .
He , a judge , going to hang the prisoners  I , an humble individual , going to do all that lay in my power to save their lives , by procuring for them a fair trial .
We , however , did not remain in company  the fact was , it soon got wind at Leicester who I was  one of the waiters knew me , and to my surprise , as I was sitting with Mr. Thompson , of the Chronicle office , and Mr. Warburton , who had been one of the delegates at the London meeting , a deputation waited upon me , to request that I would spend the evening with a number of gentlemen of Leicester , who had assembled in a public room in the inn , to receive me .
This invitation I accepted , and , accompanied by my two friends , I spent a few hours very pleasantly , amongst an assemblage composed of the most respectable men belonging to all parties in Leicester .


On the following day I reached Derby , where I found out Messrs. Wragg , of Belper , and Bond , of Leicester , the attorneys for the prisoners , and communicated my ill success as to collecting any subscriptions in London , by means of the public meeting which was proposed .
I , however , offered my services in any way in which they might think that I could be useful  but I soon learnt from them that it was a hopeless case , that the men had been led into a disgraceful riot , urged on by the villain Oliver , and his accomplices  that they were worthy , poor men  Brandreth , their captain , a mere helpless pauper , and that there was no chance of saving them .
Those who had a little property , had sold their little all , even to their beds , as had also their relations , to raise money enough to pay for the expenses , of the witnesses , who had been subpoened on their behalf  but the whole did not amount to enough to include the fees of counsel .
For the fees , however , we calculated that might be raised at some future time , as it was hoped that , under such circumstances , the gentlemen of the long robe would not press for their immediate payment .


I saw some of the witnesses , and amongst others one who had been acting in concert with Oliver , a regular hired spy , who described to us what passed between them and Lord Sidmouth , when he and Oliver presented their bill of expenses , after they had performed their job .
It appeared that his Lordship abused Oliver for a great fool , for being detected by the people in his communications with Sir John Byng , who had the military command of the district .
O , it was a horrible plot , to entrap a few distressed , poor creatures to commit some acts of violence and riot , in order that the Government might hang a few of them for high treason !
The projectors of it had been frustrated in London , by a Middlesex Jury , who had refused to find Dr. Watson guilty of high treason , although what was proved against him was ten thousand times more like high treason than that which was proved against these poor deluded men .
But it was thought necessary to sanction the suspension of the Habeas-Corpus Act , and the other infamous encroachments that had been made upon the liberties of the people , by the sacrifice of some lives for high treason , and the Government paid the freeholders of the county of Derby , the disgraceful compliment of selecting that county as the scene of their diabolical operations  and , as it will be hereafter seen , they were correct in their calculations .


The next morning I waited upon the attorneys , previous to their going into Court , when I found them in rather an awkward dilemma .
Mr. COUNSELLOR CROSS , who , by some unaccountable means or other , had been sent for from Manchester , to take the lead of Mr. Denman , who was the other counsel employed , had just sent to the attorneys to demand ONE HUNDRED POUNDS as his fee , before he went into Court , declaring , that he would not stir a peg till he received it .
I knew nothing of this fellow at the time , and as the attorneys , particularly Mr. Bond , appeared to place great confidence in him , Mister Cross had the one hundred pounds paid into his hands immediately .
Thus , by the cupidity of Mr. Cross , were these poor fellows deprived at once of those means which ought to have been spent in procuring them witnesses for their defence .
I immediately waited upon Mr. Denman at his lodgings , and sent up my name , to say that I had some particular information to communicate that might be of service to the prisoners  but I could gain no access to Mr. Denman .
I had this information from the brother of Turner , who was afterwards executed .
I returned to the attorneys , and I soon found that my interference was considered officious .
They refused to take me into Court with them , or at least they pretended that it was against the rules for attorneys to take any person with them into the Court .
I was , therefore , obliged to find another mode of admittance  and I ultimately , by dint of perseverance , got in with considerable difficulty , after having been violently assaulted and grossly insulted by the officers of the Court , under the direction of a Jack-in-office , who acted as Under Sheriff , the real Under Sheriff having resigned , pro tempore , on purpose to become Solicitor for the Crown , in the prosecution against the prisoners .
I , however , at length succeeded in getting a seat in the front of the body of the Court , and I heard the whole of the trial of Brandreth .
The whole of the evidence merely went to establish the fact , that one of the most contemptible riots took place that ever deserved the name of a riot , whether with respect to the numbers engaged , or the total want of influence of those who took a lead in it .
As for poor Brandreth , who was called the Captain of the Insurrection , he was nothing more nor less than a contemptible pauper , without power , or talent , or courage  and it was distinctly sworn that the whole gang fled upon the appearance of one soldier !


The means taken to procure tractable juries were the most barefaced and abominable , and as the jurors were mostly selected from amongst the tenantry of the Duke of Devonshire , the prisoners had not the slightest chance of escape , even if Mr. Cross had done his duty  but , so far was he from doing it , that he actually confessed the guilt of his clients , and urged as a palliation , that they were led into the insurrection by reading the writings of Cobbett .
The principal witnesses , in my opinion , for the prisoners , were never examined  and , although Mr. Denman made an eloquent appeal to the jury , yet he could not remove the impression which had been left upon the minds of the jurors and of the whole Court by the precious pleadings of Mr. Cross .
Brandreth and four others were found guilty of high treason .
Brandreth , Turner , and Ludlam , were executed shortly afterwards , and Mr. Cross was speedily promoted to a silk gown , as a King 's Sergeant at Law .


The avenging hand of Providence , however , caused the announcement of the execution of these men , and the Death of the PRINCESS CHARLOTTE OF SAXE-COBURG AND HER INFANT SON , to appear in the newspapers of the day at one and the same time .
The death of this Princess was so mysterious , and attended with such singular circumstances , that I dare not trust myself to write upon the subject .
The whole nation appeared to mourn her loss , much more , I believe , in consequence of her having always espoused the cause of her unhappy and persecuted mother , than from any conviction or well-grounded hope that any public good would ever be derived from her being our future Queen .
A certain party at Court could not disguise the satisfaction which they felt at being released from a most persevering and troublesome advocate of the Princess of Wales , her mother .
But the nation had this delightful comfort , that the gallant PRINCE OF SAXE-COBURG bore his loss with great fortitude , and was likely to survive his wife for many , many years , to enjoy the spending of FIFTY-THOUSAND POUNDS A-YEAR , which had been settled upon him for life , in case the Princess should pop off .


I have omitted one circumstance which occurred in the spring of the year , and which I shall now briefly notice .
Mr. Sergeant BEST , who was one of the Members for Bridport , was appointed Chief Justice of Chester , a post which he had been long seeking for in vain .
His client , Colonel Despard , had been executed for nearly fifteen years , yet Mr. Sergeant had only been promoted to a silk gown  and in spite of every effort to become a Judge , he had been frustrated , it is understood , by the objections raised by the Lord Chancellor .
He , therefore , procured a seat in Parliament , and became a violent oppositionist to the Government .
At length , the Prince Regent , it is said , demanded his promotion , and he was appointed to the Chief Justiceship of Chester , which is the stepping stone to the Bench .
He vacated his seat for Bridport , as a matter of course  and , as it was expected he would be returned again for that borough without any opposition , I thought it would be a good opportunity to remind him of the fate of Despard , and of his own apostacy , in quitting his pretended opposition as soon as he was offered a place of profit under the Crown .
Without further ceremony , therefore , I drove to Bridport , about three days before the election commenced , and announced my intention of opposing the election of the Welch Judge , and former counsel for Despard .
Though I was not known to a single person in the town of Bridport , yet I was received with great kindness by a considerable portion of the electors , and was at once promised the support of some of the most respectable of them .
The Welch Judge , however , did not make his appearance  but in his stead came a young ` Squire Sturt , the son of BEST 'S former patron .
As I had avowedly attended only for the purpose of opposing and exposing the Chief Justice of Chester , I now , at the request of some of those whose support against Best I chiefly relied upon , declined to offer myself in opposition to the young ` Squire , who possessed a majority of the houses in which the small voters lived , and whose father had always been a great favourite in the borough .
I gained great credit for the manner in which I did this , in an address to the electors from the hustings , declaring that my only object was to expose the delinquency of their former Member , the new Welch Judge .
The reader will observe that I had no acquaintance with Mr. Sergeant Best , nor had even in the remotest degree ever had any connection with him , or come in contact with him , either in the way of his profession or otherwise .
I was solely actuated by public duty , without the slightest cause for personal dislike to the lawyer .
Perhaps those who have read what I have written since I came here , will not now be at a loss to account for the vindictive hostility of the venerable Judge towards me , when I was brought up for judgment , and since I have been here .
They may now account for that Judge 's voting for my having SIX YEARS imprisonment , and for his having afterwards come the western circuit , and signed an order , drawn up by the junto of Somersetshire Magistrates , for placing and keeping me in solitary confinement for the last ten months of my incarceration .


The people of Bridport will never forget my visit , particularly Mr. Denzelo , the printer , who refused to print my address to the electors , after having taken the copy , and given his promise to do it , and a Mr. Nicholets , an attorney .
I shall forbear to relate the circumstances , and the ridiculous figure which they cut , especially the latter , upon being detected and exposed before his own townsmen in their public hall .
This exposure was ample punishment for such men , without my placing the particulars of their disgrace upon record .
I was invited to remain in Bridport after the election , which invitation I accepted , and before I left the town I waited upon every voter to thank him for his civility  and , with only one or two exceptions , I received the most polite attention and kind welcome  nearly two-thirds of the electors voluntarily promised to give me their votes at the next election , whenever it might happen .
If I had gone there again I should have certainly had a considerable majority of votes , without making any promise whatever  but , as I learnt that it was expected that an after-bribe would be given , I declined the honour of deceiving them and disgracing myself .


One curious fact which occurred I can not avoid relating .
I have since ascertained , that the person whom I took from Salisbury with me to Bridport , treacherously communicated all my plans and movements to my opponents , every night before he went to bed  and , what is still more curious , I have learnt that he was actually in correspondence with my LORD CASTLEREAGH .
I very soon afterwards obtained the knowledge of this latter fact , and of course as soon declined the honour of any farther connection with a person who had such high acquaintance .


On the 18th of December , Mr. Hone , the bookseller , was tried in the Court of King 's Bench , before Mr. Justice Abbott ( who sat for the Chief Justice Ellenborough ) and a London special jury .
The offence which he was charged with was that of publishing a parody .
After an animated and eloquent defence , made by Mr. Hone in person , which lasted seven hours , the jury returned a verdict of acquittal .
The Chief Justice Ellenborough , who was ill at the time , was so enraged at this verdict , that be came into Court the next morning , and presided when Mr. Hone was tried for a second parody .
His Lordship did every thing to intimidate , to interrupt , and to browbeat Mr. Hone , who , however , proved himself much the bravest as well as the most able man , and after a defence , similar to that of the day previous , which lasted eight hours , another jury of the city of London acquitted him .
On the day following , the 20th of December , he was tried before the Chief Justice and another special jury of the city of London , for a third parody , and after another defence , which lasted nine hours , he was a third time acquitted .
What enhances the merit of Mr. Hone 's courageous defence is , that during the whole of the time he was labouring under indisposition .
There is not the least doubt but these verdicts of acquittal , added to that of the acquittal of Dr. Watson , were the cause of Lord Ellenborough 's death  at any rate , his decease was greatly hastened by the irritation arising from such repeated disappointments  for in all these cases his Lordship strongly charged the jury for a verdict of guilty , and no agent of the Government ever worked harder to obtain a verdict than his Lordship did .
Ultimately this great lawyer became an ideot , and I have understood from pretty good authority , that for some time before his death he was in the constant habit of repeating the names of Watson and Hone , with the most evident symptoms of horror and dismay , which he continued to do till the very last , as long , at least , as he was capable of utterance .


Thus ended the year 1817 , one of the most eventful of British history .
The prospect was most gloomy : the poor were greatly distressed for want of employment : provisions were dear , the quartern loaf averaged about thirteen pence , and there was a general depression of trade .
At the same time , every honest man in the kingdom considered himself as being injured and insulted by the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act , and , indeed , a general feeling of disgust prevailed as to the proceedings adopted by the Government .
As for the moral state of the country , and the wretchedness of the people , it is only necessary to record three or four facts : at Manchester , in the year 1797 , the poor-rates were 16,941 l. , but this year , 1817 , they amounted to 65,212 l .
The number of forged notes stopped by the Bank of England , since the year 1814 , that is , during the space of two years , amounted to 113,361 l. , and in the year 1817 , the Bank prosecuted ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-TWO PERSONS for forgery , or uttering forged notes  and to support such a system as this , the peace establishment of the standing army , the land forces , for this year , amounted to ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THREE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINE MEN !
Bravo , John Gull !


I never heard of more than one public meeting being held by the people , under the provisions of the Seditious Meetings Bill , and that was advertised to be held in Palace Yard , on the 7th of September , 1817 .
This advertisement was signed by seven householders , and a copy of it was delivered to the Clerk of the Peace , and the neighbouring Magistrates , agreeable to the Act .
I was invited to preside at the meeting , which invitation I accepted , and attended accordingly .
The Seditious Meeting Act being still in force , and the Habeas Corpus Act being still suspended , it was thought a very daring and hazardous proceeding , but I took care that the laws , rigid as they were , should not be violated , and all the provisions of the Act were strictly complied with .
This meeting was held within hearing , and almost in sight of the Secretary of State 's office .
But , as we acted according to law , not the slightest interruption was offered to the proceedings , or to those who attended the meeting .
The persons who signed the requisition or advertisement , which was delivered to the Clerk of the Peace , were friends of Dr. Watson  he it was , in fact , that got up the meeting .
The doctor proposed the resolutions , which were seconded by Mr. Gast , and carried unanimously : they protested in strong terms against petitioning the House of Commons any more for Reform , as being proved to be useless by the total disregard which that body had manifested to the prayers and the petitions of the people during the previous session of Parliament , when upwards of six hundred petitions , praying for Reform , had been presented to the Honourable House .
A strong declaration and remonstrance , addressed to the Prince Regent , was read and unanimously agreed to at the meeting  which remonstrance I carried and delivered to Lord Sidmouth , at the Secretary of State 's office , the moment the meeting was dissolved  and I was attended to the doors of the office by five or six thousand of the multitude who had composed a part of the meeting .
When I entered the office , which I did alone , I was instantly conducted to his Lordship , amidst the deafening cheers of the throng without .
I gave the declaration to him , and requested he would lay it before his Royal Master , as early as it was convenient .
He promised me that he would read it carefully over , and if there was nothing improper , that he would present it the next day to the Prince Regent , and that he would write to apprize me of the result .


This was the first time , if I recollect right , that a public remonstrance to the throne was ever agreed to by the people  and , as might naturally have been expected , his Lordship found much in it that he thought objectionable , as well as the manner in which it was conveyed  it being in the shape of a firm though respectful remonstrance , instead of a creeping , cringing petition .
I have not a copy of this document by me , but as it was agreed to at the great meeting held at Manchester , as well as at the Smithfield meeting , I will , if I can procure it , publish it hereafter  but I recollect , that , after having recited a mass of atrocities committed upon the rights and liberties , and lives of the people , by the Ministers of the Crown , it demanded that they the said Ministers , of whom his Lordship was one , should be surrendered up to justice , and brought to condign punishment .
It is , therefore , almost needless to say that my Lord Sidmouth not only discovered very improper matter in the remonstrance , but that he consequently declined to communicate it to his Royal Master .


The year 1818 commenced with a great public dinner at the City of London Tavern , to celebrate the third centenary of the Reformation , at which dinner one thousand five hundred persons attended .
On the 27th of January the Parliament was opened by commission , and the usual speech was made , and its echo , the address , was voted without any opposition : a bill was now brought into the House to restore the Habeas Corpus Act .
A great meeting took place at the City of London Tavern , Alderman Waithman in the chair , where a subscription was opened for Mr. Hone , which ultimately amounted to more than three thousand pounds .
Than this measure , nothing can more clearly show the character of the city patriot , and those who took a lead in political matters in the metropolis .
While Mr. Hone was under persecution , and even up to the day of his trial , he was totally neglected and deserted  neither Mr. Waithman , nor any of those who afterwards came forwards to assist him in such a liberal way , gave him then the slightest countenance or support  nay , they even shunned and abandoned him , and he actually went into court almost alone , and probably without the means of hiring counsel , which was , in fact , a most fortunate circumstance for him , as , had he placed his case in the hands of counsel , I will warrant that he would have been found guilty upon each of the charges preferred against him  however , as soon as Mr. Hone had obtained a verdict of not guilty , these fair-weather patriots began to flock round him in order to share the honour and popularity which they now saw he was likely to obtain .
This is too much the way of the world  and if Mr. Hone 's jury had said guilty , instead of not guilty , if he had been tried by a country instead of a London special jury , he might have gone quickly to gaol , abandoned and ruined , before any of the above gentry would have stirred one inch to have saved him from rotting there .


A bill of indemnity was now brought in , to protect the Ministers against the legal consequences of their horrid abuses of power , during the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act .
Most of those who had been incarcerated were now released upon their own recognizance  but Mr. Benbow , of Manchester , bravely refused to enter into any recognizance , and he was liberated without it .
The Messrs. Evans followed his example , and were also liberated without bail .


While the indemnity bill was pending , the Livery of the city of London met in Common Hall , and passed some strong resolutions , and petitioned the House of Commons not to indemnify the Ministers against prosecutions at law for their illegal and cruel conduct during the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act .
This petition was presented by Alderman Wood , our worthy representative , but without producing any effect , for , on the 10th of March , the bill was carried through both Houses by large majorities .
In the Commons , Sir Samuel Romilly made a brilliant effort to resist the passing of this Act , but there was , nevertheless , a majority of 190 for it , and only 64 against it .
In the Lords it was sanctioned by 93 for it , while there were only 27 against it  but 10 Peers entered a firm and spirited protest against the iniquitous measure .
On the 23d of March , a meeting of the inhabitants of Westminster was held in Palace Yard , when a petition to the House of Commons was adopted , praying for a Reform of Parliament .
About this period , the case of appeal of murder , Ashford against Thornton , excited considerable interest all over the country .
The case was argued in the Court of King 's Bench , which decided that the law gave to the defendant a right to his wager of battle  but the appellant , the brother of Mary Ashford , the young woman who had been murdered , not choosing to risk his life by accepting the challenge , Thornton was discharged .


On the first of May , the Monthly Magazine , a work of great celebrity , for the talent displayed in its pages , as well as for the philanthropic character of the gentleman who has so ably and successfully conducted it for so many years , published some interesting facts relative to the cruel and illiberal treatment of Napoleon , and his brave and faithful adherents at St. Helena .
The same number contained a most interesting analysis of the progress of crime during the last seven years , by which it appears that 56,308 persons had in that time been committed to the gaols of England and Wales , for criminal offences  that 4,952 had received sentence of death  6,512 had been sentenced to transportation  and 23,795 had been subjected to minor punishments , while no bills were found against 9,287 .
In the same period 584 had been executed , and every number was tripled in the last year .
Let the philanthropist read this -- let the friends of humanity read this -- and then say whether we do not want a Reform in every department of the State , particularly in the House of Commons , where the system has been so long acted upon , which has brought England to such a degraded state .


On the second of June , Sir Francis Burdett moved resolutions in the House of Commons , for Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments .
They were negatived by a majority of 106 to 2  the minority being Sir Francis Burdett and Lord Cochrane , the two Members for Westminster .
When , during the preceding session of Parliament , that of 1817 , there were petitions , signed by a million and a half of names , praying for Universal Suffrage , Sir Francis Burdett unfortunately refused to support Universal Suffrage  but now that the people had declined to appeal to the House , and consequently there was not a single petition lying upon the table , to support the Hon. Baronet 's motion , it was negatived , as I have stated above , by an overwhelming majority .


On the tenth of June , the most infamous and servile Parliament that ever sat in England , after having passed a Bill to continue the restriction upon cash payments at the Bank  after having passed a Bill for building New Churches , and appropriating one million of the public money to carry it into effect  after having passed a Bill to add 6,0001 .
a year to the incomes of the Royal Dukes , who had been married  after having passed a Bill to continue the Alien Act  after having done all this , and far more , this servile , corrupt Parliament was DISSOLVED .


I will mention one curious fact , with respect to this precious Parliament .
My friend , Mr. William Akerman , of Patney , in Wiltshire , was upon a visit to me in London , and , as he was very anxious to go and have a peep at the proceedings of the House of Commons , I was prevailed upon to accompany him thither one evening , although I went rather reluctantly , as all the interest which I had formerly felt in hearing the debates had long since been banished from my breast .
However , I went thither to gratify the curiosity of my friend , little thinking that I should hear or see any thing to amuse or gratify myself .
The Hon. House was exceedingly thin , there not being more than about a score of our honourable representatives present : these careful trustees had voted away , as a matter of course , some hundreds of thousands of the public money .
The Chancellor of the Exchequer moved the last reading of the Bill for building the New Churches .
The Bill was passed , and one million of the money raised in taxes from the sweat of the brow of John Gull was voted away , by the Members of the Honourable House , with as little ceremony as an old washerwoman would toss off a glass of gin , or take a pinch of snuff  there being no debate , no more present than THIRTEEN of the Honourable Members of the Honourable House .
But the best joke was what followed : a bungling , hacking , and stammering gentleman got up , on the Ministerial side of the House -- ( for , if I recollect right , among the honourable guardians of our lives , our liberties , and our property , there were none present belonging to the Whig or Opposition side of the House ) -- and after a considerable deal of beating about the bush , which I saw made the Chancellor of the Exchequer rather uneasy in his seat , I discovered that the prosing gentleman , whose name was Littleton or Thornton , was prattling about the Savings ' Banks , into which it appeared that he had been inquiring rather more inquisitively than the little Chancellor approved of .
The result of his inquiry , he stated to be a discovery , that three-fourths of the money placed in the banks belonged to persons of property , who placed it there for the sake of obtaining better interest than they could get elsewhere  and that the poor , such as servants and persons of small income , whose property it was intended by the legislature should be invested in these Savings Banks , scarcely made up a quarter of the number , and not a tenth of the amount .
The gentleman was going on , when Mr. Vansittart jumped up , and in an under-tone pretty plainly intimated to him , that although the benches on the opposite side were empty , yet there might probably be some of the reporters left in the House , and if what had been stated should get abroad , it would do incalculable mischief , by exposing the humbug .
These were not the words of the Honourable Chancellor , but I have described their import .
Whether the gentlemen reporters were all absent , as well as the Whig Members , or whether they took the hint of the worthy Chancellor , or whether they did not hear what he said , I do not know  but the next morning I looked in vain in the newspapers for what had transpired , which appeared to me so curious , and which had appeared to the Chancellor a matter of so much importance  not a word of the sort was , however , to be found in any of the papers .


Perhaps it was not observed by my readers , but it is a fact , that my friend , Mr. Cobbett , who had continued to write his Register , and had sent it home from America to be published in England , seemed to have almost entirely forgotten that there was such a person as myself in existence  for more than five months , from the 8th of May , the date of his first Register written in America , till that dated the 10th of October , he scarcely ever mentioned the name of his friend , even accidentally .
However , in the Register of the 10th of October , 1817 , it appears that he had at length discovered that I was neither literally nor politically dead  for in a letter to Mr. Hallett , of Denford , in Berkshire , dated Long Island , 10th of October , 1817 , my name was again brought fully upon the carpet , relative to my opinion of Sir Francis Burdett , as it has been frequently expressed by me in confidence to him .
Very soon afterwards I received a private letter from him , full of professions of friendship , which correspondence was continued up to the period of his return from America .
He also addressed to me , in the Register , twelve public letters , beginning with `` My dear Hunt , '' and ending with `` your faithful friend , '' occasionally complimenting my zeal , courage , and fidelity in the cause of Reform , and declaring that he was `` in no fear as to the rectitude of my conduct , but always in anxiety for my health ! ''
How faithful his friendship is , he has admirably proved !
About the second or third letter which I had from him , he strongly urged me to oppose Sir Francis Burdett , for the city of Westminster  at any rate to offer myself as a candidate for that city , which would give me an opportunity of exposing the Baronet 's desertion of the cause of Reform .
I wrote for answer , that I dreaded the expense of the hustings  and the exorbitant charges of the High Bailiff , c..
These difficulties , however , he made light of , and assured me that , if it was not done before , he would take care to have me remunerated by a public subscription , as soon as he returned from America .


With this assurance , and from a conviction in my own mind that Sir Francis had deserted , or at least neglected , the cause of Radical Reform , I sent an advertisement to be inserted in the London papers , offering myself as a candidate for the representation of the city of Westminster .
A meeting was called by my friends , in the great room of the Crown and Anchor , when my name was put in nomination , as a proper person to be one of the representatives of that city  it having been publicly announced that Lord Cochrane , who was preparing to sail to the assistance of the Patriots in South America , certainly meant to resign all pretension to sit again as the Member for Westminster .
At this meeting a very large majority voted that I was a proper person to represent that city .
I believe it was nearly a fortnight before any other person was put in nomination by any of the electors of Westminster , and it was thought by many of my friends that Sir Francis Burdett and myself would be returned , without any opposition .
I firmly believe that this would have , indeed , been the case , had not the friends of Sir Francis Burdett , the Rump , proposed Mr. Douglas Kinnaird as his colleague .
Major Cartwright was then put in nomination by some of his friends .
The Whigs and Tories of Westminster perceiving that there was likely to be a great division amongst the Reformers , and that Mr. Douglas Kinnaird and Major Cartwright had been both started as it were in opposition to me , Sir Samuel Romilly was proposed as a candidate by the Whigs , and Sir Murray Maxwell by the Ministerial interest .
There was a little band of very worthy and independent men , who stood forward as my supporters , namely , Mr. West , Mr. Dolby , and Mr. Giles , who were electors , and Mr. Carlile , Mr. Gale Jones , and Mr. Sherwin , who were not electors .
Although at the outset I saw that , under such circumstances , there was no chance of my success , yet I was determined to keep open the poll to the last moment allowed by law , which is fifteen days .
At a public dinner that was held at the Crown and Anchor , my colours were produced , and consisted of a scarlet flag , with UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE as a motto , surmounted by a Cap of Liberty , surrounded with the inscription of Hunt and Liberty .
This flag was provided by Mr. Carlile  and I had the honour of being the first and only man who ever offered himself as a candidate for a seat in Parliament upon the avowed principles of Universal Suffrage , Annual Parliaments , and Vote by Ballot .


The day at length arrived for the commencement of the election in Covent-Garden .
I had proclaimed that I would not , either by myself or by any of my friends , canvass or solicit a single vote -- that I should go to the hustings , and act upon the constitutional principle of neither soliciting votes nor going to any expense .
The High Bailiff opened the proceedings , and the following candidates were proposed by their separate friends : -- Sir Francis Burdett , Sir Murray Maxwell , Sir Samuel Romilly , Major Cartwright , Mr. Douglas Kinnaird , and myself .
Upon the show of hands being taken , the High Bailiff declared it to be in favour of Henry Hunt , Esq. and Sir Samuel Romilly .
Sir Francis Burdett 's friends appeared dissatisfied with this decision of the High Bailiff , and urged that a greater number had held up their hands for Sir Francis than for Sir Samuel  but no one disputed my having had a majority , of at least ten to one , in my favour .
The reader will see that this speaks volumes as to the opinion of the people .
Though the people assembled could hold up their hands , yet when it came to the vote , the result clearly showed that the people had no share in electing those who were chosen as their representatives .


During this contest I was baited like a bull  it was very different from any election that ever took place before , for I tore the mask from all parties , and all factions  in doing which I exposed myself to a combination of the whole press of England , all the managers of which were leagued together to abuse , to misrepresent , and belie me .
The Tory , the Whig , and the Burdettite press attacked me not only without mercy , but also without the slightest regard to truth or fair play  and that portion of the press which was either under the influence or in the pay of these three parties consisted of more than nineteen twentieths of the press of the whole kingdom !


After the election had proceeded for a few days , it was found that upon the poll Sir Francis Burdett was left considerably behind Sir Samuel Romilly and Sir Murray Maxwell .
Major Cartwright 's and Mr. Douglas Kinnaird 's names were , therefore , withdrawn from the contest , and the friends of both those gentlemen joined to support Sir Francis 's election , which appeared to be in great danger .
As , however , I had no such views as they had , my exertions being daily and solely directed to open the eyes of the electors of Westminster to what I conceived to be the gross negligence of Sir Francis Burdett with respect to the cause of the people , it was determined to stand out the contest , especially as I had made an affidavit , before the Lord Mayor of London , previous to the commencement of the election , binding myself to keep the poll open to the last hour allowed by law .
Notwithstanding this affidavit , which had been printed , and posted all over London , a little impudent Irishman , of the name of Cleary , whom I have mentioned before , as a sort of writer or clerk , hired as such by Major Cartwright , came forward upon the hustings , and in a broad Irish brogue called upon me to tender my resignation , and to render all the assistance in my power to promote the election of Sir Francis Burdett , and took the liberty of insinuating that I could be no friend of the people if I did not do so .
Nothing could equal the impudence of this upstart , paid secretary , this hireling of the Major 's  he was no elector of Westminster , and had no legal business whatever upon the hustings in Westminster .
However , I treated this proposition with the silent contempt that it merited  and this drew down the malevolence of the Rump , of which this Cleary now formed a part .
They denounced me as a spy of the Government , and every thing that was base  and they put no bounds to their abuse .
In the evening , as I was addressing the electors , and defending myself against these assassin-like attacks from the Rump , I stated the circumstance of their having prevented the holding of a public meeting in the metropolis , which meeting I had proposed for the purpose of raising a subscription , to enable Brandreth , Turner , Ludlam , and others , who had been indicted for high treason at Derby , to fee counsel , and pay the expenses of their witnesses , so as to obtain a fair trial  and I of course alluded to the dirty trick which had been played me , in order to prevent the meeting , by writing me a letter , in the first instance , to say that a meeting would be called , and then putting it off when it was too late for me to come to London to call the meeting myself .
I did this in general terms , without mentioning any names  upon which Cleary came forward , and unblushingly declared that what I had said was false , and that there was no letter whatever of the sort written to me .
On this , there was a general call `` produce the letter , name , name . ''
In reply I asserted , that not only was such a letter written , but Cleary himself was the writer , and that he had gone so far as to say , in the letter , that he was so offended with the prisoners who were charged with high treason , that he could almost find it in his heart to go down and hang them himself .
Cleary again presented himself , and , in the most solemn manner , called God to witness , that what I had said was totally devoid of truth .
The clamour of the party of the Rump committee , now became excessive , they one and all bawled out , `` produce the letter !
-- you can not , Hunt !
-- it is all false ! ''
At length I vociferated that I would produce it the next day .
I thought I had the said letter amongst some others in my trunk , but , upon looking them over , I found that it was left at Middleton Cottage , with my other papers .
I therefore dispatched one of my family into the country , a distance of sixty-one miles , to enable me to perform my promise , and the demand of the party .
The next day I was obliged to state the fact , that the letter was in the country , but that I had sent an express for it , and it should be produced as soon as that messenger returned .
Upon this the whole gang burst out into a forced horse laugh , swearing that it was all false , that I had no such letter , and that I never could produce it .


On the following day , which was Sunday , I received the letter from the country .
In the meantime all the London papers had misrepresented this affair in the most scandalous and unprincipled manner , and every one of them agreeing that I had made a groundless charge against Cleary , and intimating that the story of the letter was a fabrication .
The gang had , in reality , contrived to raise a general outcry against me .
Monday , however , came , too soon for them , and on the hustings I then produced the letter , and offered to read it  but the tumult raised by the party , totally prevented it from being heard .
This being the case , I promised to have it printed the next day .
I kept my word , and one thousand copies were circulated  upon which Cleary produced a letter from Mr. Cobbett , said to have been addressed to a person of the name of Wright .
In this letter , written , I believe , ten years previous to this epoch , Mr. Cobbett grossly abused me , and represented me as a sad fellow , and recommended to the Westminster committee to have nothing to do with me .
As on the face of it this epistle appeared to have been written some years before I knew Mr. Cobbett , I felt no anger or resentment against him  although it certainly showed that he possessed a bad heart , to be capable of writing such gross and palpable falsehoods and malignant calumny against a man whom he knew only by report  which man , report must at the same time have convinced him , was a zealous and persevering friend of Liberty .
The former cry was now dropped , and in its place was substituted another .
It was impudently pretended that I had behaved very unhandsomely , in producing and publishing a private letter of Cleary 's  though the fact was , that it was a public letter written upon public business , by a man who was a sort of public general secretary for all public matters debated on and meetings held in Westminster , and who was also the paid secretary to Major Cartwright and the Hampden Club !
To bring forward a charge of this kind against me , was stretching impudence and falsehood as far as they could possibly go .


The next morning a note was put into my hands , which had been delivered open at my lodgings , on the preceding night , after I had retired to bed .
This detestable composition contained a challenge from Mister Cleary , together with a great deal of vulgar Billingsgate abuse .
I inquired who delivered it , and I was informed that between twelve and one o'clock , about two hours after I was in bed and asleep , some one knocked at the door , which was opened by my female servant , upon which three fellows rushed into the passage , and demanded to see me .
The servant , however , informed them that I was gone to bed , and could not be disturbed .
After behaving in a very boisterous and bullying manner , they gave her a letter , and informed her that it was a challenge for her master to fight a duel , and they desired , or rather ordered her to give it me as soon as I rose in the morning .
All three of them refused to leave their names .
When I rose , rather late in the morning , I found that this famous challenge had not only been read by all the females of my family , but that all the people in Norfolk-street , in which I lodged , had been informed of it , and the intelligence had also been communicated to the Magistrates at Bow-street .
Two Bow-street officers were likewise observed parading the street , apparently to watch me out .
Now , I will candidly appeal to my readers , and ask if ever they heard of a challenge to fight a duel having been delivered in such a way before ?
A challenge , avowed as such , and delivered unsealed , to a female , by three drunken Irishmen ( for such my servant described them ) , between twelve and one o'clock at night , after the person challenged bad been in bed and asleep for hours , and not one of the party consenting to leave his name !
To suppose that this poor creature meant to fight , or that those who brought his challenge , and gave it open to my female servant , ever intended that he should fight a duel , would be the height of credulity .
Yet , to crown the joke , this very fellow , Cleary , was put forward upon the hustings , the next day , and actually read a copy of his blackguard challenge , which he said he had sent to me the night before .
This was done in the presence and bearing of Mr. the present Sir Richard Birnie , and other police magistrates .
Was ever the like of this performed before in England , or any other country ?
The reader will perceive that this was a trick , and a very clumsy one , to endeavour to get me taken into custody , and bound over to keep the peace .
Yet the venal hireling press blazoned it forth to the world , that I had injured and behaved very unhandsomely to Mr. Cleary , by publishing his letter , and that I had refused to give him the satisfaction of a gentleman , when he demanded it !!
Everyone knows this was done to create effect .
If Cleary had ever meant to fight me , he would have taken a very different course  he would have sent some confidential friend to communicate with me in private .


This stratagem , however , clumsy as it was , had the desired effect , and such was the beastly and scandalous misrepresentation of the whole London press , that many very worthy and honourable men think to this day that I ill used Mr. Cleary .
They say it was unhandsome to produce his letter .
It is difficult to conceive on what moral ground they come to such a conclusion .
Now , let us see what others , who were impartial , disinterested eye-witnesses of the affair , let us hear what they say upon the subject  for no one , perhaps , can be a thoroughly fair judge of the question who was not present .
I will here insert an extract from a letter , signed `` Leonidas , '' and published in Sherwin 's Register , on the 26th of December , 1818 .
After stating that the only apology which was ever offered by any of the Rump for Cleary 's conduct was , that I had behaved unhandsomely in divulging Cleary 's letter about the prisoners at Derby , he says --


`` But this unhandsomeness , what was it ?
The present writer was near the hustings on that occasion , and a plain tale , uninfluenced except by principle , will put the whole thing down .


`` Mr. Hunt , whose elocution , though bad , is not attended with any embarrassment , a token either of a clouded intellect , or of conscious finesse , spoke , in order to set himself and those who so nearly and furiously persecuted him in a clear point of view before the people assembled at the hustings , which he had a right to do , of the prisoners at Derby , of his own conduct towards them , which was most courageous and humane , and of the conduct of the party at Westminster on the same occasion , which was assuredly supine to a frightful degree , to speak in no stronger language .
In the midst of the most horrid yelling of the party , from whom he was continually obliged to appeal to the mob below , as Mr. Kinnaird , unused to his new nomenclature , called them , Mr. Hunt mentioned that the party in Westminster had done less than nothing to save the lives of the Derby prisoners .
So far from aiding them , one had written to him that nothing could be done , and the writer had declared his own indignation against the unhappy men for disgracing the cause to be such , that he could almost go down and hang them himself .


`` This was all fair , quite unobjectionable .
Whether it was judicious to introduce this topic , is quite another question .
While Mr. Hunt was speaking in half sentences , on account of the clamour from the hustings , and from the stages in front of them , where the party usually took their station , there was an evident feeling of uneasiness prevailing , a consciousness that Mr. Hunt had more to say than it was pleasant to hear  and this feeling broke out in one burst of foolish interruption when he arrived at this point , and a din was raised of ` name , name  it is all a lie , the scoundrel , the villain , name , name . '
Mr. Hunt seemed to pause .
The present writer had not the least suspicion of whom he had to name .
When the demand was often repeated , and the noise had somewhat abated , he came forward , and , with evident reluctance , pronounced , ` It was Mr. -- , ' who by this time had placed himself in front of the hustings , and with writhing contortions uttered some most passionate exclamations .


`` Well , this was not sufficient .
The cry now was , ` produce the letter , produce the letter  you can not , you blackguard  it is a lie , ' c. c..
Mr. Hunt could not , at the instant , produce the letter  but said it should be forthcoming the next day .
It was not produced the next day , when the grossest abuse was poured on him from the usual quarter .
The party would not hear his explanation , that it was left in the country , and scarcely could this assurance reach the ears of the more indifferent spectators .
An express was sent for it , who could not return without some delay .
In the interval , Mr. Hunt was assailed with every opprobrious epithet of liar , scoundrel , base slanderer , and exclamations , ` He can not produce it , it is all a fabrication , ' c. c..
At last , the letter came , and an attempt was made to read it , without effect .
Mr. Hunt was obliged to say , ` Well , you shall have it printed to-morrow . '


`` I am not conscious that I misrepresent a tittle of this most abominable scene , such as I hope never to witness again among human beings .
This was the unhandsome way that is said to justify the production of a private letter of Mr. Cobbett , even if it had been written by him  a letter now however proved to be a forgery , and of the genuineness of which no evidence was sought even at the time , except that it was furnished by Mr. Place , the tailor .


`` Now , nothing could be more justifiable than Mr. Hunt 's conduct .
It was absolutely forced on him .
He could not avoid producing the letter .
Those who complain of unhandsomeness themselves laid on him the disagreeable necessity .
What did they say of his not having the letter ready to produce ?
Why , that it was a proof of his being a liar , and a scoundrel .
Of what was it a proof ?
Simply that Mr. Hunt had no previous intention to disclose that letter , that he was forcibly obliged to produce it to satisfy the clamour of the complaining party .
If , after he had alluded to it , which might not be discreet , but which was not at all criminal because it was not on private , but public business -- if after alluding to the letter , he had refused to produce it , let any man judge what would have been his treatment from the party .
Their character demonstrates , to a certainty , that they would not have allowed the existence of such a letter , though fully conscious of it , and would have suffered Mr. Hunt to the end of time to be considered , what they called him , a liar , a Scoundrel , and a slanderer .


`` This subject , which I had not anticipated when my last letter was written , and did not mean , before the appearance of the confused and timid letter in Cobbett 's Register , to advert to , has occupied too much time to permit me to comprehend , in this communication , all the remarks which I announced .
It must be granted me , who am of no party but that of truth , to pursue my way , at leisure , and as free as possible from the mere forms of detail .
Meaning to resume my pen , I am , for the present , Sir , c..


`` LEONIDAS . ''


The reader will observe , that this letter was written in December , six months after the election  and I beg here to observe , that I never knew or spoke to the writer till some time after this letter was written  but I am proud to say , when I was introduced to him , that this fair advocate of truth , proved to be a gentleman and a man of the strictest honour , bred up and associating with the higher ranks of society , and who was a doctor ( of divinity , I believe ) .
He was altogether just such a man as I should have selected as an arbitrator to decide any dispute , a man of strict veracity and unimpeachable character .
I have said thus much upon this affair , in order to clear myself from the imputation of unhandsome conduct , and the charge of cowardice which was so lavishly bestowed upon me by the whole of the corrupt , hireling , partial London press , the falsehoods vomited forth by which were re-echoed from shore to shore , by all the dastardly local press of the kingdom .
This virulence arose from the following fact .
In consequence of my exposure of the conduct of Sir Francis Burdett , not more than 500 hands were held up for him out of 20,000 persons present , when his name was put in nomination  and now , on the eighth or ninth day of the election , Sir Francis stood THIRD upon the poll , and ultimately he was returned only SECOND upon it -- Sir Samuel Romilly standing several hundreds ( three hundred ) above him , and Sir Murray Maxwell only about four hundred below him .
In fact , nothing but the foul play shown towards Sir Murray and his friends , together with the very bad management of his committee , prevented his being returned with Sir Samuel Romilly , and Sir Francis being rejected and thrown out altogether .
This was what made the party so outrageously clamorous and vindictive against me .
Independent of the wound which their pride suffered , from the dread of being defeated , they had another reason to abominate me .
They were compelled to make no trifling sacrifices of a certain kind .
About the eighth or ninth day of the election , a dreadful effort was made by the party , and money flew about in all directions  poor electors had their taxes paid up , others were paid for voting , public-houses were opened , and all the sources of corruption and bribery were resorted to , by the friends and supporters of Sir Francis Burdett , which were employed by the Ministerial faction for Sir Murray Maxwell .
By these means there was at length an apparent spirit of enthusiasm revived for the Baronet .
Hundreds , who had viewed his conduct in a similar light to that in which I had viewed it , and who had condemned him , and given him up , and who had actually stood neuter hitherto , not meaning to vote at all at the election , as their votes could not have rendered me any service , now came forward and voted for him , under the impression that it would be better to return him , bad and indolent as he was , than to return the rank Ministerial tool , Sir Murray Maxwell .


At the end of the election , the numbers were declared by the High Bailiff to be as follow : - Romilly 5,538 , Burdett 5,239 , Maxwell 4,808 , Hunt 84 .
Upon the show of hands at the nomination by the High Bailiff , when the election commenced , Sir Francis stood third , below myself and Sir Samuel  at the end of the election Sir Francis stood second upon the poll , 300 below Sir Samuel Romilly .
This was a sad blow to the Baronet 's popularity , and a still more severe blow to the upstart gentry who formed the Rump Committee .
When Lord Cochrane resigned his seat , at the dissolution of the Parliament , and I publicly offered myself as a candidate , if Sir Francis and the Committee had stood neuter , even I should have been returned with him without any opposition  but this did not suit him , or the Committee  they opposed me , and no one doubted their power to prevent my being elected , though , at the same time , they little dreamt that I had the power to endanger the election of their idol , Sir Francis , and by my exertions to cause the Whig candidate , Romilly , to be placed at the head of the poll 300 above him .
Even all that , however , was easier to be borne than to have me in Parliament .
Whether I acted right , or whether I acted wrong , in thus opposing and bringing down that man , who had but a few years before been returned at the head of the poll for Westminster ( 2,000 above all the other candidates ) , is a matter of great doubt with a number of good men  I can only say , if I erred , I erred from public and not from private motives .
Sir Francis Burdett has , since I have been here , acted the most noble part towards me , and I have no doubt but he is convinced that I was actuated in my opposition to him solely by public views  and if I was then deceived and mistaken as to his public conduct , he has shown that he has the nobleness of soul that knows how to forgive my hostility to him , because he believes that I was his opponent , not to serve any selfish end , but from a sense of public duty .


A few days after I had been so grossly misrepresented by the press , with respect to Cleary 's affair , another circumstance occurred .
One of the gents belonging to the Observer newspaper , was a Mr. Spectacle Dowling , who appears to have written so many falsehoods upon the subject , that he actually believed at last that what he had written was true .
I had , in one of my speeches , alluded to the evidence which this person had given , on behalf of the Crown , upon the trial of Watson .
The next morning , when I entered the hustings , a person at the door spoke to me , and while I was looking back to answer him , I felt the stroke of a small whip upon my hat , and , on turning hastily round to see what it meant , there was Mr. Spectacle Dowling flourishing a small jockey whip in a violent manner .
I dashed up to him , and had just reached him a slight blow in the chin , when I was seized by the constables  but in his flight he received a blow in the mouth from my brother , and another from my son Henry , a lad of eighteen .
We were all three held by the constables , who were all prepared to favour his escape .


Mr. Dowling immediately summoned my brother before Sir Richard , then Mr. Birnie , for the assault .
I attended to give bail for him , and I certainly never saw a person who more resembled `` raw head and bloody bones '' than Mr. Dowling did , for he was bleeding at every pore  the marks of the three blows he had received were very evident upon his forehead , his mouth , and his chin .
It appeared that Mr. Dowling 's object was , not so much to get my brother held to bail , as it was to get himself bound over to keep the peace towards me  and Mr. Birnie , who had learned that Mr. Dowling was the first aggressor , urged me to prefer the complaint , and he would hold him to bail for the assault , as Dowling bravely protested before the Magistrates that he should have given me a good horsewhipping if the constables had not interfered .
I , however , positively declined to make any charge against the gentleman , as I had resolved that the first time I met him I would give him an opportunity of taking a belly-full .
I own that I walked the streets many an hour afterwards , in hopes of meeting him , and I carried a good cane in my hand , in order to lay it smartly about his shoulders .
It was , however , many months before I met the gentleman .
At length , one day , I was standing in Mr. Clement 's shop , talking with Mr. Egan , the gentleman who at that time was the fashionable slang reporter of all the pitched battles and prize fights of the day , and who has since produced from his pen those characters which have made such a noise at the Adelphi and other theatres , namely , Tom and Jerry .
While I was conversing with Mr. Egan , Mr. Dowling opened the door and walked in .
I immediately addressed him , and said , `` The last time I had the honour to meet you , Mr. Dowling , I believe was at Bow-street , when you stated to Mr. Birnie that you had struck me upon the Westminster hustings with a whip , and if you had not been prevented by the constables you would have given me a good horsewhipping . ''
`` Sir , ( said he ) I do not wish to have anything to say to you . ''
`` But , ( replied I ) there is a little account to settle between us  you struck me a blow with a whip , and I gave you a slap on the chin , so far we were equal  but you informed the Magistrates , that , if you had not been prevented by the constables , you would have given me a good thrashing  now , Sir , there are no constables present to interfere , and I will give you an opportunity to carry your threat into execution . ''
`` Sir , ( he again repeated ) I do not wish to have any thing to say to you  '' and he was making out of the shop as fast as he could shuffle  but as soon as he opened the door , and stepped upon the pavement , I said , `` Protect yourself , '' and at the same time I gave him a slight blow in the face with my flat hand , which knocked off his spectacles .
The gallant reporter picked them up very coolly , and putting both hands before his face , he sued for mercy , saying , that if I persisted he should take the law of me .
He kept his word , and I was indicted at the Middlesex sessions , and fined five pounds .


So ended the horse-whipping affair and the Westminster election , with the exception of a trifling after-clap or two , such as the High Bailiff sending me in a bill for my third share of the hustings , amounting to upwards of two hundred and fifty pounds ( I think that was the sum ) .
I refused the payment of it , and he commenced an action for the amount , and obtained a verdict for a great part of his charge .
This brought me for the first time in contact with Mr. Counsellor Scarlett , he having been employed by the High Bailiff against me .
I at once discovered , that this worthy Barrister , although a very clever fellow , was cursed with a very irritable , waspish disposition , of which I always took advantage afterwards , as often as we met in the Courts , which , unfortunately for me , was much too frequently for my pocket .


About this time an action had been brought against me , in the name of my landlord , Parson Williams , of Whitchurch , of whom I had rented Cold Henly Farm for three years , at a loss of about two thousand pounds , which I sunk in cleaning and improving the estate .
When Mr Cobbett fled from England to go to America , in 1817 , some of the Winchester attorneys and parsons openly said that they `` had driven Cobbett out of the country , and they would try hard to make me follow him . ''
They were as good as their words , for they tried all sorts of ways to injure my credit , and not succeeding to their wishes , an action was commenced against me , by a man who is clerk to the Magistrates , a Mr. Woodham , an attorney at Winchester , in the name of Mr. Williams , for breaches of covenants while I occupied Cold Henly Farm .
I called on Mr. Williams , who denied having ever given any orders to Woodham to commence the action  he said that Woodham had urged him to do it , but that he refused to do so , and he wished every thing to be settled amicably .
I relied upon the word of the old parson , who said he would write and stop any further proceedings  but my confidence was very soon betrayed , as I had notice that I had suffered judgment to pass by default , and a writ of inquiry was to be held at the next assizes to assess the damages .
The writ of inquiry was executed at Winchester , and a verdict was obtained against me for , I believe , 250l .
The breaches of covenant were easily proved , although they had been assented to by the parson , which assent I had carelessly and confidingly neglected to obtain from him , either in writing or before witnesses .
Mr. ABRAHAM MORE , an eminent barrister upon the Western Circuit , was employed , and conducted the inquiry for Mr. Attorney Woodham .
Mr. More was esteemed the best special pleader , and , after Mr. Sergeant Pell , he was certainly the best advocate upon the Western Circuit .
But I take leave to ask , what is become of Mr. More ?
Mr. More has quitted the circuit and the bar , and fled from his country , since I came to this Bastile .
I believe Mr. More was the Recorder of Lord Grosvenor 's rotten borough of Shaftesbury , and he was , I am told , his lordship 's steward , and suddenly left England under such circumstances as would have been blazoned forth in every newspaper in England , if he had been a poor Radical .
I bear no personal hostility to Mr. More , therefore I shall not say any thing to wound the feelings of those of his relatives and friends who are left behind .
But it is a remarkable fact , that the learned barrister , the Recorder of Shaftesbury , and the once learned and honest attorney , Mr. Richard Messiter , of Shaftesbury , should have left their country , and both have fled to America , under such peculiar circumstances .


On the 22d of July the son of Napoleon was created Duke of Reichstadt by his grandfather , the Emperor of Austria .
On the 15th of August , very considerable disturbances took place at Manchester , amongst the manufacturing poor , who were suffering great privations and misery , in consequence of the high price of provisions , and the ruinous low prices given for manufacturing labour .
On the 29th of September , the Emperors of Russia and Austria , and the King of Prussia , held a congress at Aix-la-Chapelle , assisted by ministers from England and France .
On the 2d of October , the convention of Aix-la-Chapelle was signed .
At the same period it was publicly announced by the Americans , that their navy consisted of six ships of the line , eleven frigates , and twenty-two sloops .
On the 21st , Lord Ellenborough resigned the office of Chief Justice of the Court of King 's Bench .


On the 2d of November , Sir Samuel Romilly put an end to his existence , by cutting his own throat with a razor .
This event excited a very considerable sensation throughout the whole kingdom .
Sir Samuel Romilly , although a lawyer , was very generally beloved and respected .
By his death , a vacancy occurred for the representation of the city of Westminster , and , within ten minutes after I heard of the deed which had been committed by Sir Samuel , I determined upon an opposition against whoever might be nominated by Sir Francis and the Westminster Committee .
I did not , indeed , myself , choose to encounter a repetition of the expenses which I had recently incurred , by standing a contested election for Westminster , but I was , nevertheless , determined to have some one put in nomination , to prevent , as far as lay in my power , the great and powerful city of Westminster from being made a rotten borough , under the influence of Sir Francis Burdett .
But I found all the little staunch phalanx who had supported me during my own contest , now declined supporting an opposition in favour of Mr. Cobbett , whom I proposed to put in nomination .
In fact , I could not get a single elector of Westminster either to propose or second the measure .


I ought to have noticed before , that , at the former contest , I was manfully and ably supported by Mr. John Gale Jones , who never deserted me , and who stood boldly by me to the very last day of the election .
I ought also to have noticed , that my colours , surmounted by the Cap of Liberty , with the mottos of `` Universal Suffrage '' on one side , and `` Hunt and Liberty '' on the other , were every day , during the first general election in this year , carried to the hustings , and there nailed to the same , where they remained proudly floating in the air the whole day , till they were taken down , when the polling was closed , to proceed with my carriage every night into Norfolk street .
I beg the reader , young or old , not to forget this fact , that at the general election in June 1818 , for the first time in England , a gentleman offered himself as a candidate , upon the avowed principles of `` Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot  '' that at this election , which lasted fifteen days , the Cap of Liberty , surmounting the colours with that motto , was hoisted and carried through the streets morning and evening , preceding my carriage to and from the hustings in the city of Westminster  and that these were the only colours that were suffered by the people to remain upon the hustings , all other colours that were hoisted being torn down and trampled under the feet of the multitude , while the Cap of Liberty and the flag with Universal Suffrage remained all day , and every day , for fifteen days , fixed to the hustings , without the slightest insult or molestation being offered to it by any one .
The cap and flag were frequently left for several hours together , without any one of my committee or myself being present  and I never heard that it was even hinted to offer to remove them , except once , on which occasion the following curious circumstance took place .
One day , one of the constables , observing that myself and all my immediate friends were absent from the hustings , proposed in a low voice to some of his companions , to remove Hunt 's flag and Cap of Liberty  but , softly as he had spoken , the proposal reached the quick ears of the multitude , and a loud and general cry was raised , `` Protect Hunt 's flag , my lads  touch it , if you dare ! ''
This was accompanied by a rush towards that part of the hustings where it was fixed .
The constable gentry slinked off , and never mentioned it afterwards , or attempted any thing of the sort .


One or two more instances of the devotion of the people towards me , I have forgotten to record .
On the day when Mr. Dowling affected to strike me with a horse-whip , within the hustings , some one upon the hustings , Dr. Watson , I believe , communicated to the people without , that the constables were ill-using me  he seeing that the constables had seized me by the arms .
With the quickness of lightning the boards which formed the lower end of the hustings were demolished , and the brave and generous people rushed in to my assistance , declaring that they were ready to lose their lives in my defence .
I will give but another instance of their honest devotion to the man who they thought was advocating their rights .
One evening , as I was leaving the hustings to pass to my carriage , there was , as usual , a great crowd at the door awaiting to salute me , and , amidst the pressure it so happened , that , without my being aware of any thing of the sort , a pickpocket neatly drew my watch from my pocket .
But , although the act was unobserved by me , it did not escape the vigilance of my friends , who surrounded the door from purer motives .
I passed on through the crowd to my carriage , which stood at a distance of twenty yards , the coachman not being able to bring it nearer up to the hustings , and , after I had got into the carriage , a man who was standing close to the door of the hustings hailed me , and holding up my watch and seals in his hand , passed it over the heads of the crowd , till it was handed into the carriage-window to me .
The fact was , that some of the people saw the fellow take my watch and pass it to another of his gang , and he did the same to a third , but they were pursued , and the watch was rescued from the gang , who got a sound drubbing for their pains , and the watch was restored to me in the way which I have stated .
Amongst the number who acted in this gallant and handsome way to me , I did not recognise any one that I knew by name .
Mr. Gale Jones was with me in the carriage , and was an eyewitness of this affair , so honourable to the people of Westminster , who attended the hustings during the election .


On the 17th of November , Queen Charlotte died at Kew , in her 75th year .
The Lord have mercy on her !
although I never heard that , during the very long period that she was Queen of England , she ever attempted to use her influence with her husband , George the Third , to save the life of a single fellow-creature , with the exception of Dr. Dodd , a parson , who was hanged for forgery !
but may the Lord have mercy upon her !


On the same day , I think it was , there was a meeting called at the Crown and Anchor , to nominate someone , as a proper person to be elected for Westminster , in the room of Sir Samuel Romilly .
I attended that meeting , and by accident was seated next to Sir Charles Wolseley , with whom I then , for the first time , became personally acquainted .
The chair was taken by Sir Francis Burdett , who briefly stated the purpose for which the electors had met .
A Mr. Bruce , the young man of that name who was imprisoned in France , for assisting in the escape of Lavalette from prison , proposed John Cam Hobhouse , Esq. as a fit and proper person for the choice of the electors of Westminster as their representative .
One of the Westminster committee seconded this nomination , and Mr. Hobhouse , a very young man , mounted the table , and addressed his auditory in a good set speech , which appeared to have been prepared for the occasion , as it consisted of nothing definite , but was merely made up of general professions of his being friendly to Liberty and Reform .
After he had done he left the room , amidst a pretty general expression of approbation .
Some time now elapsed , during which there was a pause , as every one was in expectation of Mr. Wooler , or some friend of Major Cartwright , putting that gentleman in nomination  but , as no one came forward , I mounted the table .
After some time I obtained a hearing , and I began by inquiring who and what Mr. Hobhouse was ?
I demanded if he was any relation to the Under Secretary of State , or if he were any relation of that Sir Benjamin Hobhouse house who had formerly professed in that very room the same sort of general principles of Liberty which were now professed by the youth whom we had just heard ?
whether he was any relation to that same Sir Benjamin Hobhouse , who afterwards accepted a place in the Addington administration , and who had for so many years annually received 2,000 l of the public money , for doing nothing , as a commissioner to inquire into the state of the Nabob of Arcot 's debts .
The truth was , that I thought this young gentleman was a brother of the then Under Secretary of State , and that he was a nephew of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse , and not his son .
I followed up these questions , which were well received , and made a considerable impression upon the meeting  and at length I proposed my friend , Mr. Cobbett , as a fit and proper person to represent the enlightened citizens of Westminster , and I put him in nomination accordingly .
There was a pretty general cry of no !
no !
and a loud laugh from the gentlemen of the Rump Committee  however , some persons in the crowd seconded my nomination .
Mr. Wooler was then called for , as it was understood that he was to propose Major Cartwright .
After a short parley , Sir Francis Burdett stated , that Mr. Wooler was not an elector of Westminster , and that he had nothing to say .
But , though Mr. Wooler had nothing to say , it appeared that Mr. Gale Jones had something to say .
But Mr. Jones was not permitted to express his sentiments  for , as usual , the impartial gentlemen of the committee cried him down with the most horrible yell , howling out that he was no elector .
I believe Mr. Bruce , who proposed Mr. Hobhouse , was no elector .
I was no elector , who proposed Mr. Cobbett .
-- This I stated  but the answer was , `` we did not know but you were going to propose yourself , which you had a right to do . ''
`` Well , '' said I , `` hear Mr. Jones .
How do you know that he is not going to propose himself ? ''
But all that I could urge was fruitless .
No man , who has not been an ear-witness , knows , nor can any man imagine , what sort of a thing is the howl which is set up by the party who attend those meetings , it would disgrace a conclave of fiends .
I have always seen Mr. Jones hooted down by these worthies , and I never knew them give him a single fair hearing in my life .
However , Mr. Jones had taken ample revenge upon them at the late election  during that fortnight he paid them off in full , for all the dastardly foul-play that they had shown towards him for many years , and now , when they got him upon their own dunghill , they retaliated , not by answering him , or controverting what he had to say , but by refusing to hear him at all .
Mr. Gale Jones , who is one of the most eloquent and powerful speakers that I ever heard , was always too independent in spirit for these gentlemen  he could neither be purchased nor wheedled out of his opinion .
Every art had been tried to seduce him from the path of honour , but the humble walk of life in which he has always moved is the best proof of his sincerity , and that his noble mind stands far above the reach of all corruption 's dazzling temptations .
A man , who possesses his eminent talent and very superior eloquence , might in this venal age have been elevated to wealth and power , if he would have condescended to speak a language foreign to his heart , and become the slave and tool of the Government , or of one of the factions .
I believe Mr. Jones to be one of the most amiable , virtuous , and truly humane men in the kingdom .
Those who have been envious and jealous of his talents , are the only persons who speak ill of him .
In his profession of a surgeon , he is skilful and assiduous , but his modesty has always prevented him from pushing his practice to any extent , so as to render it lucrative .
How many unfeeling , stupid block-heads are there in London , who ride in their carriages , and keep elegant establishments , clearing thousands a-year as surgeons , who do not possess a tenth part of the talent and skill of Mr. Gale Jones !
It may be asked , why then is he not rich , like other men in his profession ?
This question is very easily answered by me .
Alas !
his humanity and his modesty have been the cause of his poverty .
Some people will laugh at the idea of the retiring modesty of a man who could stand forward upon the hustings , and address twenty thousand of his fellow-creatures , with so much ease , and with so little embarrassment  but my assertion is , nevertheless , not only perfectly true , but also perfectly consistent  he is a lion in the cause of Freedom and Humanity , but a lamb in all other cases .
He is bold and fearless when contending for public Liberty  but he is no less modest , meek , and humble , in private life .
This has assisted to keep Mr. Jones poor , but his poverty has principally arisen from his great benevolence .
I have known Mr. Jones run a mile , and gratuitously devote hours , to assist a poor and friendless fellow-creature  I have known him to do this , and share the shilling in his pocket with the sufferer , and return weary and pennyless to his wife and family , when he might have obtained a rich patient in the next street , and a guinea fee , with a twentieth part of the trouble and time he had gratuitously bestowed upon the poor and helpless .


I have said thus much of Mr. Gale Jones , as a matter of common justice  and , as a public duty , I call the attention of my readers in the metropolis to the situation of this worthy man , this real friend of Liberty , who has been neglected and insulted by that venal band of mercenary and time serving politicians , those flippant summer flies of the metropolis , those fair-weather patriots , which , when compared with the steady , sound , and inflexible patriotism of Mr. Jones , are like the dross of the vilest metal put in competition with the purest gold .
In doing this justice to Mr. Jones 's character ( and it is but bare justice ) , I do not , however , mean to say that all the members composing the Westminster Committee are quite the reverse of what he is  on the contrary , I know many of them to be very worthy and most respectable men in private life , and perhaps they have very unintentionally been instrumental in making Westminster a rotten borough , in the hands of a particular circle .
Probably there did not live a more honourable , upright man , in private life , than the late Mr. Samuel Brooks  and , as to his public exertions , I believe that his intentions were equally honourable , although he was frequently made the instrument to promote injustice , partiality , and foul play , by some of the designing and unprincipled knaves who surrounded him , some of whom had great influence over him , and frequently urged him on to do that which in his heart I know he very much disapproved .


But I must now return to my narrative , from which I was led by the foul , unmanly , un-Englishman-like conduct of the Westminster party , in hooting and howling down Mr. Jones at the public meeting at the Crown and Anchor , which meeting was called expressly to discuss a subject of great national importance , and to decide upon who was the most proper man to represent the great , the enlightened , the opulent city of Westminster .
Mr. Hobhouse and Mr. Cobbett were , as I have already stated , put in nomination , and the chairman took the sense of the meeting , which , certainly , was very evidently in favour of Mr. Hobhouse  those who held up their hands in his favour being more than ten to one .
Upon this occasion I produced a letter , which I received from my friend Mr. Cobbett , from America , and likewise a New York newspaper , wherein was inserted a letter , which he had written to the editor of that paper .
In his letter to me , as well as his letter in the New York paper , he solemnly declared that the letter which was read by Cleary upon the hustings , at the late Westminster election , which Cleary stated to be written by Cobbett , was a FORGERY , and , of course , was never written by him .
Upon this Cleary went to Brooks 's and produced the letter , which , when it was shown to me , still appeared to be forged , as it was written in a much stronger hand than Mr. Cobbett usually wrote  and I also observed the post-mark was different from that of the office where I knew he always sent his letters when at Botley .
These circumstances , and my having implicit reliance upon the word of my friend , who in the most solemn manner declared it to be a forgery , made me have no hesitation in pronouncing it as my belief that it was such .


As the show of hands was so decidedly in favour of Mr. Hobhouse , and as I could not get a single Westminster man to join me , it was in vain to persist in forcing Mr. Cobbett 's claims upon the electors  but I was nevertheless determined to look out for some other cock to fight , so satisfied was I that it was necessary to oppose the schemes of that party who appeared determined to make Westminster a rotten borough , it being very evident that Mr. Hobhouse was the mere nominee of Sir Frances Burdett .
There was plenty of time to look about for a candidate , but I felt quite sure that no one would oppose him if I did not bring forward that candidate .
The Whigs had no chance whatever , unless some popular character stood forward to oppose the Westminster faction  and as for the Ministers , they had no relish to start another man , after the failure of Sir Murray Maxwell .
Nothing could , indeed , have more forcibly shown their conscious weakness , and the thorough detestation in which they were held by the public , than that they did not even dare to start a candidate in the very hot-bed of corruption , the very citadal of Court influence .


The election was not to take place till the spring  in the mean time I did not fail to sound all the men that I thought likely to assist me , but I did this quite privately , while every possible exertion was made by Mr. Hobhouse and his friends , aided by the powerful influence , and still more powerful purse , of Sir Francis .
The Westminster Committee now found it necessary to exert their utmost , and to strain every nerve .
Canvassing committees were formed in every parish , and meetings were called , at which Mr. Hobhouse attended in person , to solicit the favour of the electors .
The reports of these meetings I watched very narrowly , and in all the speeches of Mr. Hobhouse , I never could discover any one pledge given by him , to show that he was a friend to a real constitutional and efficient Reform .
He dealt in general terms , such as his father Sir Benjamin , or Burke , or any other apostate from the cause of Liberty , might have used with perfect safety .
There , nevertheless , appeared great enthusiasm amongst the party , and a general committee was formed , consisting , as it was said , of three hundred electors , selected from the different parishes .
Those who were not in the secret , were astonished to hear of such extraordinary exertions , such seemingly overwhelming preparation  and the general opinion was , that the election of Hobhouse was placed far above the chance of a failure .
In fact , he did not appear to have any opponent  no one had offered himself -- no one had been proposed but Mr. Cobbett , who was named by me under such circumstances as made any opposition from such a quarter worse than futile , absolutely ridiculous .
Apparently there was but one person who even insinuated any opposition to Mr. Hobhouse , but that one person was Hunt .
The Rump knew me too well to treat my opposition lightly .
They had so very recently experienced my power , that they saw with dismay that I had been the sole cause of endangering the election of Sir Francis , and that , by my exertions alone , he , their IDOL , Westminster 's pride and England 's hope , had been placed SECOND upon the poll , having received three hundred votes less than Sir Samuel Romilly .
The Rump Committee and Sir Francis knew all this perfectly well : they knew that if it had been a contest between Romilly and Burdett , without any interference of mine , that Burdett would have had a thousand or fifteen hundred votes more than Romilly .
Hence all the preparations and exertions that were now made .


Seeing all this , I was obliged to act with great caution .
I had applied , over and over again , to those that I thought the staunchest friends of Major Cartwright , but I found them wavering and insincere  desponding , and exclaiming `` it is all no use !
it is impossible to return the Major ! ''
I had taken care to get a friend to sound the Major , and I found that the old veteran was exceedingly pleased at the thought of being once more nominated for Westminster , for which city he certainly ought to have been the member long before .
This was the Old Game Cock , then , that I had determined to set up against the young Bantam , although I found that I should have great difficulty in bringing his seconds , or rather his proposers , up to the mark .
I had therefore solemnly made up my mind as a dernier resort , that if my effort to have the Major proposed should ultimately fail , I would once more offer myself , and stand the contest in person , so convinced was I of the absolute necessity of exposing the conduct of the electors of Westminster , who constituted what was called the Rump Committee .
They had treated me at the late election in the most foul and unhandsome way , such as was totally unbecoming the character of the very lowest of those who set up any pretension to honour or honesty .
I had made them feel the weight of my opposition , and I was determined that they should a second time experience the effect of my single-handed hostility .
I well knew that Major Cartwright was by no means popular amongst the Westminster electors , and that he would not stand the slightest chance of being elected  but I was alse thoroughly assured , that , as soon as the Whigs were quite certain that I had determined to stand forward against the Burdettite faction , they also would start a candidate .
This was the state of parties in Westminster at the close of the year 1818 .


By a report of a Committee , appointed by the House of Commons , it appeared that four millions of pounds weight of sloe , liquorice , and ash-tree leaves , are every year mixed with Chinese teas in England , besides the adulterations that take place in China , before the teas sent to England leave that country !
The new Parliament met on the 14th of January , 1819 , and was opened by commission .
The Queen 's death was noticed in the speech , and a Bill was brought in , and passed , to give the custody of the old insane King 's person to the Duke of York , instead of the Queen , with an allowance of TEN THOUSAND POUNDS per annum !
This is about four thousand pounds a year more than the salary of the President of the United States of America .
The guardians of John Gull 's purse vote the King 's son four thousand pounds a year more , for having the custody of his father 's person , who was confined as a lunatic in Windsor Castle , than the Americans pay to their Chief Magistrate , for managing all the business of the American nation !
In settling the election petitions , three boroughs were declared by the committees and by the House of Commons to have been carried by bribery , and an order was given to the Attorney-General to prosecute the parties .
Another bill was passed to prevent the Bank of England from paying their notes in gold .
What a hoax !
A bill was likewise passed , to prevent the subjects of England from inlisting into the service of any foreign state at war with another , which bill was intended to apply to the colonies of Spain .


The middle of February was fixed for the Westminster election , and not a breath had been heard about any opposition to Mr. Hobhouse .
I , however , put an advertisement into the Sunday Observer , I think it was , signed with my name , assuring the electors that an independent , real friend of Reform would be nominated at the hustings on the day of election .
Before this letter appeared in the paper alluded to , the Westminster committee were so satisfied in their own minds that , by their great and overwhelming show of preparations and canvassings , they had deterred any one from offering any opposition , and that their candidate would be returned on the same day , without going to the poll , that the high bailiff had not taken the usual precaution of erecting a hustings , a temporary scaffold being thought quite sufficient .
Nay , so thoroughly convinced of this was the Rump , that they actually ordered the CAR , and got it prepared for chairing their candidate , Mr. Hobhouse , and every necessary preparation was made for this ceremony being performed on the first day of the election : but , as soon as my letter appeared in the papers , it was all consternation and confusion amongst them , and the party were running about from one to the other like so many wild men !
In the mean time , Sir Charles Wolseley and Mr. Northmore had been written to , and had arrived in London .
A meeting was called , at the Russell Coffee-house , under the Piazzas , over night  Sir Charles and Mr. Northmore subscribed 50l .
each , and a few other subscriptions were entered into , making in the whole about 120l. , which was placed in the hands of Mr. Birt , of Little Russell Street , who was appointed treasurer  and with this sum I undertook to conduct the election of the Major for fifteen days , if the arrangements were left to me .
This was agreed to , and a placard was issued , and posted immediately , merely stating `` that the gallant Major was in the field . ''


A friend of mine that evening communicated to the Whigs , who were assembled at Brooks 's , in St. James 's Street , what had been done , and what was decided upon , and that I pledged my life for a fifteen days opposition to Sir Francis 's nominee , Mr. Hobhouse .
This intelligence was not communicated to the Whigs till late in the evening preceding the day on which the election was to be held  but they instantly assembled a council of war , to decide upon what steps ought to be taken .
At length it was agreed upon by them to start Mr. George Lambe , the son of Lord Melbourne .
He was instantly sought for , and , as I was credibly informed , he was called out of bed , to hear the news , so late as one o'clock in the morning  the election being to commence at eleven the same day .
I immediately agreed for a Committee Room , at the Russell Coffee-house , where , as I have said , we had a previous meeting of some half dozen the evening before , to settle who was to propose and second the nomination of the Major in the morning .
The only two electors of Westminster who attended , besides Mr. Birt , were Mr. Nicholson and Mr. Bowie .
These gentlemen hesitated about performing this office , and we separated without any thing being decided upon as a certainty .
However , I knew that Mr. Birt was to be depended upon as a man of strict honour and integrity  and looking forward to the probability of the other two gentlemen failing to attend , I had taken care to provide against any contingency of that sort .
It was necessary to take every precaution , for I was aware that I had to contend with the greatest tricksters of the age  I knew Mr. Morris , the High Bailiff , to be one of the Rump faction  and I knew Master Smedley , the deputy of the High Bailiff , to be a cunning , sly , intriguing fellow  and it was therefore certain that I should have to watch their motions narrowly , being quite sure in my own mind that they would take advantage of any little informality to close the election -- a step , or their part , which I was determined , if possible , to frustrate .


The morning arrived , and I attended the committee room early  but I found no one there except Mr. Birt and Dr. Watson , from whom I learned that Messrs. Bowie and Nicholson , the professed friends of the Major , had appointed to meet , to breakfast , at a Coffee-room , at the top of Catherine Street , in the Strand .
Thither I repaired , and found them still wavering and undecided .
When , however , I gave them to understand that it did not depend upon them alone , whether the Major should be proposed or not , as I had procured two electors , who were ready to propose and second the nomination of the Major if they failed to do so , their doubts and hesitation vanished , and they immediately agreed to go upon the hustings , and perform the task .


At this moment I received a message from the Major , who wished to see me at Probat 's hotel , in King Street , Covent Garden , where he was waiting .
I found the Major very anxious to know how matters were going on , he having heard of the difficulties which had been started  I assured him that all was going on well , but I strongly remonstrated against his taking any part in the election , and censured his coming so near the hustings as Probat 's hotel , as I knew that the Rump would have been delighted to have saddled the Major with a heavy share of the expenses of the hustings , c..
The Major agreed to return home , and not interfere any further , and he also assured me that he had positively prohibited the little upstart Irishman , Cleary , from going near the committee room , or interfering at all in the election on his account , as he knew that I had an objection to place myself in the power of such a fellow , by being even in the same room with him .
Cleary , who , upon such occasions , was always a very busy , officious , meddling Marplot , felt very much mortified at this prohibition , so much so , that I am informed he immediately offered his services to the Rump , to act in opposition to his patron and friend , the Major .
But , however basely the Rump might have acted in other respects , they acted very properly in this instance  for they declined to accept this treacherous offer , and poor Mister Cleary sunk into his original nothingness .


When I returned from visiting the Major , I found that the High Bailiff had proceeded to Covent Garden , mounted the scaffold , and with unusual haste had proceeded to have the writ read , and to open the proceedings of the election .
I got as near as possible to the hustings , upon which I observed that Mr. Bowie and Mr. Nicholson had taken their stations  and with considerable difficulty I also contrived to mount them .
Mr. Hobhouse was proposed , Mr. Lambe was proposed , and the Major also was proposed and seconded in due form  and the High Bailiff , upon a show of hands , declared the election to have fallen upon John Cam Hobhouse , Esq. by a very large majority , which was evidently the case , in the proportion of eight or ten to one .


As soon as this ceremony was over , I found Mr. Lambe and his friends , Lambton , Macdonald , and Co. hastening off the hustings , apparently to prepare for the polling , without ever taking any steps to demand a poll .
Now was the moment to exert myself , and , as no time was to be lost , I made my way through the dense crowd upon the scaffold up to Messrs. Nicholson and Bowie , and requested them immediately to demand a poll , as I saw that the High Bailiff was preparing to declare Mr. Hobhouse duly elected .
When thus brought to the test , they both began to shuffle , and finally replied that they would not undertake to do this , as it would make them liable to the expenses .
It was in vain that I denied this , and requested them to tender their votes for the Major  they were not to be moved , and as every thing would be lost by a single instant of indecision , I rushed back again through the crowd , to that part of the scaffolding where I had seen Mr. Lambe and his friends retreating , and in my way I nearly overturned several of the Rump .
I assured the High Bailiff that a poll would be demanded , and with great difficulty I was just in time to seize the tail of Mr. Lambe 's coat , as he was walking down the ladder of the scaffold .
In doing this I was obliged to jostle Mr. Lambton , who appeared excessively indignant at the shake which he received from me .
I , however , kept fast hold of Mr. Lambe 's coat , and earnestly requested him to return that instant and demand a poll , as otherwise the election would be closed in favour of Hobhouse .
Both he and Mr. Macdonald , although they had been bred to the bar , appeared to know nothing of the matter , and seemed to doubt the accuracy of my assertion .
I again emphatically assured them that , unless they returned and instantly in writing demanded a poll , the law would justify the High Bailiff in declaring Hobhouse to be duly elected .
My earnestness induced them to return and do so , and if they had not complied with my suggestions , the election of Hobhouse would have been irrevocably declared in less than one minute after .


Thus by my presence of mind were the High Bailiff and the Rump frustrated in their schemes  for , had it not been prevented by my prompt , bold , and decisive interposition , Hobhouse would have been at once chaired as one of the Representatives of the city of Westminster .
In consequence of the want of such decision and presence of mind , this trick has been a hundred times successfully played off at elections , and would most certainly and most effectually have succeeded here  for , after the show of hands is taken , unless one of the candidates or two of the electors immediately present to the returning officer a written demand of a poll , he is justified by law in declaring that person duly elected for whom the show of hands has been given .


It was , I repeat it , my interference , and my single exertions upon this occasion , that prevented Mr. Hobhouse from being at once returned as the colleague of Sir F. Burdett  and yet some persons are so foolish as to inquire , `` what can be the reason of such men as Tailor Place , Currier Adams , c. c. and the rest of the Rump , persisting with such vindictive and rancorous hostility against Mr. Hunt ? ''
The fact which I have stated is of itself a sufficient reason for their malice  but there are other reasons for the display of the malignant feelings of Mr. Tailor Place and Co. .
The reader should recollect , that I have often called the public attention to the conduct of this said professed Jacobin Tailor  for instance , when Sir Francis Burdett left the Tower , and the procession was got up for him , Tailor Place undertook to attend , and to take the management of those who were on horseback  but when the time arrived , the Tailor forgot to attend , although he was one of the most violent against the Baronet , for going over the water and deceiving the people .
Again , when the famous Inquest was held upon the body of the murdered SELLIS , in the Duke of Cumberland 's apartments in the Palace , who , in Heaven 's name , should be selected for the foreman of that jury which sat on the inquest , who but Tailor Place , of Charing Cross !
The verdict was felo de se , and the body of poor Sellis was buried in a cross road !
Tailor Place was considered by some as having been a very lucky fellow , to be selected as the foreman of the said jury , by the Coroner for the Palace .
I know , and I beg to remind the public , that the conduct of the said tailor was so very suspicious , that Colonel Wardle and Sir F. Burdett did not fail to speak very plainly upon the subject  and I know also that for many years Sir Francis Burdett would not trust himself in the same room with the said tailor , and that when he spoke of him he did it in the most unequivocal terms of suspicion and distrust -- and more-over , that for many years the late Samuel Brooks never would have any communication with the said tailor .
These things , with many others , came to my knowledge , and I never failed to speak of them in the language which they merited , both to the face of the said tailor and behind his back : my friends will therefore at any rate not be surprised at the malignant and cowardly hostility of this part of the Rump , in order to be revenged upon me .
The exposures that I have made , the hundred times that I have frustrated the dirty plots of this gang , have entitled me to , and secured to me , the honour of their everlasting hatred , and a high honour I assure them I esteem it .


After the poll had been demanded by Mr. Lamb , the High Bailiff adjourned the election till the next morning , to give time for the workmen to erect a proper hustings .
The polling commenced under the most vindictive and malignant feelings towards me on the part of the Rump  in consequence of the disappointment and the defeat which they had sustained , in not carrying the election of Mr. Hobhouse without opposition  which opposition they very justly attributed to me alone .
I stood upon the hustings the avowed advocate of the Major , but at the same time the openly avowed opponent of Mr. Hobhouse , because he was the nominee of Sir Francis Burdett , whom I was determined to convince that he was nothing without the support of the people , that people which I contended he had deserted in 1816 , when he refused to present their Address and Petition to the Prince Regent , and when he declared himself hostile to Universal Suffrage .
The Baronet felt his situation to be such that he must either retire for ever from politics , or make a desperate effort to carry his point  he had set the die upon the election of Mr. Hobhouse , and his failing to carry that election would be a death blow to his popularity throughout England , and to his future influence in Westminster .
I thought the Baronet had deserted his post , by refusing his aid and protection to the suffering people , in the years 1816 and 1817 , and upon public grounds alone was I determined publicly to bring him to a sense of the relative situation in which he stood with the people .
Whether I was right , or whether I was wrong , is not the question .
I believed that he had neglected his public duty , and I took this public occasion , even as it might be said upon his own dunghill , to convince him of his error .
I solemnly declare that I was actuated solely by a sense of what I owed to the public , and that I never in my life felt any private enmity towards Sir Francis  on the contrary , I always entertained a personal regard for him .
But no influence on earth could induce me to abandon what I thought a public duty , to gratify any private or personal considerations .
I now met Sir Francis Burdett openly upon his own ground , where he had been always idolized , in the midst of his friends , and surrounded by his constituents .
I did not go behind his back to attack him , I met him face to face , and I boldly charged him with having deserted the cause of the people .
I was indeed urged on to do this in a less courteous manner than I should otherwise have done , by the cowardly and blackguard attacks which I was daily experiencing from the dirty members of the Rump , by whom I was assailed with all the malice , filth , and falsehood which that august body could rake together , and fabricate against me .
In fact , when I began to speak , I was baited like a bull , by a set of as cowardly caitiffs as ever disgraced , by their presence , the face of the earth  and , in addition to these , towards the latter end of the election , ruffians and assassins were regularly hired to attack me in a body .


The Baronet attended daily on the hustings , and he went round and visited the committees , and addressed them at night  his purse-strings were thrown open , and , in truth , if the Baronet 's life had depended upon the event , he could not have laboured harder or have done more to have saved it , than he did to secure the election of Mr. Hobhouse  -- but all would not do !
The gang composing the Rump also attended every evening , with their hired myrmidons .
As my only object was to expose them and their corrupt system , so their only apparent object now appeared to be to vilify and abuse me , and when , at length , the election of Mr. Lamb seemed to be almost certain , they became desperate .
I was not only hissed and hooted , but I was pelted with sticks and stones by their hired agents , and although the people appeared excessively indignant at these outrages , they could not altogether prevent them .
A little gang of desperadoes was always placed to open on me as soon as I began to speak , to endeavour to drown my voice in the most vulgar , brutal , and beastly manner .
Amongst this gang generally some of the reporters to the Burdettite newspapers took up their station , and in such beastly abuse , as I have alluded to , much too coarse and horrid to mention in print , these worthies freely indulged .
The commencement of their attack was , `` Hunt , where 's your wife ? ''
And then followed a volley of such beastly and disgusting ribaldry as would have disgraced the most abandoned inmates of the lowest brothel in the metropolis .


It had been frequently suggested to me that none but wretches of the most profligate character could be guilty of such atrocious conduct , in which opinion I fully concurred .
One day , when I was about to address the people at the close of the poll , this gang began their accustomed attack , and vociferated the most revolting , obscene , and truly horrid observations , relating to my wife  upon which I turned round and asked , if it were possible for such language to proceed from the mouth of any one who possessed the character of a man ?
And I added , that it did appear to me more than probable , that no one would resort to such cowardly , base , and horrid language , but some monster who was connected with a gang like that of Vere-street notoriety .
This silenced the scoundrels for a moment , but at length some fellow among them took this to himself , and demanded if I meant to accuse him of unnatural propensities ?
I replied that I did not allude to any one individual , but that it did seem clear to me that none but monsters of the worst description could be guilty of such conduct as had been exhibited daily before the hustings when I addressed the people .


This circumstance , which occurred exactly as I have stated it , was , nevertheless , grossly perverted in a great number of the newspapers the next day  they falsely asserting that I had accused a person of being guilty of an unnatural crime , and pointed him out to the vengeance of the multitude before the hustings  and this has frequently been repeated and harped upon since by some scoundrels , who know the utter falsehood of the accusation .
It is , however , a very curious fact , which would require but little trouble to prove , that one of the very men who suffered last week at the Old Bailey , for this detestable crime , was a constant attendant at the aforesaid Westminster election , amongst that part of the crowd from whence the horrid insinuations with respect to my wife were daily vociferated .
So much for the dreadful cry out that was made against me by the daily press , for having , as they falsely asserted , accused a person wrongfully .
I remember at the time of the general election , in 1812 , when Mr. Cobbett offered himself a candidate for the county of Hants , a drunken , vulgar blackguard was abusing him in a most beastly and insufferable manner , whereupon Mr. Cobbett seriously informed the people that he was a maniac , and that his opponents had suffered him to escape for the purpose of abusing him  and he made a most feeling appeal to the people , and expostulated , in the most grave and serious manner , upon the baseness and cruelty of suffering the poor maniac to come amongst the crowd to expose himself without his keeper .
This appeal had the desired effect , for the drunken ruffian was led away out of the crowd perforce , under the impression that he was actually a madman , who had just escaped from his keeper  yet no one thought of abusing Mr. Cobbett for this trick to get rid of an intoxicated beast , who was unwarrantably abusing him .


I attended the hustings daily till the last day but one , when the success of Mr. Lamb , and the defeat of the Baronet and Mr. Hobhouse , were certain .
Mr. Lamb was declared duly elected at the end of the fifteenth day , to the great mortification of Sir Francis Burdett , and the total discomfiture of the Rump  and the CAR which had been provided for the chairing of Sir Francis 's disciple , was laid by for another occasion .


For this defeat of the Rump they have solely to thank me .
I made them a second time feel the power of courage , honesty and truth , when opposed to fraud , trickery , and pretended patriotism  and this great lesson was read to Sir Francis Burdett , that he was nothing without the support of the people  that all his immense wealth , that all his great and profound talent , and all his influence , were nothing in the scale of political power without the people .
The Baronet is , I believe , truly sensible that my exertions have taught him this useful lesson , and , like a truly great and good man , he bears me no malice for performing this painful duty -- for I have no hesitation in saying , that it was the most painful , the most trying public duty that I ever performed in the whole course of my life .


The numbers polled at this election were , for Lamb 4465 , for Hobhouse 3861 , for Major Cartwright 38 : -- so that Mr. Lamb polled 604 more electors than Mr. Hobhouse .
As for Major Cartwright , he had not the slightest chance from the beginning .
No real Reformer , no friend of Universal Suffrage , can have the slightest chance to be returned for Westminster , while that rotten borough continues in the hands of a particular family , or while any considerable portion of the electors suffer themselves to be led by the nose by a gang of the most contemptible , as well as most corrupt , men under the face of the sun .
As a body of men , the electors of Westminster are , perhaps , as enlightened and intelligent as any body of men in the universe  but the little faction called the Rump , are as contemptible and as corrupt as their brother electors are free and impartial .
The great mass of the electors do not take any trouble to inquire about these matters  they are industrious tradesmen , every one of them having business of importance of his own to attend to , and consequently when an election comes they suffer themselves to be led by the nose by a little junto , who have no more pretensions to patriotism than they have to talent and integrity , of which it is plain that they are totally destitute .
When I stood the contest for Westminster , at the general election , and only obtained eighty-four votes , it was urged against me how few friends and supporters I had amongst the real electors of Westminster  it was said that I had disgusted and displeased all parties  and Counsellor Scarlett , one of the licenced libellers of the Court of King 's Bench , had the impudence to state this fact in the Court , as a proof in what little estimation my character was held  and he added this unblushing , bare-faced falsehood , that `` wherever Sir Samuel Romilly offered himself , there I went to oppose him , merely because he was a good man  '' while , on the contrary , he well knew that , had not Sir Francis Burdett and his nominee been opposed by me , Sir Samuel Romilly , far from being elected for Westminster , would never have been even nominated for that city .
But what answer will these trading politicians give to the fact , that Major Cartwright obtained only thirty-eight votes during a contested election of fifteen days ?
I had made thousands of personal enemies , yet I obtained eighty-four votes  while the Major , who never in his life made a personal enemy , could only obtain thirty-eight votes , not half the number that polled for me , although he was amongst all his friends , where he had resided for many years , and where he was universally and justly respected , both for his private and his public virtues .
The fact is , that of the Major 's politics , as of mine , the honesty and sincerity are hated and dreaded by the whole of the Rump faction , who would soon be reduced to their native nothingness , if once a really independent man were to be chosen for Westminster  I mean a man independent , as well of Sir Francis Burdett , as of the Ministry and the Whigs .
Till that time arrives , the representation of Westminster will be upon a level with the rottenest of rotten boroughs .
We know Sir F. Burdett to be a profound politician , a real and steady friend of Liberty , and a truly great man , yet in the House of Commons he carries no more weight from his being the Representative of the great city of Westminster , than he would do if he were only the Representative of Old Sarum , or any other rotten borough .
Such is the abject state to which , by their dirty intrigues , the Rump have reduced this once great and high-minded city , by the exertions of which the whole kingdom was wont to be agitated !
Mr. Hobhouse is an active member of the Honourable House , but he dares not quit the leading-strings of the worthy Baronet  and let me ask the honest part of mankind to point out any one great political question which he has brought before the House ?
What has he done for the people , or for the cause of Liberty , since he has been elected ?
I am not speaking personally  for I personally feel that Mr. Hobhouse did his best to serve me , when I was in bondage in Ilchester gaol , for which I shall always feel personally grateful  but still , looking at the question on public grounds , I must ask what has he ever done in the House , such as we might and should have formerly expected from one of the independent Members of the city of Westminster ?
We know that he always votes with the Whigs against the Ministers  but how is it , if he is in earnest , that he has never created any great sensation throughout the country , by some grand exposure of those Ministers , and of that system of which his father , Sir Benjamin , forms so prominent a part ?
It has often been asked , what can one man do in the House ?
I think I can give a silencing answer to such a time-serving question : What could not one man do in the way of exposure , if he were honestly disposed to do it ?
I think , after the exposure that I made while I was locked up in a gaol , I am entitled most triumphantly to make this answer .


In consequence of the death of the Princess Charlotte of Wales , the Dukes of Clarence , Kent , Cumberland , and Cambridge disposed of their mistresses , and got married , in order , as it would seem , to secure a heir from the precious stock of the Guelps , to fill the British throne  to accomplish which desirable purpose there appears to have been a hard race , for on the 26th of March , in this year , 1819 , the Duchess of Cambridge brought forth a son -- on the 27th the Duchess of Clarence was delivered of a daughter -- on the 24th of May the Duchess of Kent was delivered of a daughter -- and on the 5th of June the Duchess of Cumberland was delivered of a son .
So that this worthy family presented John Gull with an increase to their burdens in one year of four great pauper babes , to be rocked in the national cradle , and to be bred up at the national expense .
Oh , rare John !
what a wonderfully happy fellow thou must be !
On the 29th of March , the conscientious guardians of our rights and liberties , the faithful stewards of public property , the worthy Members of the Honourable House of Commons , voted an allowance of TEN THOUSAND POUNDS A YEAR to the Duke of York -- for taking care of his poor old mad father 's person  and it is a very extraordinary fact that , on the 12th of April , on one of his early visits to Windsor , to enable him to earn this large sum of money from John Gull , his Royal Highness fell in one of the rooms of Windsor Palace , and BROKE HIS ARM .
All the old women in the nation , and many of the young ones also , swore that this was a judgment upon him , for extorting such a sum from John Gull 's pocket , for such a purpose !
On the 17th , Johnston , Bagguley , and Drummond were tried , and , as a matter of course , found guilty of sedition at the Chester assizes .
On the 26th of May the House of Commons passed a vote of thanks to Marquis Camden , for giving up the profits of his sinecure place of Teller of the Exchequer .
This was another precious hoax upon John Gull  the fellow having been actually frightened out of it in 1817 , in consequence of the resolutions which were passed at the great public meeting where I had the honour to preside  which meeting was held in the city of Bath , where the Noble Marquis was recorder .
On the 1st of June there was a serious riot at Carlisle , by the weavers out of employment .
On the 19th there was a very numerous public meeting held at Huntslet Moor , near Leeds  and about the same time , and in the following weeks , very numerous meetings were held at Glasgow , in Scotland , and other places all over the North of England , petitioning for Annual Parliaments , Universal Suffrage , and Vote by Ballot .
On the 12th of July a great meeting was held at Newhall Hill , near Birmingham , for Parliamentary Reform , at which Major Cartwright and Mr. Wooler were present .
It was said upwards of sixty thousand persons attended , and unanimously elected Sir Charles Wolseley their legislatorial attorney , and representative for Birmingham , with directions that he should apply to the Speaker to take his seat .
On the 13th twenty thousand Spanish troops at Cadiz , destined by Ferdinand to fight against the cause of Liberty in South America , mutinied and deserted .
On the 15th Bills of Indictment were found , at Chester , against Sir Charles Wolseley and the Rev. Joseph Harrison , for political speeches made at a great public meeting for Reform , at Stockport  and on the 31st the Gazette contained a proclamation against seditious meetings , particularly denouncing the election of representatives or legislatorial attorneys as illegal .


On the 21st a Reform meeting was held in Smithfield .
This meeting was called by some of the inhabitants of the Metropolis , and I was invited to attend and take the chair .
Dr. Watson and his friends were particularly active in procuring this meeting , and when the committee invited me to take the chair , I did not hesitate a moment to accept it , though , at the same time , I made up my mind to be particularly careful as to what resolutions were passed , c. and by no means to be led into the scheme of electing any legislatorial attorney , as they had done at Birmingham , especially as this scheme had been denounced as illegal by the proclamation in the Gazette the week before .
When I came to London , the night before the meeting , I was met by Dr. Watson and the committee , and I desired to see what resolutions they had prepared to be submitted to the meeting the next day .
I found , however , that they had only a few very vague and imperfect resolutions drawn up  but the Doctor produced a letter from Joseph Johnson , the brush-maker , at Manchester , saying , that it was the wish of the people of Manchester , that I should , at the Smithfield Meeting , be elected the representative and legislatorial attorney for the unrepresented people of the Metropolis , c..
He also alluded to the great public meeting , which was to be held at Manchester in the beginning of August , and stated , that it was the intention of the people on that day to follow the example of the people of Birmingham and the Metropolis .
It was very easy to discover that the motive of Mr. Johnson for advising the people of the Metropolis to elect me their legislatorial attorney , was , that he might be elected for Manchester at the ensuing meeting .
On this proposition I at once put a negative , by referring to the Gazette , and to the proclamation , adding , that it would be worse than folly to run our heads against such a post  and I further declared , that I saw no good that was to be derived from such a measure .
In this the committee at once concurred , and it was agreed , that every intention of that sort should be abandoned , that other resolutions should be drawn up , and that the same DECLARATION which had been passed at the Meeting held in Palace-Yard , and at the Manchester Meeting , at which I presided in the early part of that year , should be proposed to the Smithfield Meeting .
It was also decided , that certain conciliatory resolutions , and an address to the Catholics of Ireland , should be submitted to the meeting .
Of these resolutions I highly approved .


The next morning , just before the time fixed for the meeting , Mr. James Mills , late of Bristol , called at my lodgings with a string of resolutions , which he wished to be submitted to the meeting .
Dr. Watson , I think , was present .
These resolutions were read over in a hasty manner , and as hastily adopted , to be made part of the proceedings of the day .
I own that this was acting very differently from my usual cautious manner  but , as Mills gave us to understand that they had been laid before Major Cartwright , and I believe he said had been approved of by him , and as he led us also to believe that he would attend at the meeting to move them , they were accordingly sent off to the Observer office , to get slips set up , that they might be given to the different reporters who attended the meeting .


Great military preparations were on this occasion made , under the pretence of quelling some tremendous riot , or some apprehended insurrection .
The then Lord Mayor , John Atkins , was a corrupt and devoted tool of the Government , and he made himself particularly officious in this affair .
Six thousand constables were sworn in the day before , and in the city all was hurry and bustle  and all this was done in order to work upon the fears of the timid and foolish part of the community , to create a prejudice in their minds against the Radicals .
When the hour of meeting arrived , an immense multitude was collected , which was computed to consist of not less than seventy or eighty thousand persons .
The Rev. Joseph Harrison , from Stockport , attended , and either moved or seconded some of the resolutions  but Mr. Mills , the author of them , never came near the place  or at any rate he never showed himself upon the hustings .
A warrant had been issued against Harrison , by the Magistrates of Cheshire , with which the officers had followed him up to town , and , having got it backed by the Lord Mayor , he was apprehended upon the hustings by the city officers .
This was evidently done with the view to work upon the feelings of the multitude , and to create an appearance of tumult , that the military might be called in and let loose upon the people , with some apparent show of necessity .
Had not care been taken to frustrate it , this plot of the worthy John Atkins would have succeeded  for some one cried out a rescue , and the multitude was spontaneously pressing towards the officers for that purpose  but here my natural presence of mind in emergencies was exercised promptly and with full success .
I came forward , and stated to the people what had occurred , and I cautioned them not to be led away by any such plot , to excite them to a breach of the peace  and I demanded of them , in case of a warrant having been issued against me , that they would let me go with the peace-officers quietly , for nothing would delight our enemies so much as to work up the people to tumult and disorder , that they might have a pretence for bloodshed .
This had the desired effect .
Harrison was taken away peaceably , and the business of the meeting proceeded with the greatest regularity , as if nothing had occurred of a nature to disturb it .
This was certainly one of the most cold-blooded attempts to excite a riot that was ever made in this or in any other country .
But fortunately I had influence enough over the people to frustrate this plot .
The resolutions were passed , and the declaration was carried unanimously , as well as the address to the Catholics  the meeting was dissolved , and the people retired to their homes in the most peaceable manner , after having conducted me , their chairman , to my lodgings .


The slips , which had been printed at the Observer office , had been sent to me while I was on the hustings , and I delivered them to the different reporters , who applied for them .
Mr. Fitzpatrick , the reporter of the New Times .
was the only one who had the baseness treacherously to betray this confidence , by voluntarily coming forward in the Court , at York , to swear to the fact of my having furnished him with them upon the hustings .
Thus ended the great Smithfield Meeting , held on the 21st of July , 1819 .


On the 26th of the same month , at a Common Hall , the Livery of the City of London passed a strong vote of censure upon their Lord Mayor , John Atkins , `` for his officious and intemperate conduct on the day of the Smithfield Meeting . ''


I forgot to mention , in the proper place , that I had been invited to attend and preside at a great public meeting , held at Manchester , in the early part of this year  if I recollect right it was in January .
This meeting had been convened by public advertisement .
I slept at Stockport the night before , and was accompanied from that town to the place of meeting by thousands of the people .
When I arrived there , none of the parties who had invited me to Manchester , Messrs. Johnson , Whitworth , and Co. accompanied me upon the hustings  but they attended a public dinner , which , in the evening , after the meeting , was provided at the Spread Eagle Inn , Hanging Ditch , at which upwards of two hundred persons sat down .
I found a number of good men at Manchester , and amongst that number I esteem my worthy friend Mr. Thomas Chapman , of Fannel-street , one of the very best men and most honest advocates of Liberty in the kingdom .
I have ever found him the same man in principle , sincere and bold in public , and kind , generous , and open-hearted in private .
To know during one 's political life , and to possess the friendship of , two or three such men as Mr. Chapman , is more than sufficient recompence for the treachery , cowardice , and baseness of hundreds that one must as a matter of course become acquainted with .
Here I first saw Johnson , the brush-maker  he had not the courage to accompany me upon the hustings , although he was one of the most officious to invite me to preside at the meeting .
John Knight and Saxton were the men who attended me upon the hustings , and addressed the people , c. c. I had never seen either of them before .
Mr. Wroe and Mr. Fitton , of Royton , also were upon the hustings .
I had seen the latter , as a delegate from Royton , at the meeting of delegates called by Major Cartwright and the Hampden Club , in the name of Sir Francis Burdett , in the year 1817 .


As this meeting passed off without any difficulty or danger , Johnson the brush-maker , who was very young in the ranks of Reform , professed a determination to take a more active part at a future opportunity .
In conformity with this resolution , he wrote to invite me to attend a public meeting , to be held at Manchester on the 9th of August , which invitation I accepted .
The intended meeting being publicly announced in all the London papers , excited a very considerable sensation throughout the country , and particularly through the North of England .
As I strongly suspected that my letters to Manchester , about this time , were opened at the post-office , I sent them by other conveyances than by the post .
My family appeared to dread my second visit to Manchester , and to forebode some fatal accident , and they endeavoured to persuade me not to attend  but , although I did not anticipate a very pleasant journey , yet I had given my word , and that was quite enough to insure my attendance .


On my road , I stopped to bait my horse at Wolseley Bridge .
As soon as I arrived , the landlord of the inn addressed me , and begged to know if my name was Hunt .
I answered in the affirmative  upon which he delivered an invitation from Sir Charles Wolseley , requesting me to call on him .
He lived only about a hundred yards from the inn .
The fact was , I had slept at Coventry the night before , where I met Messrs. Goodman , Lewis , and Flavel , and one of them had written to Sir Charles Wolseley , to say that I should pass Wolseley Bridge in the morning , and this induced him to leave the message which I have mentioned .
I accepted his invitation , and this was the first time that I ever met the worthy Baronet in private .
I spent a few hours very pleasantly with Sir Charles , who had also , I understood , been invited to attend the meeting at Manchester  but some family reasons prevented him from complying .
When I arrived at Bullock Smithey , near Stockport , I heard that the meeting was put off , and that another meeting was advertised to be held on the 16th of August , the following Monday .
The cause of this was , that Mr. Johnson and those concerned in calling the meeting had , in their advertisements , stated one of the objects to be , that of electing a representative or legislatorial attorney for Manchester .
This foolish proposition , directly in the face of the late proclamation , was seized on by the Magistrates of Manchester , and they issued hand-bills , and had placards posted all over the town , denouncing the intended meeting as illegal , and cautioning all persons `` to abstain at their peril from attending it . ''
Upon this , Mr. Saxton had taken a journey to Liverpool , to obtain the advice of some barrister , of the name of Raincock , who gave it as his opinion that the meeting was advertised for an illegal purpose , and that the Magistrates would be justified in preventing it , or dispersing the people when they were assembled .
The parties concerned immediately , therefore , advertised , and placarded the town , to say that the meeting would not take place on the 9th of August  but that another meeting would be convened on Monday the 16th of August , `` to take into consideration the best and most legal means of obtaining a Reform in the Commons ' House of Parliament . ''
A requisition in these words was immediately drawn up , signed by upwards of seven hundred of the inhabitants , and addressed to the Boroughreeve of Manchester , requesting him to call the meeting .
It was presented to the Boroughreeve , who haughtily refused to call the meeting , whereupon it was immediately called in the name of those who signed the requisition , and was appointed by them to be held on the sixteenth .
All this had taken place  the original meeting of the ninth , to which I had been invited , had been abandoned , the new requisition had been signed , and the meeting of the 16th had been appointed , without my having in any way received the slightest intimation of what had been going on .
I had arrived on the eighth at Bullock Smithey , which is within ten miles of Manchester , and within three miles of Stockport , where I had appointed to sleep on Sunday , the day previous to the intended meeting , and I had not yet heard one word of its being put off .
I had travelled two hundred miles in my gig for the purpose of presiding , and when I learned that I had been made such a fool of , I expressed considerable indignation , and declared my intention of returning into Hampshire immediately .
I was , however , at length prevailed upon to proceed to Stockport to sleep that night , as I understood that Mr. Moorhouse had provided a bed for me , and a stall for my horse .
On my road to Stockport I was met by Johnson , the brush-maker , and Mr. Saxton , who explained to me the whole of the circumstances , and at the same time expressed a great desire that I should remain in Manchester , to be present at the 16th , as they had , without my knowledge , advertised my name as chairman of the intended meeting .
At first I positively refused to comply with their wish , and I assigned more reasons than one for my refusal .
At length , it was agreed that I should proceed through Manchester the next day , Monday the 9th , to dine with Mr. Johnson at Smedley Cottage , to meet some friends whom he had invited to join me there .


I slept at the house of Mr. Moorhouse that night , and received from him every polite and kind attention .
When I arose in the morning , I was agreeably surprised by a note being brought to me from Sir Charles Wolseley , to say that , soon after I had left Wolseley Park , he had followed me  that he was at the inn , and would accompany me to Manchester , if I would let him know the time at which I meant to start for that place .
I immediately waited upon him at the inn , and , after breakfast , we proceeded together in my gig to Manchester , attended by many thousands of the Stockport people .
Johnson , the brush-maker , and others , from Manchester , had come to meet us , and they followed in a chaise , and Mr. Moorhouse followed , with a party , in his coach .
We were greeted with the utmost enthusiasm by the people of Manchester .
In one of the open spaces I addressed them briefly , and explained to them the reason of my then appearing amongst them .
I told them that I had travelled two hundred miles to keep my appointment , and that it was not till the day before , when I had arrived within a few miles of their town , that information was given to me of the meeting having been postponed .


We dined at Smedley Cottage  and , after having , for a length of time , resisted the most urgent intreaties , I was at last , though still very much against my inclination , and quite in opposition to my own judgment , prevailed upon to yield to the pleadings of Mr. Johnson and his friends , to remain with him till the following Monday , in order that I might take the chair at the intended meeting .
Had Johnson 's life depended upon the result , he could not have been more anxious to detain me .
He begged , he prayed , he implored me to stay  urging that without my presence the people would not be satisfied  and , in fact , foreboding the most fatal consequences if I departed before the meeting took place .
I solemnly declare that I never before consented with so much reluctance to any measure of the sort .
I had important engagements of my own to attend to , which I had put off to enable me to take the chair on the 9th , and to remain from home another week would cause me the greatest personal and private inconvenience .
I was , nevertheless , ultimately prevailed upon to stay , from a conviction that my presence would promote tranquillity and good order , and under the assurance that , if I did quit the place , confusion and bloodshed would , in all probability , be the inevitable consequence .
The manner in which those in authority had treated them , had irritated to the highest degree the people in and near Manchester , and they had also been excited to acts of desperation and violence , by some of those who professed to be their leaders .
As for Johnson , the brush-maker , he was a composition of vanity , emptiness , and conceit , such as I never before saw concentrated in one person .
It was the most ridiculous thing in the world to see him assuming the most pompous and lofty tone , while every one about him did not fail openly to express contempt for his insignificance and folly .
In truth , even amidst all his pomposity , of which he had so enormous a share , this poor creature could not conceal the fact from any one , that he had not the slightest confidence in himself  he expressed the greatest terror at the idea of my leaving to him the management of the intended meeting , and swore that he would run away from it altogether if I did not stay .
In this he involuntarily did himself justice  for , in reality , every one appeared to dread the thoughts of the thing being left in his hands .
Every thing , therefore , conspired to impress on my mind the conviction that I alone had the power of conducting this great meeting in a peaceable , quiet , and Constitutional manner .
I knew and felt , indeed , that it would be a task of great difficulty , danger , and responsibility .
Yet as I had never turned my back upon the people because difficulties and dangers presented themselves , so I made up my mind not to desert them upon this trying occasion , when I knew they were surrounded by the most base and blood-thirsty opponents , who were laying in ambush , and only waiting for a pretext to take every unmanly and cowardly advantage of any accidental disturbance or disorder that might occur .
I repeat again , that I consented most reluctantly to accept Johnson 's pressing invitation to remain at his house during the intervening week prior to the 16th of August  and I can , with great truth , affirm that this was one of the most disagreeable seven days that I ever passed in my life , not excepting the period of my solitary imprisonment in the Manchester New Bailey and Ilchester Bastile .
However , most fortunately for me , Johnson was from home a considerable portion of this time , attending to his brush-making and other business  this alone rendered the visit to Smedley tolerable : he frequently invited me to visit , with him , the surrounding neighbourhood , from the inhabitants of which places I had received pressing invitations  but all these I declined from prudential motives , and it was fortunate I did so , or my prosecutors would have found some pretence for the charge of conspiracy , of which , as it was , they could never bring the slightest shadow of proof .


During this week I was waited upon by many very respectable inhabitants of Manchester and the surrounding country , and on the Friday Mr. Edward Grundy and a friend from Bury called , and informed me that there was a report in circulation in Manchester , that it was the intention of the Magistrates to have me apprehended , under the plea of having committed some political offence , in order to interrupt the proceedings of the meeting  but these gentlemen assured me that they would become my bail to any amount , if it should be so .
However , this did not satisfy me , and on Saturday , morning I drove down to the New Bailey , where the Magistrates were sitting , and applied to know if there was any charge against me ?
-- if there was , I begged to know what was the nature of it , as I was then ready to surrender myself and to meet it .
Mr. Wright , who was present , appeared surprised at my application , and said he had not heard of any such thing , and he called Nadin , and asked him , if he had heard of any charge having been made against Mr. Hunt ?
Nadin , who appeared to be surprised at the question , replied , `` none whatever . ''
I then informed them that I understood the report to come from the police office , which induced me to attend for the purpose of ascertaining the fact .
I was , I told them , then ready , and should at all times be ready , to meet any charge that had been or might be preferred against me  and , consequently , there could be no necessity to issue any warrant or summons whatever , as the slightest intimation of my conduct being called in question would always insure my attendance .
Mr. Wright , as well as Nadin , professed they were perfectly satisfied of this , and appeared to shew to me all the polite attention that they were capable of showing .
I left the Court House with the full assurance from them that there was no charge against me , nor , as far as they knew of , any person who designed to bring a charge against me .
Although I was fully impressed with the treacherous and blood-thirsty characters of those with whom I had to deal  and , of course , was not wholly satisfied of the sincerity of their language , yet I was conscious of having in this instance performed an important duty to the public , by depriving the authorities of every fair pretence for interfering with the proceedings of the intended meeting .
I therefore returned to Smedley Cottage , with the conviction upon my mind that I had done all that a man could do , or ought to do , upon such an occasion .


On Sunday morning intimation was brought to me that one Murry , a sort of spy of the police , had , early in the morning , been very much beaten and ill-used , for interrupting some persons , who had assembled on a neighbouring Moor , to practice the method in which they should come into Manchester , to join the meeting on the following day  their wish being to enter the town with that sort of regularity which should give the least possible room for complaint to the authorities .
I was sorry to hear of this breach of the peace , as I foresaw that an advantage would be taken of the circumstance , to inflame the minds of those who were perhaps as yet only half bent upon the diabolical plot against the liberties of the people , and that it would be used as a plausible pretext to alarm the more timid part of those who are called the respectables of Manchester .
I , therefore , passed the Sunday with that degree of anxiety which every person not wholly devoid of sensibility must have naturally felt for the result of the coming day .


Monday arrived , and a beautiful morning it was .
From my bed-room I beheld the people , men , women , and children , accompanied by flags and bands of music , cheerfully passing along towards the place of meeting .
Their appearance and manner altogether indicated that they were going to perform an important , a sacred duty to themselves and their country , by offering up a joint and sincere prayer to the Legislature to relieve the poor and needy , by rescuing them from the hands of the agents of the rich and powerful , who had oppressed and persecuted them .
In fact , the conduct of the people , in every instance , was such , that none but devils in human form could ever have premeditated to do them any injury .


About twelve o'clock an open barouche was drawn up to the door of Smedley Cottage , to convey to the meeting myself and those who were assembled at Mr. Johnson 's .
It was settled that I should take the chair , that Johnson should move the Resolutions and the Remonstrance , and that John Knight should second them .
It was not anticipated that any other person would address the Meeting .
We entered the barouche soon after twelve o'clock on the morning of the 16th of August 1819 , and proceeded immediately towards St. Peter 's Plain , on which spot the Meeting was to be held .
We were attended by an immense multitude , preceeded by a band of music , and we very soon met the Manchester Committee of Female Reformers , headed by Mrs. Fildes , who bore in her hand a small white silk flag .
These females were all handsomely dressed in white , and they proposed to lead the procession to the field , walking two and two , but as , in consequence of the crowd , this was found to be impossible , they fell into the rear of the barouche , which position they maintained , with some difficulty , during the whole way till we arrived at the Hustings .
Mrs. Fildes , who carried the flag , was taken up at my suggestion , and rode by the side of the coachman , bearing her colours in a most gallant stile .
As , though rather small , she was a remarkably good figure , and well dressed , it was very justly considered that she added much to the beauty of the scene  and , as she was a married woman of good character , her appearance in such a situation by no means diminished the respectability of the procession , the whole of which was conducted with the greatest regularity and good order .


When I entered the field or plain , where the people were assembled , I saw such a sight as I had never before beheld .
A space containing , as I am informed , nearly five acres of ground , was literally covered with people , a great portion of whom were crammed together as thick as they could stand .
Great bodies of people had assembled and marched to the spot in regular order , each striving with the other which should contribute most to the respectability of the meeting by peaceable conduct  every one appeared to be animated with the greatest enthusiasm and devotion to the cause for which they had come together  that cause being solely either to petition , to address , or to remonstrate with , the throne , for a redress of insupportable grievances .
Every one appeared to me to be actuated by a similar feeling to that by which I felt that I was prompted in attending the meeting -- namely , the performance of an important , a sacred , and a solemn duty to ourselves and our country .
Let the reader who was not present picture to his imagination an assemblage of from 180 to 200 thousand English men and women , congregated together to exercise the great constitutional right of laying their complaints and grievances before the throne , and when he has done this , he may form an idea of the scene which met my view .


The moment that I entered the field , ten or twelve bands struck up the same tune , `` See the conquering hero comes  '' eighteen or twenty flags , most of them surmounted by a Cap of Liberty , were unfurled , and from the multitude burst forth such a shout of welcome as never before hailed the ears of an individual , possessed of no other power , no other influence over the minds of the people , except that which he had gained by an honest , straight-forward discharge of public duty .
With some difficulty , and by slow degrees , the carriage was drawn up within a few yards of the Hustings , where the crowd was so dense as to forbid the approach of the carriage any nearer .
We alighted , and , an avenue being made for us , we ascended the Hustings .
The ladies composing the Committee of Female Reformers had followed close to the carriage up to this point , and therefore it was absolutely necessary to dispose of them in some place of safety , to prevent their being trampled under foot .
Some part of them were placed in the carriage , which we had left , and the remainder were assisted upon the Hustings .


Another shout now filled the air , as a compliment to me , and I took off my hat , to endeavour to address this immense multitude , with a full conviction that the very orderly conduct of the people would deprive their enemies of all pretence whatever to interrupt their proceedings .
I had scarcely uttered two sentences , urging them to persevere in the same line of conduct , when the Manchester Troop of Yeomanry came galloping into the field , and formed in front of a house occupied by a Mr. Buxton , where it was said the Magistrates had assembled for the purpose of keeping the peace .
As soon as the military appeared , the people , ( as is always the case under such circumstance ) began to disperse and fly from the outskirts .
To prevent the confusion likely to arise from such a circumstance , I caused three cheers to be given , which had the desired effect of restoring the confidence of the people , who did not , indeed , suspect it to be possible that the devil himself would have authorised the Yeomanry to commit any violence upon them , as there was not the slightest symptom amongst them that could have created any real fear in the mind of the most timid .
Before , however , the cheering was sufficiently ended to enable me to raise my voice again , the word was given , and from the left flank of the troop , the trumpeter leading the way , they charged amongst the people , sabring right and left , in all directions , sparing neither age , sex , nor rank .
In this manner they cut their way up to the Hustings , riding over and sabring all that could not get out of their way .
In this magnanimous exploit several fell dead , and hundreds were wounded  and this was done in cold blood , with the most savage ferocity , without the slightest provocation having been given by the people , and without one act of resistance , without ONE STONE , ONE STICK , or ONE FINGER having been raised even to resist , much less to provoke , such a bloodthirsty , such a cowardly , wanton , cruel , and murderous act .
At length it turned out that these diabolical deeds were committed in order , as it was pretended , to execute a warrant , to apprehend myself and others who were upon the Hustings with me .
Now I most solemnly declare , that this warrant could have been executed with the greatest possible ease , by any single constable , without the aid of the military , or any breach of the peace whatever  and I have not the slightest doubt in my own mind , that the magistrates were fully sensible of this fact at the time when they ordered the ferocious Yeomanry to charge and cut down the people .
The object was to strike terror into the minds of the assembled multitude , and to pull down reform by the sword , regardless of the blood that would be spilt in the enterprise .
That my life was meant to be a sacrifice no reflecting man can for a moment entertain a doubt .
We were now seized and taken , by Nadin and his runners , to the house where the worthy projectors of the plot were sitting in solemn conclave .
While we were passing to the house , amidst the screams of the flying , and the piercing cries and groans of the dying people , two ruffian Yeoman made several efforts to cut me down , but each time I guarded myself , by placing Nadin between myself and them as they renewed their charge upon me .
Nadin endeavoured to escape , and to leave me to their mercy , but , with the aid of providence , I held him fast , and used him as a shield to ward off the deadly blows of these blood-thirsty cowards .
Nadin was so alarmed that he at length yielded like a child to the direction of my arm , and quietly suffered himself to be placed before me as they came up , hallowing lustily for them to desist , and using his staff for his protection .
They , however , charged , and cut at me several times , and I received three cuts from them , a slight one on the back of my hand , and two others in my head , which cuts penetrated through my hat .
As I entered into Buxton 's house , pinioned between two constables , Nadin and another , a ruffian came behind me and levelled a blow at my head with a heavy bludgeon , which would have felled me to the earth , had I not been supported by the constables , who had hold of my arms .
One fellow very deliberately took off my hat , that the other coward might have a fairer blow at me , which he instantly repeated , and had I not at the moment fortunately slipped my head on one side , my scull must have been fractured .
Nadin cried shame at this , and replaced the hat upon my head , saying it was too bad !
By this means Nadin saved my life , as it was evidently the intention of the ruffian to have taken it .
The fellow who acted such a cowardly and diabolical part , was a general in the English army , of the name of C -- y , who was then on half-pay , and living at Pendleton .
The following extract from a letter , written to Mr. Sheriff Parkins by his brother , who was an eye-witness of the transaction , speaks for itself  it was given to me by Mr. Parkins to make what use of it I pleased , and I shall therefore insert it verbatim :


`` 79 , Water-Street , Manchester ,


`` I take up my pen to relate to you one of the most daring , cruel outrages that ever was committed on a defenceless people .
I was within ten yards of the Hustings , when the cavalry surrounded the stage on which Mr. Hunt , Mr. Johnson , Mr. Knight , and many other gentlemen , whom I personally knew , were standing , with several ladies .
At this time the main body of the Cavalry made a charge on the people who were assembled , and cut down all before them  and if I had had a pistol , I would have levelled that villain C -- y , who used Mr. Hunt in such an outrageous manner , that if I had gone into eternity that moment , I would have shot him  but I had nothing but a small walking-stick in my hand , with which I parried off several blows that were aimed at me , and thank God I received no material injury .
I never saw a man behave with more fortitude than Mr. Hunt did on that most trying occasion .


`` Instead of reading the Riot-Act , and ordering the people to disperse , the military came on without any notice whatever .
Mr. Hunt was committed to the New Bailey Prison , and what will be the result of all this the Almighty only knows .
If you will do a praiseworthy action , come down and back Mr. Hunt , and your name will then be handed down to posterity with the blessing of thousands of your suffering countrymen . ''


When I came before the worthy Magistrates , I saw that they were dreadfully alarmed at their own deeds .
Hulton and Hay took the lead , and we were marched off to the New Bailey , to which we were committed upon a charge of High Treason  it being necessary to make some highly sounding charge , in order to take off the attention of the public as much as possible from the foul deeds that had been perpetrated by the drunken infuriate Yeomanry .
I think there were twelve in all committed , and amongst the number was Mr. John Tyas , who attended as a reporter for the Times Newspaper .
This circumstance I shall ever consider as a most fortunate .
Mr. Tyas is a gentleman of a most respectable family and connections , and it is unnecessary to expatiate on his character and talents , it being , as far as regards these , quite enough to say , that he has long occupied the station of a reporter to the Times Newspaper , a lucrative and responsible situation , which none but a man of character and talent could fill for any length of time .
Mr. Tyas was not only present during the procession from Smedley to the Hustings , but he was upon the Hustings , he was apprehended there , taken before the worthy Magistrates , and sent to the New Bailey , where he had the honour to pass twenty-four hours in a solitary cell .
He was an eye-witness of the whole affair , and , as he was totally unconnected with any of those who called the meeting , he was capable of giving , and he did give , the most unprejudiced evidence upon the subject , and I hope he will yet live to give his evidence upon an inquiry into this atrocious affair , either at the Bar or before a Committee of the House of Commons  for if ever I get into that House , I pledge myself never to cease my exertions to procure an investigation , a national investigation , into the whole affair .
If I should become a member of the House of Commons , I will leave no stone unturned , at whatever hazard to myself , to cause such investigation to take place .
We were detained in separate cells , in solitary confinement , for eleven days .
I was once brought privately before the worthies , and questioned , but as it would not do , as they could make nothing of me , they gave it up , and we were at last brought up in open Court , and ordered to be held to bail , for a CONSPIRACY to overturn the Government , by frightening out of their seven senses all the old women in breeches who resided at Manchester .
It was not so with Johnson .
I believe the worthy Magistrates tried us all round , and found us all too staunch to be tampered with  all but Johnson  he , it appears by his own confession , was brought before them , and had several PRIVATE examinations , during which , he offered to give up all the letters which I had written to him , and he at length wrote a letter to his wife , with an order for her to deliver them to the messenger .
Fortunately they had been placed by Mrs. Johnson in the hands of his attorney , who had too much honour to obey such disgraceful , such unprincipled instructions from his client .
Not that I was afraid of any thing that I had written to any one .
But as I had written in the greatest confidence to him , and had sent my letters by coach , via Oxford and Birmingham , because they should not be opened at the Post Office , it would have been a breach of every principle of honesty , honour , and fair dealing , to have given them up to the Magistrates , while I was in their custody under a charge of High Treason .
In my political connexions , I have met with some very base and unprincipled fellows , but amongst them all , I do not believe that I ever knew any one , except Johnson , the Brush-maker , who would have voluntarily become such a shameless pander , such a thorough-paced time server , as to have given up my private letters to save his own worthless carcase from the chance of a Trial for High Treason .
I repeat that , amongst all the political apostates I have ever known , and they are many , and some of them very vile indeed , I never knew one that I believe would have been so poor and mean a creature as this Johnson .


When we were brought up for final examination , the charge was shifted from that of High Treason to a Seditions Conspiracy to overturn the Government .
I was to give bail in # 1000 myself , and two sureties in # 500 each , which Sir Charles Wolseley and Mr. Chapman were ready to enter into for me  but , as I was very hot and fatigued with the examination , I returned to my apartment to change my shirt before bail was given .
I had not been in my room more than ten minutes before the goaler came to inform me that I must prepare to set off for Lancaster Castle in five minutes , as the magistrates had left the Court , and had ordered that we should be conveyed there immediately , for want of bail .
I replied that Sir Charles Wolseley and Mr. Chapman were prepared to give bail for me , and that they were gone , or going , with Mr. C. Pearson , my attorney , to Mr. Norris 's house to do so .
The gaoler , a very civil little personage , lamented that he had no discretion , that his orders were peremptory , that a stage-coach , which had been hired for the purpose , was ready , and we must depart in less than five minutes , as a Military Dragoon Guard was in attendance , ready to conduct us thither .
I answered that I would be ready in half the time , and I began to change my shirt and pack up my trunk before he left the room .
The fact was , that the parties had made up their minds , ( as is generally the case ) , before they came into Court  they had resolved upon a committal on the charge of High Treason , and they had given previous orders to prepare a coach and the Military Guard .
A messenger had also been dispatched to Bolton , Blackburn , and Preston , to order the troops stationed in those towns to be ready to relieve the guards as they arrived , and to proceed forward .
These relays were to have been ready as early as two o'clock in the day , the worthy Magistrates not having calculated upon the turn the question took in the Court , in consequence of my cross-examination of the witnesses produced to substantiate the charge .
This cross-examination , which lasted several hours , during which I caused all the witnesses to be removed out of Court except the one under examination , by which means I contrived to make them , not only equivocate and contradict each other , but actually contradict themselves on every material point .
This unexpected circumstance caused the worthy Bench of Magistrates to pause a little  they retired to consult , and held a private conferrence with Mr. Maule , the solicitor to the Crown , who was sent down to conduct the prosecution for the Attorney General .
The result of this conferrence was , that the charge of High Treason was abandoned , and we were to be held to bail for a misdemeanor only .


After I had retired , Johnson and Moorhouse procured bail in Court , and they were liberated immediately .
Johnson , I understood , was carried to his home on the shoulders of the populace , but he was totally regardless of what became of his friend , who was a stranger in the town .
I stepped into the coach , and was followed by John Knight and Dr. Healy  Saxton , Bamford , and three others , wholly unknown to me , were placed on the top of the coach , each attended by one of the police , and with pistols and blunderbusses , c..
Mr. Nadin did us the honour to ride in the coach with us , whilst his runners took their stations aloft  a troop of horse , with swords drawn , surrounded the coach , and off we went for Lancaster , a distance of fifty miles , without my having had an opportunity of seeing or writing to my attorney or friends to apprise them of our departure .
As I sat in the coach I wrote three lines with a pencil to Sir Charles Wolseley , merely stating the fact  and I handed it out open , requesting that it might be conveyed to him  but I saw that it was instantly seized by one of our amiable attendants , who took care that it should never reach its destination .
We were paraded in this way to Bolton , from which place a fresh troop conducted us to Blackburn  another troop forwarded us to Preston , and a third attended us to Lancaster .
At Preston we halted and took some refreshment , for which I offered to pay .
Mr. Nadin , however , insisted upon it that I should not do so , as he had already given an order upon the treasurer of the county to pay all expenses .
Thus , for the first and only time in my life , I was compelled to take a meal at the public expense .


Previous to our arrival at Preston we were nearly overturned , and the pole of the coach was broken short off .
We were consequently obliged to dismount and walk to the next village , to get it repaired .
Nadin , who had hitherto conducted himself with great moderation , now burst out into such a strain as would have made a Lethbridgeite 's hair stand on end upon his head  he poured forth a volley of oaths , which for atrocity and vulgarity exceeded all I had ever heard before or since , except in the instance of Bridle , the Ilchester Gaoler  he swore that he should lose all his prisoners , c. c. and that he would blow out the brains of the coachman and all his runners .
I sat perfectly quiet during this disgusting scene , and heard with horror his beastly epithets and dreadful imprecations .
At length , having exhausted his rage , he appealed to me in the utmost confusion to know what should be done .
I told him we would walk to the next village , where he could get the pole mended  and , as I found that he was preparing to handcuff them together , I assured him that I would be answerable for the safety of all the prisoners .
With this assurance he was satisfied , and we proceeded to a small inn upon the road .
The news soon spread , the house was very quickly surrounded , and a rescue was boldly and openly offered .
This kindness I of course declined , and Mr. Nadin 's fears were soon dispelled .


During our stay at Preston , almost all the gentlemen of the town came to see us , as we were at supper .
Amongst the number were some sincere friends , although total strangers , who shook me cordially by the hand , in token of their sincerity .
We arrived at Lancaster Castle about three o'clock on the Saturday morning , where we found the gaoler , young Higgins , ready to receive us  he having , of course , been previously apprised of the intention of the worthy Magistrates to send us thither , right or wrong .
At the door I thanked the officer of the Dragoons for his polite attention , lamenting sarcastically , as I had done to each of the others , that he should have had so much trouble on my account .
We then entered the walls of Lancaster Gaol , and were conducted into a spacious dirty room , from which some other prisoners had been removed to make way for us .
In an adjoining close room we were all to sleep , and beds were ordered for us .
I expostulated against this arrangement , of our all sleeping in the same room  upon which Mr. Higgins replied , that I should be accommodated with a cell .
Soon after this we were all removed into a much better and cleaner apartment , adjoining to one of the new round towers , where we spent the day , Saturday , in procuring materials for cooking , c. c..
At Lancaster Castle nothing was provided for political prisoners , not even a trough to wash their hands in .
My companions , not having anticipated such a journey when they attended the meeting on the 16th of August , could only muster a few shillings amongst them , but as I had a few pounds in my pocket , every thing necessary was soon provided , such as it was .


The fools , the mad-headed fools , who sent us to make a parade through their county , little dreamt of the feeling which it would create  I own I felt very indignant at the selfish conduct of Johnson , who had invited me to Manchester , although I never expressed this to my fellow prisoners .
I was , however , quite sure that the moment Sir Charles Wolseley , Mr. Chapman , and Mr. Pearson were made acquainted with the dirty trick of the Magistrates , that they would lose no time in procuring bail , and forwarding it for my release .


When seven o'clock came , we were ordered into our cells in the Round Tower , and most infamously close they were .
I thought that I should have been suffocated for some time after I entered it .
I , however , laid myself down , and soon fell into a sound sleep , from which I was roused about nine o'clock , by the turnkey , who came to inform me that a gentleman was arrived with bail for me and John Knight .
I soon dressed myself , and having taken leave of Saxton and Bamford in the adjoining cells , we proceeded to the Lodge , where I found my worthy friend Chapman , who had come over from Manchester , as soon as he could get Mr. Norris to take the bail of himself and Sir Charles Wolseley , which the Magistrate had contrived to avoid on Friday night , under a pretence that he was engaged .
Mr. Chapman had procured two Magistrates of the town of Lancaster , one of them of the name of Salusbury , who came down to the Gaol to take our recognizance , notwithstanding it was an excessively wet night , and which might have afforded them something like an excuse to have kept us in the Castle till Monday morning .
But they proved themselves the very reverse of the Manchester Magistrates , at whose conduct they appeared to feel ashamed and disgusted , and they did all that honourable men and gentlemen could do to wipe their hands of all connection with them .


We bid adieu to the Castle , and slept at the inn in Lancaster that night .
In the morning we proceeded on our return to Manchester , where Sir Charles Wolseley and Mr. Pearson were waiting to receive me .
We stopped and took some refreshment at Preston , where some of the worthy Electors of that town introduced themselves to us , and there and then it was that I received and accepted an invitation to become a Candidate for the Representation of that Borough , at the approaching general election .
In the evening we reached Bolton , at which town we slept , and there I became acquainted with some of the very best men in the kingdom .
In fact , to have been introduced to the worthy men of Preston and of Bolton was worth more than all the inconvenience I suffered from being dragged through the county under a military escort .
The enthusiasm manifested by the people of Bolton , of all ranks and degrees , surpassed every thing I had ever before witnessed , and it impressed my mind with a respect and attachment for that town , which will never be eradicated from my breast till the heart which it contains ceases to beat .


My reception in Manchester , the next day , which place we entered about three o'clock , surpassed all description .
Sir Charles Wolseley and Mr. Pearson came to meet us about a mile beyond Pendleton , and the spontaneous expressions of the whole population , which appeared to have turned out to receive and welcome me , it is utterly impossible for my pen to describe .
From my worthy friend Chapman , during our journey from Lancaster , I learnt the history of the bloody proceedings of the 16th of August , and my soul was struck with horror and indignation by the recital .


I returned to Johnson 's house at Smedley , although Mr. Chapman had informed me of the report of his cowardly and base conduct , while he was confined in the New Bailey , of his having offered and actually written to his wife to give up all my confidential correspondence to the Magistrates , to enable them to make out a charge of High Treason against me , upon condition that he should be admitted what is called KING 'S EVIDENCE .
Notwithstanding Mr. Chapman assured me that he believed this report to be true , and produced to me almost incontrovertible proof of the fact , still I could not possibly bring my mind to believe that any one could be guilty of such incomparable baseness , and much less that Mr. Johnson , with all his devotion , with all his professions of friendship and regard , could be such a mean , dirty , cowardly dog  and I never should have credited it to its full extent if the wretched slave had not confessed it with his own lips .


While I was confined in the New Bailey , not a soul was allowed to have any access to me but the officers of the Gaol , and latterly my servant , in the presence of the gaoler .
I had written to Mr. Charles Pearson , to request his professional assistance , which of course was the greatest proof I could give of the high estimation I entertained of his honour , talent , and political integrity .
It is true that I was only slightly acquainted with him at the time , but the result proved that I was perfectly justified in the choice which I made , and the confidence which I placed in him .
To have been cursed with either a fool or a knave , under such circumstances , would have been worse than death itself  but I found him to be , what I expected , a man of brilliant talent , and of inflexible political honesty , yet possessed , at the same time , of an intimate knowledge of all the quirks , quibbles , tricks , and shuffles of both the bar and the bench , as well as of all the intermediate ranks between the lowest catchpoll and the highest elevated judge upon the bench .
Though he has since been unfortunate in his pursuits , and though he was sometimes inattentive and careless , and though I have heard others complain of him , yet , in the midst of all his foibles and follies , for follies and foibles he has as well as other men , I can safely say that up to this hour , when put to the test , in all his dealings , relations and connections with me , I have found him actuated by the strictest notions of honour , honesty , and conscientious integrity .
In a matter of importance , in a case of life and death , such a case as I was then concerned in , I would rather have the professional assistance of Mr. Pearson , even under his present circumstances , if he would devote himself to it , than that of any other man I ever met with in his profession .


While I was imprisoned in Manchester , Mr. Wooler called a Public Meeting , at the Crown and Anchor , and some spirited resolutions were entered into  and a subscription was set on foot for the relief of those who had suffered at Manchester , and to bring to justice the perpetrators of the horrid murders and cruelties committed on the 16th of August .
Major Cartwright was appointed the Treasurer .
Sir Francis Burdett likewise addressed an excellent letter to his Constituents , to call a meeting upon the subject .
This letter was calculated to rouse into action every man in the kingdom who had a heart in his body , and I verily believe that in any country in the world , except England , such a letter , written to the people by a man of Sir Francis 's rank , would have caused the whole people to rise in arms to avenge the horrid murders which had been committed upon their helpless , unoffending countrymen .
Meetings were , however , called all over the kingdom , to petition the King and the Parliament to investigate the affair , and to bring to justice the authors of such a dreadful outrage upon the lives and liberties of the people .


In the mean time the subscription set on foot by Mr. Wooler began to fill apace -- a circumstance which was calculated to have the very best effect .
It , nevertheless , excited the envy and jealousy of the worthies who composed the Westminster , the Borough , and the City of London Rump Committees , and they lost no time in devising the means of getting the management out of the honest hands of those who had taken up the measure .
These gentry , who understand how to manage their matters so well , soon wormed themselves and their agents into the Committee , in sufficient numbers to form a majority  and this being accomplished , the next step was to propose to elect four of the Westminster or Burdettite Rump  four of the City , or Waithmanite Rump  and four of the Borough , or Wilson Rump , and these twelve worthies were to form what they themselves were pleased to denominate the Metropolitan Committee , to manage the Subscriptions , and the affairs of the Manchester Sufferers .
Major Cartwright and Mr. Wooler were disgusted with the proceedings , and the Major immediately resigned his office of Treasurer , upon which they appointed their own Treasurer , and , in the most unblushing manner , proposed to send Mr. Harmer , a relation of one of the leaders of the party , down to Lancaster , to prefer Bills of Indictment against the Yeomanry , and to assist in defending myself and others who had been prosecuted by the Government .
It was , however , suggested by some one of them , that it was too bare-faced a job to send Mr. Harmer down , who had written for , and had already got Mr. Pearson down to assist us , and therefore it was agreed upon , to appoint Mr. Harmer and Mr. Pearson to act jointly in this affair .
Mr. Harmer was consequently sent off post to Manchester , to do that which Mr. Pearson , who was on the spot , was so fully competent to have done .


The moment that I heard of these proceedings , I foretold , to Mr. Pearson and Sir Charles Wolseley , every thing that would happen , and how the subscriptions would be misapplied  all of which predictions have been verified to the very letter .
Mr. Harmer did not arrive till after we had undergone the final hearing before the Magistrates , till they had abandoned the charge of High Treason , till we had been sentenced to Lancaster Castle , after having undergone an imprisonment of eleven days ' solitary confinement  he did not arrive till all this had taken place , and we had been bailed and returned from Lancaster  all this had occurred , and we might have all been committed to Lancaster Castle for High Treason , several days before Mr. Harmer , the Attorney of the Trinitarian Rump Committee , reached Manchester , if it had not been for the assistance of Mr. Pearson and my own personal exertions .


Bills of Indictment were preferred before the Grand Jury at Lancaster , against Owen , Platt , and Derbyshire , for perjury .
The first was found a true bill , although bills against the two others were ignored upon the very same evidence .
Bills were also preferred against several of the Yeomanry Cavalry , for cutting and maiming men , women , and children , in the most wanton , cruel , and murderous way , on the 16th of August , not only at the meeting on St. Peter 's Plain , but likewise in various parts of Manchester  and , in one or two instances , for cutting and maiming those who had never been at the meeting at all , and who were merely standing at their own doors , looking at the military , who were hunting , driving , cutting and slaying in all directions , regardless of age or sex .
All the bills , notwithstanding they were supported by the most unquestionable testimony , and all the parties were identified , ALL , ALL of them were ignored and thrown out by a Lancashire Grand Jury , the foreman of which was Lord Stanley , the great Whig Member for that County .
Lord Stanley is the eldest son of Lord Derby , who is a regular supporter of the Whigs in the House of Lords , and Lord Stanley is a regular supporter of all Whig measures in the House of Commons .
This Whig , Lord Stanley , was also one of the most violent against a parliamentary inquiry into the transaction , when the question was brought before the House of Commons .
-- The Lord deliver us from the tender mercies of the Whigs , I say !


The bill that was preferred by the Crown , against myself and others , for attending the Manchester meeting , was found immediately , and bail to a heavy amount was required for the appearance of all the parties at the Assizes  which bail could never have been obtained for many of the party , who were very poor men , had it not been for the magnanimous and truly generous conduct of Sir Charles Wolseley .
He not only , in the first instance , came to Manchester to bail me , but he remained at Manchester , assisting in causing the bloody Yeomanry to be indicted , and he went to Lancaster , and attended the whole time , and at length became the voluntary bail for every one that could not procure it otherwise .
This was really acting a true , noble , manly , and patriotic part !
Sir Charles actually saved several of those who were indicted with me from remaining in prison from September to the following March .
By his magnanimous behaviour he proved himself to be in reality , an independent , upright Radical , a real friend to justice and humanity .
In this affair , Sir Charles Wolseley did more to serve the cause of Liberty and the People , than was done by all the Aristocracy and all the Country Gentlemen in England put together .


Sixteen persons had been murdered , and upwards of Six Hundred had been badly wounded , on the Sixteenth of August .
Coroners ' Inquests had been held , without effect , upon several of the bodies !
`` They all died a Natural Death ! ''
till , at last , an Inquest was held at Oldham , on the body of John Lees .
This Inquest was attended by Mr. Harmer , and , at the end of the third or fourth day , the evidence was so conclusive , that the Jury were prepared to have returned their verdict of Wilful Murder !
but , by some extraordinary fatality , by some unaccountable cause , Mr. Harmer kept calling fresh witnesses , and the Inquest was adjourned from day to day , and from place to place , for a month , and after the last adjournment , they never met again .
As the Petition of Robert Lees , the father of the murdered man , speaks fully for itself , and will explain this very curious circumstance better than any thing that I can say , I shall conclude the subject by inserting it at full length , as follows : --


`` TO TO THE HONOURABLE THE COMMONS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND , IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED .


The HUMBLE PETITION of ROBERT LEES , Of OLDHAM , in the County Palatine of LANCASTER , Cotton-spinner ,


SHEWETH , That your Petitioner 's son , John Lees , a youth twenty-two years of age , having attended the meeting held at Manchester on the 16th of August last , was , as your Petitioner is led to believe , without any just cause or provocation , most inhumanly attacked and cut by Yeomanry Cavalry , and afterwards most unmercifully beaten with the clubs or batons of Police and Special Constables , and also trampled upon by the horses of the Cavalry , whereby he was so much injured , that he was , from that time , incapable of attending to his ordinary employment , and lingered in pain and debility until the night of the 6th of September following , when he died .


That the Surgeon who attended your Petitioner 's son having certified that his death was occasioned by violence , several householders in Oldham and the neighbouring townships were served , late in the evening of the 7th of September , with summonses from the Coroner of the district , to attend the next morning at half-past ten o'clock , to serve as Jurors on an inquest to be held on the body of your said Petitioner 's son .
At the time appointed the said Jurors assembled , and were met by a person named BATTYE , who attended as Deputy for the said Coroner , for the purpose of inquiring into the cause of the death of your Petitioner 's son  and , having sworn the Jury , he went with them to take a view of the body .
But , finding that several witnesses had arrived from Manchester , to give evidence upon the said inquiry , he refused to proceed in the inquest  and having adjourned the same for three hours , he , at the expiration of that time , further adjourned until the 10th day of the same month , when the said BATTYE promised , that either Mr. FERRAND , his employer , or Mr. MILNE , a neighbouring Coroner , should certainly attend and proceed in the investigation .


`` That , on the next day , a Surgeon attended , by the direction of the said Mr. BATTYE , to open and examine the body of your Petitioner 's son  and he was then allowed to be interred .


`` That , on the 10th day of September , the Jury again assembled  but , although Mr. MILNE attended , he refused to interfere in the business , as he said it did not belong to his district  and the inquest was further adjourned until the 25th day of the same month .
And , during this interval , some of the Manchester newspapers inserted the vilest falsehoods , to depreciate the reputation of the deceased , with a view , as your Petitioner believes , to extinguish every feeling of sympathy for his fate .


`` That , on the said 25th day of September , Mr. FERRAND attended  and , after swearing the Jury , and ascertaining from them that they had all seen the body , he proceeded to examine witnesses  but , in the course of the investigation , he adjourned several times for days together , without any reasonable or probable cause , and merely , as your Petitioner believes , to harass and tire out the witnesses , who came day after day a considerable distance to give testimony .


`` That , in detailing his complaint to your Honourable House , your Petitioner exceedingly regrets he should be Please note


All known copies of volume 3 are `` imperfect '' and are `` wanting after page 640 '' .


It is possible that these pages were suppressed as they were `` written by himself in H ' .
M 's Jail at Ilchester '' .

