
AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF ALL THE VOYAGES ROUND THE WORLD , PERFORMED BY ENGLISH NAVIGATORS  INCLUDING THOSE LATELY UNDERTAKEN By ORDER of his PRESENT MAJESTY .


THE WHOLE Faithfully Extracted from the JOURNALS of the VOYAGERS .
DRAKE , undertaken in 157 [ ... ] ?
80 CAVENDISH , 1586 ?
88 COWLEY , 1683-86 DAMPIER , 1689 ?
9 [ ... ] COOKE , 1708-11 ROGERS , 1708-11 CLIPPERTON And SHELVOCKE , 1719-22 ANSON , undertaken in 1740-44 BYRON , 1764-66 WALLIS , 1766 ?
68 CARTERET , 1766-68 And COOK , 1768-71 TOGETHER WITH That of SYDNEY PARKINSON , Draftsman to JOSEPH BANKS , Esq who circumnavigated the Globe with Capt. COOK , in his Majesty 's Ship the ENDEAVOUR .


AND The Voyage of Mons .
BOUGAINVILLE round the World , Performed by Order of the French King .
Illustrated with Maps , Charts , and Historical Prints .


IN FOUR VOLUMES .


To which is added , An APPENDIX .
Containing the JOURNAL of a VOYAGE to the NORTH POLE , by the Hon. Commodore PHIPPS .
and Captain LUTWIDGE .


VOLUME THE FIRST .


LONDON : Printed for F. NEWBERY , the Corner of St. Paul 's Church-Yard .
MDCCLXXIV .


PREFACE .


 PERHAPS there never was brought together , in so small a compass , in any language , a more copious collection of rational entertainment , than will be met with in the following sheets .
To trace the progress of the discoveries that have successively been made in passing round the globe , must fill the reader 's mind with such a variety of new objects , as can not fail to raise his wonder , and entertain him with infinite delight .


He will , in this work , be safely conducted through regions that were once thought inaccessible , and be made acquainted with countries altogether different from that in which he dwells .
Every page he reads will furnish him with novelties , and every Voyage will bring him nearer to that unknown count [ ... ] y , in ear [ ... ] h of which so many [ ... ] comman [ ... ] er have been sent in vain .


The discovery of the western continent , by Co [ ... ] umbu [ ... ] , gave geographers reason to believe , that a like con [ ... ] existed somewhere in the south .
Without such [ ... ] [ ... ] qu [ ... ] poise they could not conceive how the globe could preserve its balance .


Magell [ ... ] a [ ... ] n , a Portuguese mariner , was the first who attempted to immortalize his [ ... ] by the disco [ ... ] He pa [ ... ] the S [ ... ] , that to this day bear [ ... ] , and entered the Pacific Oc [ ... ] an , where no Eu [ ... ] pean vessel had ever sailed before .
He d [ ... ] scovered the [ ... ] and Phillippine Isles , and returned by the Cape [ ... ] Good Hope , having surrounded the whole earth , and proved , [ ... ] d [ ... ] monstration , the spherical figure of the globe .


He was followed by navigators of different nations , who , emulous of his glory , sought to pursue the track , [ ... ] had pointed out , with better success  but the [ ... ] gers they encountered , and the disasters they met [ ... ] , rendered the difficulties that attended the prose [ ... ] tion [ ... ] nsurmountable  many perished , and those who [ ... ] ved wer [ ... ] glad to return home after a fruitless search .


The ill success which attended these first attempts [ ... ] a damp upon the enterprize , and [ ... ] remained [ ... ] unnoticed , except in the writings of the learned .
 [ ... ]  side the globe ?
Did not the little Phoenician state reap a more glorious harvest from the discoveries of its merchants , than Alexander could boast from all his conquests ?
Was it not the perseverance of the Princes Henry , John , and Emanuel , in supporting the charges of prosecuting new discoveries in the fifteenth century , that laid the foundation of the Portuguese greatness , whose territories in Europe are of no considerable extent ?


If the glory of aggrandizing a state , and perpetuating a name to posterity be the first object of human ambition , where , among all the tyrants who have depopulated the earth , can be produced a conqueror , whose name will be remembered , when that of Christopher Columbus is forgotten ?
Or where shall we look for a monarch , who , after having spread murder and desolation throughout the world , descended to the grave with that heart-felt satisfaction that attended the Florentine merchant Americus Vespucius , when he saw all Europe agreeing , with one consent , to transfer his name to more than a third part of th [ ... ] terr [ ... ] strial globe ?


The success which has attended our grac [ ... ] ous Monarch 's first essays in the Voyages we are [ ... ] about to relate , though [ ... ] has yet produced no [ ... ] advantages to compensate the sums expen [ ... ] d [ ... ] the pros [ ... ] cution of them , yet it has been such as to open the way to new islands , from whose inhabitants new arts may be learnt , and from whose productions new acquisitions may be made , both to the vegetable and fossil kingdom , by which the regions of science may be enlarged , and the gardens of the curious enriched and beautiful .


It is no small satisfaction to an inquisitive mind ( were there no other advantage to be gained from these Voyages ) to be made acquainted with the genius , the arts , the various pursuits , the customs , the manners , the religious nations , the distin [ ... ] tions of rank , and the subordination that is to be met with among the people of various islands and countries , distinct from each other , and from [ ... ] language , habits , learning , and ways of living .
Who is it that can read of the poverty and misery of the wretched inhabitants of Terra del Fuego , who have nothing but the skins of beasts loosely thrown over them , to defend them from the severity  [ ... ]  meaner sort , with which their benefactors were requited ?


The variety of incidents that happened in the course of these Voyages , when they come to be historically recited , unencumbered with the jargon of sea-phrases , will afford a fund of entertainment , seldom to be met with in the productions of the press .
The many singular adventures , unforeseen dangers , and providential escapes , that every ship experienced in passing round the globe , can only be conceived by those who read , and believed by those who have seen the wonders of the deep .


Nothing can excite or gratify curiosity more than relations of marvellous events that happen in succession , and in circumstances equally critical and important .
The moment a ship launches into the ocean to proceed on new discoveries , every man on board demands his share of attention as well as the commanding officer .
The story of the black , who , with his two companions , perished on the mountains of Terra del Fuego , is no less affecting than that of the murder of the poor Indians , who set the Endeavour at defiance , and bravely opposed the landing of the crew .


There is not an object that presents itself either by sea or land , but affords some degree of use or speculation .
The fish that swarm about the ship , and the fowls that present themselves in the ocean , are indications by which the skilful ma [ ... ] er avails himself , eithe [ ... ] to guard against the storm , or to prepare for land  and the reader , as circumstances arise , either shares h [ ... ] s danger , or partakes of hi [ ... ] refreshment .


When the Endeavour is encircled in the wide ocean with rocks of co [ ... ] , her sheathing beaten off , and her [ ... ] floating by her side , a [ ... ] her bottom , [ ... ] fainting at the pumps , what heart is so callous , as not to sympathize with the de [ ... ] ing crew [ ... ] and , anxious fo [ ... ] their safety , drop a [ ... ] for their deliverance ?


And what [ ... ] be the [ ... ] of every [ ... ] ling heart , [ ... ] , after [ ... ] hundred leagues , and arriving [ ... ] Batavia , at [ ... ] her planks [ ... ] the keel , and [ ... ] in the ship 's bottom , were , for six [ ... ] together , rubbed thinner , by [ ... ] er  [ ... ]


1 .
THE INTRODUCTION .


 PREVIOUS to our entering upon the detail of the discoveries and adventures of the English navigators who have surrounded the globe , it may , perhaps , afford some entertainment to the curious reader , to be made acquainted with the first steps that led to so bold an undertaking , and with the characters of those happy geniuses , who not only conceived the plan , but contributed not a little by their example to facilitate the execution .


We are told that the shadow seen in the moon in the time of her eclipse , first pointed out to the early navigators the true figure of the earth  and that , from this simple observation , Columbus , by revolving it in his mind , deduced the possibility of passing round its surface , or , to speak with more precision , of sailing from one side of the continent to the other  for as yet one great continent , and one great ocean , with their appendages , were thought to compose the whole material world .


Full of this idea , he was naturally led to conclude , that , by sailing in a direct course from any given point of land on one side , he must of necessity arrive at another point of land in the same parallel on the opposite side , provided his  provisions were proportioned to the voyage , and no accident from tempests or shipwreck intervened to interrupt his progress .
It was on this obvious principle that Columbus founded the certainty of his discovery  the infallibility of which served to support his hopes , when absolute despair had seized the greatest part of his followers .


It is true , that , though the figure of the earth was in effect conceived , yet its dimensions were wholly unknown : but as the road over-land to the eastern coasts of the continent was no secret , Columbus was persuaded that a passage by sea by a western course , if no intermediate lands prevented , would assuredly bring him to the same coasts .
From his knowledge , therefore , of the position of those countries , from whence the rich productions of the East were circulated through all the kingdoms of the West , he was led to steer , first , a south-west , and then a direct west course , which brought him among those broken fragments of the western continent , which he at first mistook for the islands of the Indian Ocean , and to the richest of which he imagined another voyage would certainly open a passage .


The discovery being once made , the principle upon which it was grounded could no longer be concealed .
Those belonging to the naval department about the Court of Spain , who had been most violent in opposing the undertaking , as appearing to them in no better light than as  the visionary conceit of some crack brained projector , now assumed another tone , and affected to speak of it as a discovery that required no extraordinary talents to accomplish  that it was not the result of science , but a thing that must follow of course to the first adventurer  and that it was fortunate for Columbus that he could prevail upon their Majesties to furnish the means to undertake it , as with such encouragemen [ ... ] there were not wanting officers in the royal navy much better qualified to have conducted the enterprize , tho ' by his unparalleled assurance he had obtained the preference .
In this slight and contemptuous manner it was the humour at court to speak of the new discovery  and though Columbus , after his return , was for a while caressed by the Royal Family , yet the frequent repetition of these indignities could not fail in time to lessen the idea of the merit of a man who had no advocate to support his credit but the evidence of his own superior abilities .
At a court-entertainment , however , to which he was invited , an incident happened that contributed not a little to heighten his character , and mortify his enemies .
The conversation at table turned , as was usual , upon the importance of the new discoveries  and though all seemed to agree , that the advantages would be immense that must inevitably result to Spain , yet little they thought was due to the first discoverer , because any ordinary seaman , by keeping his ship 's head to the westward , must have fallen in  with the same countries .
Columbus , without seeming to regard their discourse , when dinner was over , and the table uncovered , called for an egg , and twirling it about with his hand , as if by way of amusement , asked if any of the company could make that egg stand upon its little end without additional support .
The company , after trying their skill , pronounced the thing impossible  when Columbus , taking it again in his hand , and bruising the shell a little at bottom with his nail , produced it upon the table standing upright .
The company all fell a-laughing , and one cried out , that any fool could do as much as that .
I doubt not , replied Columbus , but any of you may do it , now you have seen it done  and so may any miserable pilot in the navy sail to the Indies , now that I have pointed out the track  but till the issue had shewn it practicable , addressing himself to the naval gentlemen , that , too , you pronounced an impossible thing .
The King and his royal consort , particularly the latter , were highly pleased when they were told this story , admiring the promptness of a mind whi [ ... ] h , ever collected , neither malice nor envy could disconcert .


Other navigators equally enterprizing , tho ' less sagacious , were now inflamed with the desire of immortalizing their names by new undertakings  so that it is no wonder that the business of discovery went rapidly on for a succeeding century .


It was in 1492 that Columbus made his first  expedition to the Bahama Islands  and in 1496 , John Cabbot , in the service of England , discovered the continent of North America .


Columbus , in his first voyage , had not yet conceived the idea of a double continent , but believed , as we have already noted , that he had discovered a passage by sea to those islands in the East that were already known by the name of the East Indies  in conformity to which he gave to the islands that he discovered the appellation of the West Indies , which they retain to this day .


In 1493 , having made a second voyage , and carried his discoveries considerably farther to the South , it is said , he received some faint notions of a sea beyond a great land , by which the islands he had first discovered were bounded  but it was not till after his third voyage in 1497 , that he attained a sight of that continent which Cabbot had discovered the year before .


It may seem , from what has just been said , that the eastern passage to the Indian Ocean had been discovered by the Portuguese  and that the East Indies were known to that people before this western discovery by Columbus : but , though several journies by land had been made , with a view to the opening an advantageous commerce with the eastern countries , by Portuguese Ambassadors well instructed in the Arabian language , by whose address some progress had been made in that business , yet it was not till 1495 that Bartholomew Diaz doubled the Cape of Good Hope , nor till the year 1497  ( the same year that the American continent was discovered by Cabbot ) , that Don Vasquez de Gama , by steering the nearest course , passed the Cape , which Diaz had discovered , and sailed into the Indian Ocean , where he afterwards made considerable conquests , and by his prudent management very suddenly diverted the current of Indian commerce into an entire new channel .
The notion , therefore , that Columbus borrowed his idea of a western passage from the discoveries made by the Portuguese towards the East , is ill founded .
These last had , indeed , made a considerable progress in their discoveries by land  but the passages to the Eastern and Western Indies by sea were discovered about the same time , without the least connection or intelligence between the respective discoverers .
And here we can not help entering our protest against the honour ascribed to Columbus by Mr. Campbell , and other judicious naval historians , as being the first circumnavigator , because , as Mr. Campbell observes , ' `` it was his [ Columbus 's ] opinion , that there was a passage from the North Sea into the South , and from thence it might be very possible to sail to the East Indies . ''
- ` That it was the opinion of Columbus , that there was a western passage to the East Indies is readily granted  it was his original idea : but that there was a passage from the East Indies to Europe , without returning the same way he went , he could have no conception of , till after the passage by the Cape of Good Hope was discovered  by the Portuguese .
Had he dreamt of an eastern passage by sea to the East Indies , he would most certainly have preferred it to a western passage , because it might have been performed without losing sight of land  and therefore , with much less risque than by launching into an immense unknown ocean , of which no one could tell the extent .
But his notion was , that the earth , like a bowl , inclosed the sea , and that it could only be traversed from side to side by water , and then from shore to shore by land .
Many irrefragable proofs of his having no conception of sailing round the globe might be adduced  but that of his returning the same way back a second time , without his knowing for certainty , or believing there was any other sea to sail upon , or having even determined the extent of that sea on which he had already ventured so far , may serve without farther proof to convince the intelligent reader , that Columbus had never thought of but one sea when he undertook his discovery , and that that sea was only to be crossed from West to East , and vice vers , .


But to proceed : - Soon after the eastern passage to the Indies was laid open , the coast of Brazil , opposite to the Cape of Good Hope , was discovered by Cabral , a Portuguese pilot , who was driven out of his course by stress of weather .
The same coast was likewise discovered the same year by Yannez PinÁon , who commanded a carvel that accompanied Columbus in his first expedition to the West Indies .
This man contested the honour of the first discovery  with Columbus , and insisted that it was through his perseverance alone that land was descried , the crew of Columbus having absolutely determined to steer back before the discovery took place .
Be that as it may , this able mariner afterwards examined the coast from the Bay of Mexico to the Equinoctial Line , and , in the year 1500 , discovered the great river of Amazons , which it was thought would have opened a passage to the South Sea .


In 1502 , Columbus made his fourth and last expedition , when he fully satisfied himself , that the islands he had discovered were totally disconnected from those he went in quest of , and that another continent existed besides that which was known to Europeans .
He was still , however , of opinion , that a western passage to the old continent from the new would be practicable , whenever a way was found to the Great Sea by which it was surrounded : and now it is not at all improbable but that he might fortel what afterwards came to pass , that one day or other the whole globe might be circumnavigated , though he did not live to see it executed .


In 1509 , the Portuguese first found the way to Sumatra , and from thence extended their discoveries to the Moluccas .


About this time a contest arose between the Spaniards and Portuguese , concerning the right of possessing countries , to which neither of them had any other claim than that of being the first Europeans who happened to land upon their coasts : a claim of the same kind his Otaheitean  Majesty may pretend to the western part of Europe , his subject Aotourou being the first Tropical inhabitant from the S. Sea that ever set foot on that continent .
This contest , however , the Pope took upon him to decide  and , to prevent the bloody consequences that might ensue between two such powerful competitors , he published a bull , which , at that time of blind obedience , was held decisive , decreeing , that whatever discoveries were made to the westward should belong to Spain , and such as were made to the eastward , to Portugal .
This seemed for a while to content both parties  but , in 1520 , Ferdinand Magellan , or Magellhanes , as Mr. Dalrymple affects to call him , having made his famous discovery to the Molucca Islands by a new passage , the contest was again revived , and the competitors claimed a second time the Pope 's interposition to settle the limits of their respective claims by more precise and determinate boundaries .
The claims of the Spaniards were now extended to near three parts of the globe  and those of the Portuguese , which by a false representation had been much diminished , were now to be restored , or rather regulated by a more exact standard .
The two contending powers were to divide the globe between them , by what was then stiled a line of demarkacion .
This line was to cut the globe into two hemispheres , and was to be acknowledged a first meridian : all the discoveries in the western hemisphere were to belong to Spain  and all in the  eastern to Portugal .
But still there arose a dispute about the precise spot where this meridian line should be fixed .
By the Pope 's bull it had been placed 100 leagues to the westward of St. Antonio , one of the islands of Cape Verde  but , by this new regulation , it was removed 270 leagues farther to the west .
This alteration was intended to deprive Portugal of the possession of the Moluccas  but the Portuguese pilots were not to be thus deceived : they suffered the line of demarkacion to be fixed  but , when it was finally determined , they insisted on their right to the Moluccas , as still within their limits , and future observations have since confirmed their claims .
But , notwithstanding the justice of their claims ( if justice can at all be admitted to exist in cases of usurpation ) , the Spaniards held the Moluccas till 1529 , when the Portuguese purchased an exclusive right of trading to them by a loan of 350,000 ducats .
- But to return from this digression :


We have already observed , that the coast of Brazil , and the river of Amazons , was first discovered by Yannez PinÁon , in 1500  but it was not till twelve years afterwards that John de Solis discovered the river Plate .


In 1513 , Vasco Nunez de Bilboa got sight of the Great South Sea , from the mountains of Pancas in the province of Panama  and from that time Ferdinand Magellan , a Portuguese officer , conceived the design of surrounding the globe , by finding a passage by which he might  enter that sea .
He now began to consider the earth as divided into two continents , with their concomitant seas  and , as a promontory was found , by the doubling of which one continent might be visited on both sides , he made no doubt but that another promontory existed , by which the other might be visited in like manner .
Perhaps the idea of a strait might not at first strike his mind , till the opening at Cape Virgin suggested it .
His original thought was to coast along to the southward , as the land trended  and by perseverance , he persuaded himself , that a boundary would be found , by which the land of the new continent would be terminated , though he did not , nor could not then ascertain to what height it might reach .
He had in view a nearer way to the Moluccas than that by the Cape of Good Hope  and he at first imparted his views to the Ministers of his Court , who , probably suspecting that by such a passage the right to the Moluccas might be brought in question by Spain , treated his project with a contemptuous neglect .
To a man full of the importance of such a discovery , nothing could be more mortifying .
He determined , since he was so coolly received at home , to try his fortune abroad .
For this purpose he repaired to the court of Spain , where , after making himself known to the leading Minister , he undertook to prove the Moluccas , and other rich islands then reputed in the East , to be within the Spanish line of demarkacion to the  West , and by a new passage to them he engaged to confirm the truth of what he advanced incontestibly .


These propositions , after being properly examined , and approved by the ablest astronomers and geographers at that time in Spain , was eagerly embraced by the Emperor Charles the Fifth , an enterprizing Prince , who then held the kingdom , and who gave him audience in the council-chamber at Saragossa , and conferred upon him , and his companion Ruy Falero , the order of St. Jago , both of whom his Imperial Majesty honoured with the title of his Captains .


This encouragement , and these honours , could not fail to alarm the Court of Portugal : but all the interest and opposition which Alvaro de Acasto , the Portuguese Ambassador , could make , had no effect  the preparations for the voyage were prosecuted with more than ordinary diligence , and five ships were soon got in readiness to put to sea .


But , previous to their setting sail , a difference [ ... ] concerning the necessary forms of commons , which had well nigh ruined the voyage before it was undertaken  the honour of carrying the royal st [ ... ] ndard was contested by Ruy Falero , and some other indignities were offered to Magellan on account of his country .
These , however , were redressed by the interposition of the imperial authority  Ruy Falero was persuaded to suspend his departure on account of his health , and Magellan was declared General  of the squadron , which was now committed to his sole direction .


On the 10th of August , 1519 , this little fleet , consisting of the Admiral 's ship  the St. Antonio , Capt. Juan de Cartagena , Vice-Admiral  the Victoria , Capt. Luys de MendoÁa , Rear-Admiral  the St. Jago , Capt. Juan Rodriguez Serrano  and the Conception , of which Gasper de Quezada was Master  left Cadiz , and proceeded to Teneriff , from whence they took their departure , on the 2d of September , and on the 13th of December arrived at Rio de Janeiro , on the coast of Brazil , where they staid till the 27th  and , after being plentifully supplied with all necessary refreshments at a very moderate price , they weighed anchor , and continued their voyage , in the course of which much discontent arose concerning the track they were to steer  but on Easter evening they entered St. Julian river , and were next day ordered on shore by the General to hear mass .
Three of the Captains refused to obey  namely , Luys de MendoÁa , Gasper de Quezada , and Juan de Cartagena , this last being already in arrest for disrespect to his General .


Their disobedience put Magellan on his guard .
He perceived that the majority both of officers and men were averse to the undertaking , and that a general murmuring prevailed throughout the whole squadron .
Only a few trusty friends were ready to support their General , and willing to follow wherever he should  lead .
The weather was now set in very severe , and the Spaniards , unused to the rigour of such a climate , were hardly to be restrained .
They represented the inutility of proceeding , as they were already in a climate too boisterous and inclement to be navigated by Spaniards  that it could never be the Emperor 's intention to sacrifice the lives of his subjects , without the least prospect of advantage to the State  and that now it was manifest , though the discovery were certain , the navigation would be impracticable , and therefore useless .
To these representations and others more full of asperity , Magellan coolly made answer , ' `` that he was determined to die rather than return back  that he should pass the winter where he then was  and that neither provisions nor wine should be wanting to those who would be contented with a moderate allowance  but that if any persisted , in spreading discontents , and encouraging disobedience , he knew how to punish as well as to reward . '' '


Barros says , that the three Captains Cartogena , Quezada , and MendoÁa , conspired together to kill Magellan , and to return and make their report of the usage they had met with , and the hardships they had endured in the voyage  but Magellan , considering the danger , and that in certain circumstances temerity is better than caution , ordered the people of his own ship to arms  and , manning his boat with thirty trusty friends , he clapt the Victoria aboard  and while MendoÁa  was reading a letter directed to him from the General , the messenger that delivered it stabbed him to the heart .
- The moment the order was executed , the thirty men entered to the assistance of the assassin , and quietly took possession of the ship .
This done a council of war was called , and a conspiracy was detected , in which more than forty of the principal people on board the several ships were found to be deeply concerned  but Magellan , that he might not appear too sanguinary or vindictive , sentenced Quezada only to be executed , and Cartagena to be left on shore , accompanied by a French Priest  a punishment that probably was worse than immediate death , as it subjected the criminals to hardships , which instant execution would have prevented .
MendoÁa and Quezada , he ordered to be quartered as traitors , to strike the disaffected with the greater terror .
This put an end to all opposition for the present .


When the winter months drew towards a conclusion , Magellan was vigilant to hasten the departure of his fleet  and , as soon as the cold abated , he dispatched Serrano to coast along the shore to make observations .
Serrano , at about twenty leagues distance , found a river a league broad at the entrance , which he named St. Cruz , because he fell in with it on that Saint 's day .
In examining this river , and in fishing for seals , he spent six days , at the end of which a furious storm arose , which split his sails , and drove his ship on shore , where she bulged , and was beaten  to pieces .
The crew , however , were saved , but reduced to the last extremity for want of food .
Two of the company undertook to travel over land , to give the General notice of the miserable situation of their fellow-sufferers  and , after 11 days fatigue , they at length surmounted every difficulty , and accomplished their purpose .
Magellan , pitying their distresses , sent a vessel with provisions , which came seasonably to their relief .


The time for sailing being now come , and the ships in readiness , they left the bay of St. Julian on the 24th of August , 1520 , after setting Juan de Cartagena , and Pedro Sanchez de Revora , the Priest , who was also found deep in the plot , ashore on that desolate coast .
They supplied them plentifully with bread and wine  but as they were never afterwards heard of , there can be no doubt of their perishing miserably .


The squadron , consisting now of four ships , kept coasting along to the southward , with imminent danger of shipwreck , till towards the latter end of October , when they fell in with a promontory , which the General named Cape Virgin , because it was discovered on St. Ursula 's - day .
This Cape opened an inlet , which Magellan judged favourable to his design .
He cast anchor at the entrance of the inlet , and ordered two ships to examine its course .
In five days these ships returned , and one of them affirmed it was a strait , because the flood was greater than the ebb  the other reported that  they saw nothing but inlets and breakers .
The General , on these different relations , determined to sail into the opening , in order to be more precisely informed .
He accordingly weighed , and came to an anchor in a commodious bay , where he first sent his skiff with 10 men to reconnoitre the shore , and then the St. Antonio to trace out the inlet to a certain distance .
When the men returned from the shore , they said , they had found a burying-place with more than 200 graves , and had seen the skeleton of a whale in a cove upon the beach , but had seen neither house nor inhabitant .
The Captain of the St. Antonio on his return gave a more flattering account .
He said , he had followed the inlet for more than 50 leagues  that its course was due east and west  and that he made not the least doubt but that it was the passage so much desired .
This news was received with repeated acclamations .
A council was called of the chief officers and pilots , in which a very warm debate arose , whether , in the circumstances the ships were then in , it were better to return to Spain , having obtained the main object of the voyage , or to proceed to complete what the General had undertaken to perform , namely , to trace out a western passage to the Molucca Islands .
Estevan Gomez , the pilot of the St. Antonio , a man of excellent parts and sound judgment , insisted on returning back , and bringing another squadron to complete the discovery , alledging , that they had still a great  and unknown sea to pass , and that , if either tempests or calms intervened to retard their passage over it , the whole fleet must inevitably perish .
His opinion was supported by the whole council , Magellan only excepted , who declared , that , if he were sure to be reduced to the necessity of eating the hides that covered the yards , he would persevere in the discovery .
He accordingly gave orders for weighing anchor immediately  and , proceeding down the strait , sent the Antonio to examine some inlets that promised a nearer passage to the main ocean than that they were pursuing  but the pilot Gomez , and the purser Guerra , seized and stabbed Alvara de Mesquita , the Commander , and carried home the ship .
In the mean time , Magellan supposing some disaster had befallen her , went himself in pursuit of her  but after six days fruitless search , he determined to continue his voyage  ' `` and it pleased God , says my author , that , at the end of twenty days , he entered into the Great South Sea , and was the first who had found the passage so much sought after , whereby the memory of this excellent Captain shall be eternally celebrated . '' '


Finding that the land trended northwards , Magellan directed his course accordingly , that he might as soon as possible clear those cold and dreary coasts that had caused so much murmuring among the mariners , and so much caballing among the officers  but before he reached the Tropic he met with most tempestuous   weather , by which the three remaining ships were very much shattered in their sails and rigging .
In this passage they discovered two uninhabited islands , St. Pedro and Tiburon , about the situation of which mariners are still divided  and it has been questioned , whether either of them have since been seen .
As they approached the Line , they found the wind to stand fair .
Magellan then ordered the ships to change their course , and steer N. W. and W. N. W. till he reached the Line .


Harris takes notice that it was on the 28th of December when Magellan entered the Great South Sea , and that in this wide ocean the ships that accompanied him sailed three months and twenty days without seeing any other land than the two islands just mentioned , which afforded them no refreshment .
At length , when they had undergone all the miseries that human nature is capable of sustaining , from hunger , thirst , and sickness , they fell in with the Ladrone islands , where they landed  but where the inhabitants were such thieves that they were in fear left their ships should be pulled to pieces and carried away before their faces , the crews not having strength enough left to defend either their lives or their properties .
They therefore shortened their stay among these plunderers  and were more fortunate in their next attempt .


On the 10th of March , landing on the island of Zamal , they found springs of delicate water , which to them were more precious than fountains  of the choicest wines  fruit in abundance , that surpassed any they had till then tasted  and inhabitants humane and civil , who pitying their distresses , brought their richest productions to relieve them .
From this island they continued to steer between the west and south-west , till they arrived at Buthuan , or , as it has since been called , Buton , the King of which gave them honourable entertainment .
They visited several other isles , and in all of them were well received  till at length coming to the Isle of Mathan , they were attacked by an army of Indians , against whom the General himself being engaged was shot with a poisoned arrow , and afterwards pierced in the head with a lance  and thus ended the life and actions of this gallant Commander , whose name will be perpetuated with honour to latest posterity .
After his death , a company of his followers being invited to an entertainment on shore , were treacherously murdered by a pretended friendly King , and only Don Juan Serrano , of all who landed , was reserved alive , in order to procure a large supply of fire-arms and ammunition by way of ransom  but those who remained on board , fearful of being trepanned , would have no farther intercourse with the perfidious infidels  so that poor Serrano was left to their mercy .
Those on board the ships , 80 in number , directed their course towards the Moluccas , and arrived at Teridore , one of the principal of those islands , on the 8th of November , 1521 .
Here they  were hospitably received , and here they staid till the middle of January , 1522  and , being now come into well-known seas , we shall accompany them no farther  only remarking , that , of the whole squadron only one ship , namely the Victoria , had the good fortune to return to Spain  and of 234 officers and seamen , the complement at first setting out , if we except those who returned in the St. Antonio , of whom we have no account , only 13 Spaniards survived to return to Seville .
Their Commander John Sebastian Cano was received with extraordinary marks of favour by the Emperor , who gave him for arms the Terrestrial Globe , with this motto , Primus me circumdedistis , and otherwise liberally rewarded him .
The voyage he lived to make took up three years and thirty-seven days , and is , perhaps , the most remarkable that ever was performed .


This voyage opened a new field for discovery : the Spaniards , who were already settled on the western coasts of America , were very curious to examine what countries might be situated along that vast space which divided the new continent from the old  and accordingly Cortez , the celebrated conqueror of Peru , fitted out two ships for the purpose , the command of one of which he gave to Ferdinand Grijalva , the other to Don Alvarado .


Grijalva departed from Pageta , in 6 deg .
N. lat .
about the beginning of April , 1537 , and steered W. and S. W. into 29 deg .
S. lat .
where  his ship springing her mast , he stood again to the Line , in which tract a mutiny happening among the crew , Grijalva and his nephew were both assassinated  and the ship , after a passage of four months , was carried to Papua , where falling to pieces , the crew , reduced by famine and fatigue to seven men , took to their boat and coasted along the shore , till being boarded by a number of Indians , it was sunk .
The Spaniards , however , were saved by the humanity of the captors , and sold for slaves .
This ship , it is affirmed , sailed 1000 leagues on both sides the Line without seeing land .
Among the islands , however , which they afterwards fell in with before they came to Papua , was that called Isla de los Pescadores , called in the late voyages BYRON 's ISLAND , and supposed to be a new discovery .


Alvarado was instructed to pursue his discoveries along the Line , without deviating either to the right or left , farther than the most advantageous method of navigating his ship required  and in that direction he discovered the islands of Papua .
He also discovered other islands , named the Guelles , in 1 deg .
N. lat .
east and west from Teronate , and 125 leagues from that of Moro , with Hamei , 170 leagues from Tidore , and many others that have since been thought new discoveries .
After his return , he was again employed upon services of the like kind , and was instrumental in establishing the trade of Manilla .


 But of all the Spanish discoveries that have been made , or pretended to have been made , in the South Seas , that of Juan Fernandez , who first pointed out the way from Lima to Chili by sailing to the westward , if real , is by far the most important .
This pilot , ( the same who discovered the island which still bears his name ) in the latitude of 40 deg .
S. was brought , as it is said , in courses between west and south-west , upon the coast of a continent , from what he could judge , very fertile and delightful , inhabited by white people , hospitable , and well-disposed , of a middle stature , dressed in very fine cloaths , and so peaceable and civil , that , in every way they could express , they endeavoured to gratify the strangers , and to accommodate them with the best things their country afforded , the fruits whereof were excellent and abounding in the greatest profusion .
It is added , that , being over-joyed with having discovered the coast of that great continent so much talked of , and so ardently sought after , he returned to Chili , intending to make a second voyage properly fitted out to improve this fortunate discovery to his own and his country 's enrichment  but before he could persuade his friends to give entire credit to his report , he died , and the secret of the precise situation of his new continent perished with him , for it has never since been found  though Mr. Alexander Dalrymple , author of an Historical Collection of Voyages to the South Pacific Ocean , whose opinion is of no small  weight , is persuaded that Fernandez did discover the SOUTHERN CONTINENT , and that , whenever it is again visited , it will be no new discovery , but a confirmation of the existence of that land which has already been found .


But , besides this dubious discovery , there is still another , which has not yet been clearly ascertained , and about which geographers are much divided .
This discovery is attributed to Alvaro Mendana , who , in 1567 , is said to have fallen in with a cluster of islands abounding with gold and pearl , which were named by him the Isles of Salomon  and for the settling of which an unsuccessful attempt was made by Mendana himself  and a second strongly solicited by Pedro Fernandez de Quiros , the chief pilot who accompanied that General , and who afterwards made a voyage thither on his own account , in which he made many discoveries .


It was in April , 1595 , that Mendana left Callao , in Peru , to settle the Salomon Isles .
He had with him two large ships , a galleasta , and a frigate , on board of which were embarked from Lima 400 followers , including women and children .
Of this embarkation Lope de la Vega , his brother-in-law , was Admiral  Pedro Fernandez de Quiros , chief pilot  and Pedro Merino Manriquez , Maitre de Campo .
According to Figueroa , who wrote an account of this voyage , the Admiral 's ship was named the St. Isabella  Mendana 's ship , the St. Jerome  the galleasta , St. Philippe  and the frigate , St.  Catalina : of the two last the Commanders were Capt. Philip CorÁo , and Lieut. Alonzo de Leyla .
In this expedition Mendana was accompanied by his Lady Donna Isabella Barretos , with her three brothers  and , after parting company with the Admiral 's ship the very night they came in sight of the island on which they settled , Mendana cast anchor in a bay which he called la Graciosa , and the island he named Santa Cruz .
Here , on the 8th of October , the Maitre de Campo , and Thomas de Ampuero , were hanged , and Ensign Jean de Buy beheaded , for mutinous behaviour  and here Mendana himself died the 18th of the same month .
Don Lorenzo , brother to Donna Isabella , who , by the loss of the Admiral , had succeeded as Captain-General , died also on the 2d of November  and , in less than seven days after , Father Antonio de Serra , Chief Priest , and Juan de Espinosa , his Vicar .
In short , from change of climate , food , and customs  from labour , going in the sun , being wet without having wherewithal to shift themselves , sleeping on the ground , and from other disorders and sufferings , dangerous diseases attacked the whole company  they began to die a-pace , it being lamentable to see them in their distress creeping into huts , some delirious , and others at the last gasp  some going to the ships to seek health  others shifting from the ships to the shore  but no remedy , nor any physician to apply to for relief .
In this calamitous state things were , when Donna Isabella , on the 18th  of October , broke up the settlement  and embarking the few people that remained alive , on board the St. Jerome , the frigate , and the galleasta , they set sail , intending to pursue their course to Manilla : but the frigate soon lost company , and , it is said , was afterwards found on a defart coast with all her sails set , and the people on board dead and rotten  and the galleasta put into an island near the coast of Mindanao .
The St. Jerome , however , after suffering unspeakable hardships , got to Manilla , where Donna Isabella married Don Ferdinando de Castro , and returned in his ship to New Spain the very next year .
The Admiral 's ship was never heard of .
- Thus ended this unfortunate expedition .


The island of Santa Cruz , in which this settlement was attempted , is said to be 100 leagues in circumference , and to lie E. S. E. and W. N. W. in lat .
10 deg .
20 min .
S. distant from Lima 1800 leagues .
They cast anchor on the north side of it , in a harbour , to the north of which is a volcano , or burning mountain , that from its top frequently casts forth fire , and from the inside of which proceeds a noise sometimes louder than thunder .
To the west of the harbour is a small island about four leagues in compass , separated from the great island by sunken rocks and banks of sand .
The port is formed at the bottom of the bay by a great river , and the country round it is fine and plentiful .
A more exact description than this , one would think , could not have been given .


 Quiros , who navigated Donna Isabella , first to Manilla , and afterwards accompanied her to New Spain , was so charmed with the beautiful appearance of these enchanting islands , that he continued for the space of ten years incessantly to weary the Court of Spain with memorial after memorial to renew the settlement of them  and at length he prevailed .
- Previous to his voyage , he spent several months in building two ships and a zebra , the stourest and best equipped with men , provisions , and warlike stores , of any that had ever been fitted out in New Spain .
He was accompanied by six Franciscan Fathers , with whom he took his departure on the 21st of December , 1605  and sailing without any material incident till the 26th of January 1606 , he on that day fell in with an island to the south-west , just 1000 leagues from the coast of Peru , in lat .
25 deg .
S. which island he unluckily found uninhabited .
From this island he sailed on different courses , passing several inaccessible islands , till the 10th of February , on which day a sailor joyfully cried out , Land a-head !
Here , on their landing , they surprized a woman , but so old in appearance , that it was matter of astonishment that she could stand upright .
In her youthful days it was easy to perceive that she had been of a graceful mien , and she still retained a dignity about her that shewed she was of quality .
Being asked by signs to go on board , she complied without hesitation  and when there , she eat of whatever was given  her , and received presents with a becoming ease .
After cloathing this lady very fine , they set her on shore  and , on her landing , the people flocked about her , and among them a tall , stout , well-made man , who had on his head a plume of feathers , and by his deportment appeared to be a Chief .
Him they endeavoured to entice on board  but , when he came to the ship 's side , fearing treachery , he refused to enter .
Quiros directed that no force might be used , made him some presents , and dismissed him .
This island by observation was in 17 deg .
40 min .
S. and was named by Quiros Sagitaria .
They left it on the 12th , after some skirmishes with the inhabitants , and , passing by several other islands , in which they could procure no refreshment , on the 2d of March they fell in with an island which promised fair to supply their wants .
Here on their attempting to land they were accosted by about 100 Indians , the tallest , genteelest , whitest , and strongest-made people they had ever yet seen  but , though they shewed fair in countenance , they were in fact the cruellest enemies they had to encounter in the whole voyage .
One of them in a swift canoe approached the ship singly , and , brandishing his lance , made those kind of contortions with his face , arms , and legs , by which Parkinson has remarked the South-Sea Indians provoke their enemies to battle  he even mounted the balcony of the Admiral 's ship , and with his lance made a thrust at one of the officers on the quarterdeck ,  with an intent to kill him , and instantly leaping into his canoe rowed off at a great rate .
He repeated his visits and his insolence  but it was not long before they shot him dead .
While this was passing on board the Admiral , the zebra , that had cast anchor near the shore , was still in a worse situation , surrounded by a multitude of fierce barbarians , who , having fastened a rope to her head , were endeavouring to drag her on shore  but perceiving that the people on board were preparing to cut the rope , they pushed a little off , and were fastening it to the cable , when a volley of small arms was discharged among them , by which some were killed , some wounded , and all terribly frightened : this , however , failed of the desired effect  for neither kindness nor chastisement could prevail upon them to furnish the ships with water or provisions  so that they were obliged to set sail without a supply of either .
This island lies north and south , and was called by Quiros the Island of Handsome People .


They now pursued their course for the island of Santa Cruz without interruption till the 7th of April , when they discovered land bearing W. N. W. high , and black like a volcano  but night coming on , they stood off till next morning , and then sent the zebra to look out for a safe harbour for the ships to cast anchor .
On the 9th she returned , having succeeded  and about noon the same day the ships were moored in 25 fathom water , to the great joy of the  desponding crew .
The boats were instantly dispatched to make peace with the natives  and before night , they returned with water , plantains , cocoa-nuts , potatoes , palmetos , and sugar-canes , than which the riches of Potosi could not have been more welcome .
They next day discovered a fort , constructed by art , the materials of coral stone , in which were about 70 houses surrounded by the sea , and designed as a refuge from enemies , whenever an invasion was threatened by the warlike inhabitants of the adjoining country .
To this fort they made their next approach , and , lest they should meet with opposition , they took care to be properly armed  but the inhabitants were desirous of nothing so much as peace , and received them hospitably : so different are the dispositions of people inhabiting the same climate , and separated only by a portion of the sea .
Here they were supplied at an easy rate with wood and water , in the shipping of which they were assisted by the friendly natives  and here they had plenty of the fruits and provisions which the country produced  in return for which , the grateful Spaniards seized four of the natives , with a view to carry them off  but in spite of their vigilance three made their escape , and only one c [ ... ] ntinued with them , who , being a slave where he [ ... ] , cared but little what master he served in that capacity .


At the end of seven days , the people being pretty well refreshed , Quiros again set sail , and on the 21st of April passed an island in lat .
12  degrees S. which the Indians called Tuoopia .
They now approached the islands of which they were in quest  and on the 25th a consultation was held on board the Admiral , to consider which of the lands in sight they would chuse to settle , when it was concluded not to return to Santa Cruz , but to stand to the southward in search of that great land , of which they had heard so much .
This they did , passing many islands , some of considerable extent , some small but very populous , and all of them exhibiting a most delightful prospect of woods , lawns , inclosures , and water-falls , till at length in lat .
14 deg .
50 min .
S. they came to a land stretching from east to west , to the extent of which they could see no end .
On the zebra 's approaching this land , the people on board were not a little surprized to see an Indian come down from the mountains , and without invitation throw himself into the sea , and make towards the ship .
A boat was immediately hoisted out , in order to take him up  but as he appeared spirited and strong , and made the usual contortions by way of defiance , it was judged proper to confine him , by clapping a chain upon his legs to prevent mischief .
In this manner they purposed to have carried him on board the Admiral , who wanted to get some native in his power to use with kindness , in order to facilitate a peace  but , perceiving their intent , and concluding that his imprisonment was a prelude to his death , he seized in his passage a  favourable opportunity , and snapping his chains with his hands , leapt suddenly into the sea .
Night coming on , it was in vain to pursue him , and accordingly they continued their course to acquaint the Admiral with what had happened .
They had scarce been an hour on board , when the watch on the forecastle called out , A voice !
and knowing it to be that of a native , they instantly handed him up , when , to the great surprize of the boat 's crew , who had just come on board , they perceived , by the remains of the chain about his leg , that it was the man who had made his escape .
He was quite exhausted with swimming , and chose rather to surrender to the strangers than perish in the sea .
He was kindly received , had wine and sweet-meats given him , put to bed , and in the morning was richly cloathed in taffety , and sent on shore : in return for which civilities , he caused a number of hogs to be sent on board , with plantains and other fruits  but at the same time he gave his benefactors to understand , that he was not to be diverted from the defence of his country , by the dissembled kindness of pretended friends .
When , therefore , the Spaniards attempted to land , a few Indians , headed by this gallant Chief , appeared upon the shore , and , feigning to conduct them to an open beach , led them along the skirts of a wood , where a numerous body of natives lay concealed , who watching their opportunity , let fly a volley of poisoned arrows , by which , however , one Spaniard only was wounded in the face .
 The Spaniards returned the compliment , by a discharge of musquetry  but the opposition they expected from these uncivilized barbarians ( for so they are called for defending their country ) deterred them from prosecuting their design .
They returned to their ships without setting foot on shore  and , on their return , finding themselves mistaken , it was thought proper again to put to sea , in search of that great country and that friendly people , of whose happy situation they had heard so much .


On the 30th of April , about three in the afternoon , steering south-west , they discovered land right a-head , and before night came up with it .
In the morning the zebra was sent along shore to examine the soundings , and after twelve hours absence returned , and made report , that they had found a spacious bay , and had exchanged some trifles with a people of an enormous size , who , nevertheless , appeared to be good natured , and desirous of peace .
This news gave universal satisfaction .
The ships followed their pilot  and it being the day of St. Philip and St. James when they arrived , they called the bay by that name .
Here they found a most delightful port , situated between two noble rivers ( the one they named the Jordan , and the other Salvador )  the people numerous and friendly  the climate mild and serene  and the air so wholesome , that in a few days all the sick recovered .
The soil they afterwards found fruitful to a degree of luxuriance  the woods  and plains abounding with herds and beasts of various kinds , and the seas well stored with fish .
In short , nothing was wanting to complete their wishes , but a more numerous company to secure possession .
On their first landing the Spaniards were hospitably received  but when it was perceived , by their overtures for peace , that they intended to prolong their stay , a jealousy arose that they came with no good design  and they were treated afterwards as enemies and invaders .
All friendly intercourse very soon ceased  the market for provisions was stopt  and nothing was to be obtained to subsist upon but by force or stratagem .
While they were on these terms , an incident happened that it was thought would at once have put an end to their fears and their hopes .
Among the vegetables which grew wild , and on which they were obliged chiefly to live , they had gathered some poisonous plants , of which the people in general had eaten , and all who had eaten soon began to feel the direful effects .
The symptoms were the more alarming , as all parts of the flesh seemed to partake of the noxious quality of the plants .
The ships were like the hospitals of a city infected with the plague , where the numbers of the healthy were not sufficient to administer to the infirmities of the sick .
Nothing , in short , was to be heard but lamentations and supplications  all expected to die without remedy .
But their fears , as it fell out , were greater than their danger  for , after a certain  time , the violence of the poison abated , and the sick were restored to a more vigorous state of health than they enjoyed before .
But they were scarce relieved from this misfortune , when another succeeded .
Despairing of ever being able to reconcile themselves to the natives at this port , they set sail , after having founded a city between the Jordan and the Salvador , to which they had given the name of New Jerusalem .
Coasting towards the south with a view to find a more fortunate settlement , they were overtaken by a most dreadful storm , in which the ships were separated .
The Admiral was driven off the coast , and never again returned  but the other ship , and the zebra , with difficulty returned to port .
What afterwards became of them we are not told .
Quiros , after attempting in vain to rejoin them , made the best of his way to New Spain  and on his arrival undertook a voyage to Old Spain , where he continued to solicit the Court for a new embarkation  but he died before he could obtain it .


From this time the Spaniards seem to have given over all thoughts of a settlement in those islands , to the true situation of which they appear at this day to be strangers .
Neither have other nations been more successful in their attempts to discover them  for unless ( as Mr. Alexander Dalrymple has endeavoured to prove in his Historical Collection of Voyages to the South Pacific Ocean ) they are the same with those which Dampier has dignified with the name of  New Britain , no others have yet been found that answer to their description .
To Mr. Dalrymple 's data there can be only one objection , and that is this : Quiros , in his memorial to the Court of Spain , reporting the voyage of Mendana , says , that , in prosecuting his discoveries , he fell in with four islands [ the Marquessas ] , inhabited by so good a people , that there is no account of any other having ever been found equal to them  and that these islands were 1000 leagues from Lima , 650 from the nearest coast of New Spain , and 1000 leagues from New Guinea .
Here the distance from Lima to New Guinea is precisely fixed by Quiros  but at the same time it is to be noted , that the distance from Lima to the isles in question are as precisely fixed  and in the same memorial they are said to be between the 7th and 12th degrees of south latitude , 1500 leagues from the city of Lima .
Thus they are placed by Quiros , precisely in the midway between the Marquessas and New Guinea  whereas the isles called New Britain are divided by Dampier from New Guinea to the eastward only by a strait .


But this by the bye .
- We shall now proceed to relate what other material discoveries have been made by other nations in the southern hemisphere , particularly by the Dutch : - Le Maire and Schouten left the Texel on June the 14th , 1615  and passing Strait Le Maire January 25 , 1616 , on the 10th of April the same year fell in with an island in latitude 15 deg .
 12 min .
S. 3700 miles from the coast of Peru , to which they gave the name of DOG ISLAND .
Pursuing their coast to the isles of Salomon , on the 16th they came to another island , in lat .
14 deg .
46 min .
S. to which they gave the name of WATERLAND , because in this island , tho ' uninhabited , they found a supply of fresh water , and some herbs , of which they gathered sackfuls to make pottage to refresh the men , who were now much afflicted with the scurvy .


On the 3d of May they saw many dolphins , the first they had seen in the South-Seas .


On the 11th , after passing several uninhabited islots , they discovered an island in lat .
16 deg .
10 min .
S. where they had an engagement with the natives , whom they found to be great thieves  they were , however , very handsome  their limbs well-proportioned , of large stature , quite naked , excellent swimmers , and very active .
This island they called Cocos Island , because they were here plentifully supplied with that fruit .
A league from it lay another , which they named Traitors Island , because the inhabitants had formed a design to cut them off .


On the 18th , having sailed near 5000 miles from the coast of Peru , without discovering the least appearance of a southern land , or falling in with the so much celebrated Isles of Salomon , and being in lat .
16 deg .
5 min .
S. it was there considered in full council what course to steer next  when it was determined to return home by the well known track to the northward of New Guinea .
 In pursuit of this resolution they changed their course to the N. N. W. and on the 22d , being in lat 14 deg .
56 min S. they fell in with an island which , by its beautiful appearance , promised fair to afford refreshment .
Sending the shallop to sound , they found 50 fathom , sand and shells , in a kind of bason over-against a small river issuing from a valley edged with trees .
This gave unspeakable pleasure to the whole company .


On the 23d they moored the ship  and , while they were yet busy , they were visited by whole troops of the natives , who expressed their admiration a thousand different ways .
At length , a venerable old man approached the ship , and with great gravity made an oration , at the conclusion of which , the people who surrounded him expressed their approbation by general acclamations .
A traffic for provisions now commenced  and , after a pretty sharp skirmish , in which half a dozen natives were killed by the musquetry , the same was continued till their departure with great civility and honesty .
The Chiefs of the island , after an exchange of hostages , came on board , and were magnificently entertained .
They were given to understand , that the ships were in want of water , and they made their people assist in supplying their wants .
They caused hogs , dogs , fowls , and fruits , to be sent in plenty , which were exchanged for nails , beads , dolls , and looking-glasses .
As a present , when the Chiefs returned to shore , they sent to  Figure 1 .
Horn-Island .
 the Commander two hogs ready drest  they had taken out the entrails , and put in the place of them burning stones , to roast them in the inside , and sweet herbs to make them savoury .
In short , their manners , their desires , their behaviour , their customs , their habitations , and their arts , so exactly correspond with what has lately been reported of the inhabitants of the supposed newly discovered islands in the South Seas , that there does not remain a doubt , but that this island which the Dutch named Hoorne Island , together with the adjoining island which they called the Island of Good Hope , are two of those that lie between the 10th and 17th degrees of south latitude , of which our late voyagers have given so flattering an account .
One particular reported by the Dutch is strikingly characteristic : The men , say they , were valiant , and large in stature , the tallest among them surpassing very much in height the tallest of ours  their women were not handsome , but so totally destitute of shame , that what modesty requires to be done in privacy , they performed with their men in public , by way of entertainment , before their Kings .
In the new map accompanying Hawkesworth 's Voyages , King George 's Island is placed in the latitude of 14 deg .
29 min .
S. long .
148 deg .
50 min .
W .
In the Dutch maps Hoorne Island is placed in lat .
14 deg .
56 min .
S. long .
83 deg .
30 min .
W. from Arica , on the coast of Peru , which answers to long .
153 deg .
30 min .
W. from London , being only 2 deg .
40 min .
more to the west , and  27 min .
more to the south than King George 's Island  a difference very inconsiderable indeed !
allowing for the difference of time from 1616 to 1765 , and for the improvement that has been made in the instruments of navigation during that period , particularly in those for ascertaining longitude .
On the 1st of June , as has been already observed , they took their departure from Hoorne Island , highly pleased with their kind reception , and on the 25th came in sight of the coast of New Guinea .


We should have mentioned , that Schouten was of opinion , that Hoorne Island was one of the Salomon Isles , mentioned by Quiros , none other they had met with having answered so well to the Spanish description of them .


The next remarkable voyage , undertaken professedly with a view to discovery in the southern hemisphere , is that of Abel Jansan Tasman , who , in 1642 , sailed from Batavia in the East Indies , and touched at the Isles of Mauritius , in latitude 20 deg .
20 min .
South  long .
78 deg .
47 min .
East .
On the 8th of October , the same year , he left the Mauritius , and , keeping a southerly course , on the 24th of September fell in with the land , to which he gave the name of Anthony Van Diemen 's land , in 42 deg .
25 min .
S. long .
163 deg .
50 min .
E .
Here they met with much bad weather , which obliged them to steer eastward  and on the 1st of December they anchored in lat .
43 deg .
 10 min .
S. long .
167 deg .
55 min .
E. in a bay to which they gave the name of Frederic Henry 's bay .
Their whole force consisted only of a small ship about 300 tons , named the Hemskirk , and the Zee Haan pink for examining the coast .
Here they landed , but could discover no human being , though they had reason to believe the country was inhabited .
They gathered plenty of good pot-herbs that grew wild , and saw trees full two fathom and an half in the girt , and from 60 to 75 feet high , in which steps had been cut for the purpose of climbing them , five feet distant from each other  and from this circumstance they concluded that the inhabitants must be men of gigantic stature .


On the 5th of December , Tasman pursued his course in search of the Salomon Isles , and on the 13th had sight of a very high and mountainous country , now well known by the name of New Zealand .
By its lofty appearance , he judged it to be the southern continent , and coasted it along to the north eastward , till on the 18th of December , he came to a spacious bay , three or four miles in breadth , in lat .
40 deg .
49 min .
S. long .
191 deg .
41 min .
from whence he could discern on the shore men of a strong robust make , partly clothed , and partly naked , to whom he made signals , inviting them on board , but none of them would venture to approach within the reach of a peteraro .
It was therefore resolved to go to them   but before that resolution could be carried into execution , the barbarians made an attack upon the Zee Haan 's boat , and murdered most of the crew , in the manner related in the course of the work .


Not caring to sacrifice any more of his people against a barbarous race of manslayers , he weighed anchor , and pursued his voyage along the coast till he came to an island in latitude 34 deg .
25 min .
S. which he named THREE KING 'S ISLAND , where some of his people landed , and where they saw at a distance about 40 men of an uncommon stature , who called to them in a very gruff tone of voice , and approached them hastily with prodigious strides .
The Dutchmen , being few in number thought fit to retreat .
Their business being that of discovery , not of war , the Captain thought fit to quit that inhospitable coast , and direct his course to the islands of Cocos or Hoorne , where he was sure of refreshing his men , and supplying their wants without danger of bloodshed , happy that he could find a passage into an open sea .
On this coast , however , he observed many fair plantations , handsomely laid out , and to all appearance well cultivated .


On the 19th of January , 1643 , he discovered three islands , to which he gave names .
The southernmost he called Pylstaart 's Island , the middlemost Amsterdam , and the most northerly Middleburgh .
This last lay in lat .
21 deg .
20 min .
S. long .
205 deg .
20 minutes .
 At these islands , which seemed remote from any other land , they trafficked for provisions  and the inhabitants , who were of a tawney complexion , and somewhat above the common size , behaved very civilly , and shewed no signs of a hostile disposition .
Among the natives of these islands came a lusty man with a St. Thomas 's arm , and a woman with a natural beard .
A venerable old man came also among the rest , and made an oration  after which a croud of men and women , young and old , came on board with all kinds of provisions .
It is remarkable , that , among all the islands in the South Seas , the only tame four-footed animals are hogs and dogs , and of these the inhabitants here had plenty .
They found another island at no great distance , equally abounding in the usual productions , besides being plentifully supplied with water .
It appears strange to us , that the people in those hot climates can subsist without fresh water  yet nature seems in part to have supplied that defect by furnishing a fruit that both allays thirst and assuages hunger , and that too without either art or labour .
By vegetables suited to their subsistence , it should seem that the animals , indigenous to the climate , are nourished and made fat .
Indeed , where springs , brooks , and lakes are wanting , the forests have few , if any , inhabitants  but if we may credit the relations of voyagers , the people have hogs and dogs , where they have neither river , well , or lake   for though in Amsterdam Island , the strangers might have purchased 100 hogs a day for a few baubles , yet a can of fresh water was not to be procured at any rate .
In an island , called by the natives Annamokka , but by the Dutch Rotterdam , water was found in plenty , yet it was no better inhabited than the islands before mentioned , which seemed to be wholly without .
Rotterdam Island is placed in lat .
20 deg .
15 min .
S. long 206 deg .
19 min .
To this island they repaired to take in water , and there they compleated their stock , of fresh provisions , finding the people courteous and civil , though somewhat inclined to be thievish , Being now fully refreshed and provided , without making any further discoveries worth relating , they returned to Java , by the way of New Guinea .


Jacob Roggewein was the next Dutchman who sailed professedly on the business of discovery .
He was furnished by their East-India Company with three ships , namely , the Eagle , the Tienh [ ... ] n , and the African Galley : with these he set sail from Amsterdam , July the 16th , 1721 , and towards the latter end of November came in sight of the coast of Brazil .
After a few days stay in the neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro , he weighed , and went in quest of Hawkins 's Maiden Land , which is said to lie in 30 deg .
S. but not being able to find it , he pursued his course towards the straits , till on the 21st of December , in lat .
40 deg .
S. the ships met with a violent storm , in which the  Tienhoven lost company .
About the beginning of January , Roggewein discovered a large island 200 leagues in circuit , in lat .
52 deg .
S. long .
95 .
deg .
W. about 80 leagues from the coast of America .
He named this island BELCIA AUSTRALIS , and it is the same now known by the name of Falkland 's Island .
Leaving this island to windward , he passed the strait of Le Maire , and on the 24th of February came in sight of Juan Fernandez , where he fortunately found the Tienhoven , that island having been he place appointed to rendezvous in case of separation .


There the ships continued three weeks , and sailed from thence about the middle of March , steering W. N. W. in search of Davis 's Land , which , however , they could not find .
Neither has that or Hawkins 's Maiden Land ever been seen by any other navigator except the first discoverers .
Being in lat .
28 deg .
S. long .
268 deg .
they saw many birds and other tokens of high land , but to the astonishment of the Admiral came in sight of none till they had sailed 12 leagues farther west .
They then discovered an island , which they called EASTER-ISLAND , because they came in sight of it on Easter-day .
They found this island well inhabited .
The [ ... ] an that came on board was painted with various kinds of figures , was of a brown complexion , with large ears , so long that they hung down to his shoulders .
He was tall , robust , active , of an agreeable countenance , and  lively diposition .
They offered him wine , but he threw it in his eyes .
They gave him meat , cloathed him , and sent him on shore , but afterwards killed him in a skirmish with his countrymen .
On this island they observed many idols , and saw one man quite white , whom they took to be a priest .
He had pendents in his ears a pound weight each .
On landing 150 in number , the natives crouded so close upon them , that they were forced to fire upon them to keep them off .
By this discharge several were killed , and many wounded .
These poor people , seeing their friends bleed , and fall dead , filled the air with doleful cries and lamentations  and brought offerings of fruits , roots , and fowls , to appease the wrath of the invaders .
To implore the bodies of their murdered friends , they cast themselves on the earth , and made other signs of supplication .
They were indulged in their timidity , and it was held a crime to approach a Dutchman without reverence  when they brought them presents , they laid them at their feet .


This country was full of inclosures , and seemed neatly cultivated .
The people had coverings of a manufacture that felt soft like silk .
The women in general were painted with a rouge far surpassing in brightness any thing of that colour known in Europe  they were very obliging , and enticed the strangers to every kind of familiarity both by their looks and gestures .
Their idols were chiefly of stone ,  well-proportioned , and wrought with exquisite workmanship .
While they lay at anchor at this delightful island , a storm arose , which prevented the Admiral 's design of extending his researches to the remoter parts of it , as it appeared diversified with woods , forests , lawns , gardens , and cultivated fields  and in every respect well supplied with necessaries for the refreshment of ships bound to the southern lands  but the fury of the storm increased so fast , that those on shore were glad to recover their ships .
They were scarce embarked when the billows rose to such a height , as to make it dangerous to hazard their security to the anchors with which they were moored  they , therefore , instantly weighed and put to sea , and , as the wind blew fair , they proceeded at a great rate towards the bad sea of Schouten , to which they were bound .
After a run of 800 leagues from Easter-Island , they got sight of an island in latitude 15 deg .
45 min .
S. which they took to be Dog-Island , discovered by Schouten , and therefore did not stay to examine it .


The trade-wind began now to shift , and to veer about to the south-west , by which the ships in the night were driven among a cluster of islands , and the African galley being a head was jammed between the rocks , of which a more particular account will be found in the course of the Work .


These islands were situated between the 15th and 16th degrees of south latitude  and Roggewein 's  Pernicious Island is no doubt the same with that where Commodore Byron found the carved head of a rudder that had belonged to a Dutch long-boat , and where he also found a piece of hammered iron , a piece of brass , and some small iron tools , which the ancestors of the present race of inhabitants had obtained from this ship after her shipwreck .


Here the crews of the remaining ships grew troublesome and unruly .
They had already been out ten months , and had experienced nothing but hardships , without the least prospect of advantage , either to themselves or country .
A council was therefore called , and it was determined to return home by way of the East-Indies .
On quitting Pernicious Island they fell in with a small island , which they called Aurora , because it was discovered at break of day  and soon after with another small island , which they called Vesper , because they came in sight of it in the evening .
About twenty-five leagues to the westward of Pernicious Island , they found themselves entangled among a cluster of islands , which they called the Labyrinth , because it was some time before they could disengage the ships from the rocks and shoals with which they were surrounded .
Having providentially escaped this imminent danger , they continued their course to the westward  and , after some days sail , fell in with an island , which by its beautiful appearance promised some refreshment .
They saw many natives with lances and long pikes passing  and repassing along the shore , and they sent two boats well manned to speak with them , and to encourage them to trade .
Their endeavours , however , were ineffectual , till , by killing some , and dispersing the rest , they made good their landing .
When they had gained the shore , the savages seemed more tractable  they even assisted them in gathering herbs , and bringing them water  the women , in particular , appeared enamoured with them , and by many alluring ways endeavoured to gain their confidence  but they were to the last degree deceitful .
Being decoyed into an ambuscade , the savages surrounded them on all sides , and , notwithstanding a brisk fire was kept up , which killed many , and wounded more , not a Dutchman that fell into the snare escaped unwounded .
After this misfortune it was with reluctance that any one ventured ashore to look for refreshments .
This island they called Recreation , on account of its salutary herbs , and it is placed in lat .
16 deg .
S. and in long .
285 deg .
The natives were of the middle size , but strong and well made , lively , and of a bold undaunted spirit .
Their bodies were painted , and covered with a kind of net , which they wrapt about them decently enough .
The women were covered from head to foot with a very pretty stuff that felt soft like silk  their complexion was dark , with shining black hair , very white teeth , and brilliant eyes  and to sailors who had long been at sea they were not a little inviting .
The third day after they left this island , they fell in with several islands at  once , to which they gave the name of Bauman 's Islands , where the inhabitants were altogether as courteous and civil as those they had left had been treacherous and cruel .
They came and trafficked with great good nature and honesty , and were to appearance as fair and beautiful as those in the most celebrated parts of Europe .
They now thought themselves near the islands which Dampier has named New Britain  but it was many days sail before they came in sight of them , in which interval the scurvy made dreadful havock .
The sailors were very desirous of staying in these islands to refresh , and to recover their strength  but the Commander , who had other views , pursued his course to the East Indies with all imaginable dispatch .


Thus , all this grand expedition , by which the expectations of the Commander in Chief and his employers had been raised to a very high pitch , came to nothing .
The men were dissatisfied with their officers for going so far , and the officers with their Commander for not going farther .
The existence of a southern continent still remained as doubtful as ever  and so it continues at this period , June 22 , 1774 .


Since the above was written , the Adventure , who accompanied Capt. Cook in the Resolution on a new voyage , is arrived , and reports , that they had sailed between the 55th and 67th degrees of south latitude , but had found no land  so that if any land lies farther to the southward , it must be uninhabitable .


2 .
Figure 2 .
SR. .
FRANCIS DRAKE .


 SIR FRANCIS DRAKE 's VOYAGES , PARTICULARLY THAT ROUND THE WORLD , In 1577 , 1578 , 1579 , and 1580 .


 BEFORE we proceed to the relation of the particular Voyages that characterize the navigators who first surrounded the globe , and who immortalized their names by their skill and their courage , it may be expected , that we should give some account of their families and first setting out , the distinguishing marks of genius that led them to prefer the fatigues and dangers of a sea-faring life to learned ease , or the calm pursuit of less hazardous employments  and that we should trace the steps by which they rose to eminence by their bravery and their conduct .


The bare narration of the incidents recorded in a single voyage , however memorable , would convey but a very imperfect knowledge of the general character of those renowned heroes , who carried the glory of their country to the remotest regions of the earth .
We shall , therefore , endeavour to follow them as they advance to fame , and accompany them from their highest elevation to that period when all distinctions are levelled .


 The celebrated mariner , of whom we are now to give an account , was son to Edmund Drake , a gentleman of Tavistoke , in Devonshire , who , being inclined to the doctrine of the Protestants , at that time much opposed by Q. Mary , was obliged to quit his place of residence , and retire to Medway , in Kent  where , after that Queen 's death , he was first appointed Chaplain in the royal navy , and afterwards Vicar of Upnor .
In these employments , his income being small , and his family large , he owed the education of several of his children to the kindness of his relations , and that , in particular of Francis , the eldest of twelve , to Sir John Hawkins  under whom , as it appears , he very early distinguished himself , and laid the foundation both of his fame and his fortune .


The learned Camden , indeed , informs us , that he was put apprentice to the master of a small trading vessel , in whose service he behaved so well , that his master , dying a batchelor , left him his vessel as a reward for his diligence : but Stowe , who seems better informed , represents him in a superior light  tells us , that Francis Russel , afterwards Duke of Bedford , was his godfather  and that Sir John Hawkins was his near relation .
What Camden relates of Francis may , however , be true of his brother  for there were no less than four who were bred to the sea .


Be this as it may , the first enterprize of  consequence , in which we find him engaged , was in a voyage to the West Indies , as Captain of the Judith , under his relation already mentioned .
Those islands , having but lately been discovered , and very little frequented by the English , were thought so much to abound in wealth , that no voyager thither could fail of being recompensed with great advantages .
Nothing was talked of among the mercantile or adventurous part of mankind but the beauty and riches of the new world .
Fresh discoveries were frequently made  new countries and nations , never heard of before , were daily described  and it may easily be concluded , that the relators did not lessen the merit of their discoveries , by suppressing or diminishing any circumstance that might produce wonder , or excite curiosity .


This was the age of enterprize and discovery  and her Majesty encouraged the ardour of her subjects , by furnishing ships and commissions to such officers of distinction in her royal navy as were willing to engage in hazardous pursuits .


The projects , however , that were formed , were not always successfully carried into execution  they were frequently defeated by the ignorance of the adventurers , but more often by the malice of the Spaniards , who , from the first discovery of America , considered every other nation that attempted to follow them , as invaders of their rights , and incroachers upon their territories .
At that time , however , as now , it was no uncommon thing for those who went  in search of new discoveries , to carry on a kind of contraband trade with the new settlers  which , tho ' prohibited by the Crown of Spain , was yet countenanced by the Viceroys and Governors : but even these would sometimes take advantage of the power lodged in their hands , and make prize of the profits which they themselves had been the means of enhancing , under pretence that those profits had been obtained by an illicit trade .


Among those who suffered most by the injustice of the Viceroys , was Sir John Hawkins  who , having struck out a new trade , highly advantageous to the parties concerned , though disgraceful to humanity , supplied the Mexican Spaniards with slaves from Africa , and received from them , in return , large remittances in gold and silver .
This was connived at , though we do not find that it was absolutely tolerated , by the Spanish court .


It was , however , after one of those successful voyages , in which we find two of the Queen 's ships engaged ( namely , the Jesus , commanded by Hawkins , as Admiral  and the Minion , of which Captain John Hampton was Commander  with four other armed trading ships , among which was the Judith , Captain Drake ) , that , being driven by stress of weather into the port of St. John d'Ulloa , in the bay of Mexico , they were there waiting for a supply of provisions , when the Spanish fleet from Europe arrived , consisting of 12 sail , richly laden with European merchandize , and on board of which was a new Viceroy .


 As the port was then absolutely in the power of the English , it was debated , among the principal officers , whether the Spanish fleet should be suffered to enter  as Admiral Hawkins suspected , that , if they were admitted , they would contrive some means of distressing him  and yet if they were not , they must perish at sea  an event that would certainly bring on a war , which he , as a private trader , could by no means justify .


Upon mature deliberation , it was , therefore , judged safest to propose an agreement with the Viceroy , to which he consented , and by which it was stipulated , that the English should hold one side of the harbour , and the Spaniards the other  and that hostages should be given on both sides , that no injury should be done to either .
But it was soon discovered , that , though on the part of the English , six gentlemen were sent , yet , on that of the Spaniards , the hostages were only common men , finely dressed .
This gave cause of distrust  yet the English , naturally honest , were not sufficiently on their guard .


The Spaniards for some weeks behaved with seeming cordiality  mutual civilities passed between the officers of both nations  and the English , having supplied their wants , were preparing to depart , when , all of a sudden , at a signal given , the Spaniards assaulted their ships as the officers were at dinner , boarded the Minion by a concealed ambuscade , which , however , was repulsed with loss , and then a general massacre  ensued .
The English who were on shore were all put to death  three of the four trading ships were presently sunk  and the Minion and Jesus were so embarrassed by their moorings , that it was almost a whole hour before they could be placed in a posture of defence  which , however , was at last effected .
They then returned the attack with so much fury , that the Spanish Vice-Admiral was soon blown up , and in her perished 300 men  and not long after the Spanish Admiral himself was sunk .
The Spaniards , in revenge , set two of their ships on fire to burn the Minion and Jesus , the first of which set sail and escaped  but the Jesus , after shifting the Admiral with his crew on board the Judith , fell a victim with the rest to Spanish treachery .


In the night , the Judith having made her escape , endeavoured , but in vain , to join the Minion  and being only a bark of 50 tons , alone , on a hostile coast , crouded with men , and having barely provisions on board for her own slender company , a mutiny arose among the mariners , and by far the greatest number insisted on being put on shore , chusing rather to take their chance among the savages than to remain on board to starve at sea , or again to fall into the power of the merciless Spaniards .


Accordingly , Capt. Hawkins gave every man his choice , either to land on the continent , or sail with him , and share his fate .
About 100 of the stoutest seamen chose the former  of whom five only lived to return to England .
These  gave an account , that , on their landing , the natives , mistaking them for Spaniards , fell upon them suddenly , and killed eight of their number  that , after they were known to be enemies to the Spaniards , they were used with kindness  that , however , being tired of living among savages , they agreed to part , and to seek the means of returning home .
Some directed their course to the northward , and these watching the opportunity , seized a small vessel , and , crossing the Gulph , traversed an immense tract of land , till they arrived at a French settlement on the northern continent .
Others travelled westward  and of these , which were by far the greatest part , sixty-five fell into the hands of the Spaniards , and suffered various torments from the Inquisition , three were burnt alive , and two only survived to reach their own country .
Of those who followed the northern course , five found means , after enduring incredible hardships , to get to Nova Scotia , of whom three were brought safe to England in French merchants ships .


It was in the above engagement that Captain Drake first distinguished himself  and to his judicious conduct , that those who escaped from the Jesus owed their preservation .
The Judith had the good fortune to arrive safe in England , having purchased some provisions on the Island of Cuba  but what became of the Minion we have not been able to learn .


In this expedition Sir John Hawkins lost an immense sum .
It was in vain to make complaint  to his sovereign of the infraction of the peace .
The Spanish minister vindicated the injustice of the Viceroy  and the Queen , tho ' she secretly resented the loss of her ships , could not openly abett the illicit trade carried on by her servants .


Drake , who shared in the misfortune of his relation , possessed both his spirit and his industry .
He did not sit down to lament the loss he had sustained  but , having acquired some degree of credit by his gallant behaviour , and some knowledge of the weakness and wealth of his plunderers , he determined to profit by his losses , and to make reprisals whenever a fair opportunity should offer .


It was no difficult matter to engage new adventurers in new projects in those early days of Mexican commerce , and Drake was not long before he raised a fund to begin trade on a new footing .
In 1570 , he made his first expedition , chiefly on his own account , with two ships , the Dragon and the Swan  and the next year in the Swan alone  in both which voyages he enlarged his experience , but it does not appear that he repaired his loss .


In 1572 he found means , however , to fit out a much greater force , in order to carry into execution an enterprise which he had meditated , not only to reinstate his fortune , but to revenge the treachery of his enemies .


About this time war was agitating between England and Spain , to which it must be confessed the illicit trade carried on to the Spanish settlements not a little contributed .
He , therefore , set sail from Plymouth in the Pascha , a  letter of marque ship , of 70 tons , accompanied by the Swan , of 50 tons , the command of which he entrusted to his brother John  in both which ships he had embarked 73 choice men , with a year 's provisions , and such warlike stores and ammunition as he judged necessary for the enterprize he had in view .
He had , likewise , the precaution to take with him the frames of two or three small pinnaces , that , if any accident should befal either of his larger ships , he might have it in his power to preserve the crew without being driven to the necessity of leaving any of them behind  a precaution which experience had taught him in the unfortunate expedition of his kinsman Sir John .
But this was not the only use for which he foresaw these small vessels would be wanted , as will appear in the sequel .


With this warlike force , inconsiderable as it may now appear , he cleared the land of England on the 12th of May , 1572  and , the weather continuing fair , and the wind favourable , on the 29th of June he passed between Dominica and Guadaloupe , and on the 6th of July came in sight of the high land of Santa Martha  then continuing his course to the southward , on the 15th of the same month both ships arrived at Port Pheasant , which lay at a convenient distance from Nombre de Dios , the place of their destination .


Here he proposed to build his pinnaces , and was going a-shore with a few men unarmed   when , discovering a smoke at a distance , he made the signal for another boat to follow him w [ ... ] th an armed force .
Being joined by this reinforcement , he matched towards the fire , where he found a plate of lead nailed to a tree , with an ins [ ... ] ription engraven upon it by one Garret , an Englishman , who had left that place a day or two before , and had taken that method of informing him that the Spaniards had been advertized of his intended visit , and of his rendezvous at that port  and that , therefore , it would be prudent for him to make but a very short stay .


Drake , surprized , no doubt , at the news , but at the same time knowing how convenient this place was for his designs , and considering that the hazard , and waste of time , which could not be avoided in seeking another station , was equivalent to any other danger which was to be apprehended from the Spaniards , determined to follow his first resolution  only , for his greater security , he ordered a kind of fort to be made , by felling a number of large trees , and laying the trunks and branches one across another , on an elevated spot that commanded the river , which , in case of an attack , might enable him to repel any ordinary force which the Spaniards were likely to order out against him .
This done , he set the carpenters to work  and while they were employed in putting the frames of the pinnaces together , one Captain Rause happened to touch at the same port , with a bark of 50 men .
To Rause Drake imparted his design , and  sollicited his concurrence , to which he consented  and , when the pinnaces were ready , both set sail together , shaping their course to Nombre de Dios .
They touch'd at the Island of Pines , where they were informed , by the negroes they found there , that the inhabitants of that place were in daily expectation of some soldiers , which the Governor of Panama had promised to send , to defend them from the Symerons , or fugitive negroes , who , having escaped from the tyranny of their masters , had settled themselves under two kings , or leaders , on each side the neck of land which parted Nombre de Dios from Panama  and not only asserted their natural right to liberty and independance , but endeavoured to revenge the cruelties they had suffered , and had lately put the inhabitants of Nombre de Dios into the utmost consternation .
These negroes the Captain [ ... ] on shore on the main land , so that they might , by joining the Symerons , recover their liberty  or , if they preferred slavery to independance , they might not have it in their power to apprize the people of Nombre de Dios of his intention to invade them , as by their distance , and their want of every means of communication , it must be long before they could convey them intelligence .
Then , selecting 53 men from his own company , and 20 from the crew of his new associate Captain Rause , he embarked with them in his new pinnaces , and set sail for Nombre de Dios .


On July the 28th , at night , he approached the town undiscovered , and dropt his anchors  under the shore , intending , after his men were refreshed , to begin the attack  but , finding that they were terrifying each other with formidable accounts of the strength of the place , and the multitude of the inhabitants , he determined to hinder the panic from spreading , by leading them immediately to action  and , therefore , ordering them to their oars , he landed without any opposition , there being only one gunner upon the key , though it was fortified by six brass cannon of the largest size .
But the gunner , while they were employed in throwing the cannon from their carriages , alarmed the town , as they soon discovered by the bells , the drums , and the noise of the people .


Drake , leaving twelve men to guard the pinnaces , marched into the town with little or no opposition .
The forces that the alarm had hastily drawn together were soon dispersed , except a few whom he detained as prisoners , in order to shew him the Governor 's house , and also the store-house , where the mules that bring the silver from Panama were usually unloaded .


Being now in full possession of the town , he posted the main of his small body , under the command of his brother , in the market-place  and then followed the guides , with the rest , to the store-house  where , forcing the door , and entering the room where the silver was deposited , they found it heaped up in bars , in such quantities , as almost exceed belief , the pile being , as they conjectured , seventy feet in length , ten  in breadth , and twelve in height , each bar weighing between thirty and forty-five pounds .
It is easy to imagine , that , at the sight of this treasure , nothing was thought of , by the English sailors , but by what means it might best be conveyed to their boats  and , doubtless , it was not easy for Drake ( who , considering their distance from the shore , and the number of their enemies , was afraid of being intercepted in their retreat ) to hinder his men from encumbering themselves with so much silver as might have retarded their march , and obstructed the use of their weapons : however , by promising to lead them to the King 's treasury , where there were gold and jewels to a far greater value , and where the plunder was not only more portable , but nearer the shore , he persuaded them to follow him ( not , however , without every man his bar ) , and rejoin the main body in the market-place .
Here he found his little troop much discouraged by the apprehension , that if they stayed any longer , the enemy might gain possession of their pinnaces , and that they should then , without any means of retreat , be left to stand alone against the whole force of that country .
Drake , not indeed easily terrified , but sufficiently cautious , sent to the harbour to examine the ground of their fears , and to learn if the same panic had taken possession of the men whom he had left to guard his boats  but , finding no foundation for these dreadful apprehensions , he persisted in his first design , and led the troop forward  to the royal treasury .
In their way there fell a violent shower of rain , which wet some of their bow-strings , and extinguished many of their matches ( spring-locks for muskets not being then invented )  a misfortune which might soon have been repaired , and which , perhaps , the enemy might suffer in common with them  but which , however , on this occasion , very much embarrassed them , as the delay produced by it repressed that ardour which , sometimes , is only to be kept up by continued action .


It was in vain for Drake to expostulate , or to represent the disgrace of returning in rags , after having the chief treasure of the world within their power  he therefore reproached their cowardice , set before their eyes the imminent danger to which they would inevitably be exposed , if they failed to behave like men anxious for glory , and zealous for the honour of their country .
Animated by these incentives , they resumed their former spirit , and , pushing briskly forward , the whole company followed till they arrived at the treasury , which they instantly forced .
Having thus far succeeded , Drake committed the care of the riches to his brother , and Oxenham , of Plymouth * , ( a man known  afterwards for his bold adventures in the same parts ) while he , with the main body , should again return and reconnoitre the market-place , and disperse any parties of the Spaniards that might be forming into a body to oppose their progress .
With this view , as he was advancing , his strength suddenly failed him , and he fell down speechless .


Then it was that his companions perceived a wound in his leg , that he received in entering the town , but had hitherto concealed , lest his men , easily discouraged , should make their concern for his life a pretence for returning to their boats .
Such , however , had been his loss of blood , as was discovered upon nearer observation , that it had filled the prints of his footsteps  and it appeared scarce credible , that , after such an effusion , life should remain .
The bravest were now willing to retire  neither desire of honour , or of riches , was thought to prevail in any man over the regard for his life ,  that of Drake being already given over for lost .


But Drake , whom cordials had restored to his senses , was the only man who could not be prevailed on to leave the enterprize unfinished .
It was to no purpose that they advised him to go on board to have his wound dressed .
He well knew how impracticable it was to regain the opportunity when it was once lost , and could easily foresee , that a respite of but a few hours would enable the Spaniards to recover from their consternation , to assemble their forces , refit their batteries , and remove their treasure .
What he had undergone so much danger to obtain , was now in his hands , and the thoughts of leaving it untouched was too mortifying to be patiently borne  however , as there was little time for consultation , and the same danger attended their stay in that perplexity and confusion , as their return , they bound up his wound with his scarf , and , partly by force , partly by intreaty , they carried him back to the boats , in which , with what treasure they were able to bring off , they all embarked by break of day .
Then taking with them , out of the harbour , a sloop laden with wines , they went to the Bastimento 's , an island about a league from the town , where they staid two days , to recover the wounded men who had been hurt in the first rencounter , and to regale themseves with the wines they had taken , and with the fruits that grew in great plenty in the gardens of that island .


 During their stay here , there came over to that island a Spanish gentleman , sent by the Governor with instructions to inquire , whether the Captain was that Drake who had before been on their coast  whether the arrows with which many of their men were wounded were not poisoned  and whether they wanted provisions or other necessaries ?
The messenger , likewise , extolled their courage with the highest encomiums , and expressed his admiration of their daring undertaking .
Drake , though he knew the civilities of an enemy are always to be suspected , and that the messenger , amidst all his professions of regard , was no other than a spy , yet knowing that he had nothing to apprehend , treated him with the highest honours that his condition admitted of .
In answer to his inquiries , he assured him , that he was the same Drake with whose character they were before acquainted  that he was a rigid observer of the laws of war , and that he never permitted the arrows discharged by his followers to be poisoned .
He dismissed him with considerable presents  and told him , that , though he had in part failed in this attempt , he would never desist from his design of revenging the treachery of the Viceroy of Mexico , till he had shared with Spain the treasures of America .


He then resolved to return to the Isle of Pines , where they had left their ships , and to consult about the measures they were now to take  and , having arrived on the 1st of August  at their former station , they dismissed Captain Rause , who , judging it unsafe to stay any longer on the coast , desired to be no farther engaged in their designs .
But Drake , not to be diverted from his purpose , after being cured of his wound , inquired of a negroe , whom he took on board at Nombre de Dios , the most wealthy settlements , and weakest parts of the coast .
This man recommended Carthagena as the most wealthy , and , being the most powerful , the least upon its guard .
The Admiral seemed to approve the man 's notion , and , setting sail without loss of time , came to anchor , Aug. 13 , between Charecha ( since called Boca Chica ) and St. Barnard 's , two islands at a little distance from the harbour of Carthagena .
Then passing with his boats round the island , he entered the harbour , and in the mouth of it found a frigate with only an old man in it , who voluntarily informed him , that , about an hour before a pinnace had passed by , with sails and oars , and all the appearance of expedition and importance  that , as she passed , the crew on board her bid him take care of himself  and that , as soon as she touched the shore , he heard the noise of cannon , fired as a warning , and saw the shipping of the port drawn up under the guns of the castle .
The Captain , who had himself heard the discharge of the artillery , was soon convinced that he was discovered  and that , therefore , nothing could be attempted there with any probability of success .
He therefore  contented himself with taking a ship of Seville , of 240 tons ( which the relator of this voyage mentions as a very large ship ) , and two small frigates , in which he found letters of advice from Nombre de Dios , intended to alarm that part of the coast .


Drake , now finding his pinnaces of great use , and not having a sufficient number of sailors for all his vessels , was desirous of destroying the Swan , the ship commanded by his brother , that the others might be better manned .
This , necessary as it was , could not easily be effected without disgusting the officers on board her , who , losing their commissions , would naturally be averse to her destruction .


Drake knew that nothing but the love of their leaders could animate his followers to encounter such hardships as he was about to expose them to  and , therefore , rather chose to bring his designs to pass by artifice than by authority .
He sent for the carpenter of the Swan , took him into his cabin , and , having first engaged him to secrecy , ordered him , in the middle of the night , to go down into the well , and bore five holes through the bottom , laying something against them that might hinder the bubbling of the water from being heard .
To this the carpenter , after some expostulation , consented , and the next night performed his promise .
In the morning , August the 15th , Drake , going out with his pinnace a-fishing , rowed up to the Swan  and , having invited his  brother to partake of his diversion , inquired , with a negligent air , why the Swan was so deep in the water ?
Upon which , his brother , being alarmed , sent down his steward to learn the cause , who returned immediately , with an account that the ship was leaky , and in danger of sinking in a very little time .
They had instantly recourse to the pump  but , having laboured for five hours , and gained very little upon the water , they willingly , according to Drake 's advice , set the vessel on fire , and went on board the Pascha .


Finding it now necessary to lie concealed for some time , till the Spaniards should forget their danger , and remit their vigilance , they set sail for the sound of Darien , and , without approaching the coast , that their course might not be observed , they arrived there in six days .


This being a convenient place for their reception , both on account of privacy , it being out of the road of all trade , and as it was well supplied with wood , water , wild-fowl , hogs , deer , and all kind of provisions , he stayed here fifteen days , to careen his vessels , and refresh his men , who worked interchangeably , on one day the one half , and on the next day the other half .


On the 5th of September , Drake left his brother with the ship at Darien , and set out with two small vessels towards the Rio Grand , which they reached in three days , and on the 9th of the same month were discovered by a Spaniard from the land , who , believing them to be his countrymen , made a signal for them to come on shore , with which they very readily  complied  but he , soon finding his mistake , abandoned his plantation , where they found great plenty of provisions , with which , having laden their vessels , they departed .


In the mean time , his brother , Captain John Drake , went , according to the directions that had been left him , in search of the Symerons , or fugitive negroes , from whose assistance they now entertained hopes of completing the success of their voyage : and , touching upon the main land , by means of the negroes whom they had taken from Nombre de Dios , engaged two of the Symerons to come on board his ship , leaving two of his own men as hostages for their safe return .
Those men , having assured him of the affection of their nation , appointed an interview between Drake and their leaders .
With this appointment Drake being made acquainted , he immediately quitted Port Plenty , so named by the English from the great store of provisions they had amassed at that place , and came , by the direction of the Symerons , into a secret bay , among beautiful islands covered with trees , which concealed their ships from observation , and where the channel was so narrow and rocky that it was impossible to enter it by night  so that there was no danger of a sudden surprize .
Here they met , and entered into engagements , which common enemies and common dangers preserved from violation .
But the first conversation informed the English , that their expectations were not immediately to  be gratified : for , upon their enquiries after the most probable means of acquiring gold and silver , the Symerons told them , that , had they known sooner the chief end of their expedition , they could easily have gratified them  but that during the rainy season , which was now begun , they could not recover the treasure they had taken from the Spaniards , out of the rivers in which they had concealed it .
Drake , therefore , proposing to wait in this place till the rains were passed , built , with the assistance of the Symerons , a fort of earth and timber  and , leaving his brother and part of his company to guard it , set out with three pinnaces towards Rio de la Hacha , being of a spirit too active to he still patiently , even in a state of plenty and security , and with the most probable expectations of immense riches .


In their way thither , they anchored within sight of Carthagena without landing , and on the 17th of October took a Spanish bark , with which they entered the harbour in disguise  but were soon accosted by a Spanish gentleman whom they had some time before taken and set at liberty  who coming to them in a boat , as he pretended , without the knowledge of the Governor , made them great promises of friendship , and professions of esteem .
But Drake , having waited till next morning without receiving the great things he had been encouraged to expect , found that all this pretended kindness was no more than a stratagem to amuse  him , while the Governor was raising forces for his destruction .


This appeared more clearly on the 20th , when two frigates , well armed and manned , came out in the night with a view to surprize the pinnaces , and make prisoner of Drake : but these being discovered , and their design frustrated , Drake , when day-light approached , leapt intrepidly ashore single , in defiance of their troops , which hovered at a distance in the woods and on the hills , without ever venturing to advance within reach of the shot from the pinnaces .
To leap , however , upon an enemy 's coast , in sight of a superior force , only to shew how little they were feared , was an act that in these times would meet with little applause : but motives of policy might influence the conduct of Drake , and make that necessary then which now appears a ridiculous bravado .
Finding the whole country advertised of his attempts , and in arms to oppose him , he might make a feint only of landing to increase their fears , and encourage their alarms , that they might keep together till he should assault them in their deserted posts  a stratagem which there is reason to think he put in practice , as he continued upon the coast till one of his vessels had only a gammon of bacon and a small quantity of bread on board for seventeen men , and till there was on board his own vessel even a greater scarcity .
But resolution and success reciprocally produce each other .
They had not sailed  more than three leagues on their return to their ships before they fell in with and attacked a coasting vessel , which after some resistance they took , and happily found it laden with excellent provisions .
He now determined to return to the Symerons , with whom , as has been said , he left his brother , and part of his force .
In conjunction with them , he had meditated an attempt to make his way over the Isthmus , and invade the Spaniards in the inland parts , where they probably never dreamt of an enemy .


When they arrived at Port Diego , so named from the negroe who had procured them their intercourse with the Symerons , they found Captain John Drake and one of his company dead , being killed in an attempt , almost unarmed , to board a frigate , of which they had received intelligence , well provided with all things necessary for its defence .
The Captain was unwilling to make the attack , and represented to his company the madness of their proposal  but , being over-borne by their clamours and importunities , to avoid the imputation of cowardice , complied to his destruction .


But this was not the only misfortune that befel this little company  for soon after many of them fell ill of the calenture , a malignant fever , very frequent in the hot climates , which carried off , among several others , Joseph Drake , another brother of the Commander .


While Drake was employed in the recovery of the sick , the Symerons , who ranged the country for intelligence , brought him an account , that  the Spanish fleet was arrived at Nombre de Dios , the truth of which was confirmed by a pinnace which he sent out to make observations .
This , therefore , was the time for their journey , when the treasures of the Peruvian mines were to be transported from Panama , over land , to Nombre de Dios .
He therefore communicated his design to the Symerons , requested their advice and assistance , and having obtained the promise of both , by their direction he procured all things necessary for their subsistance  and , on the third of February in the following year , set out from Port Diego .
Having already lost twenty-eight of his company , and being under the necessity of leaving some to guard his ship , he took with him only 18 English and 30 Symerons , who not only served as guards to shew the way , but as carriers to convey the provisions .


They carried with them , besides , arrows for war , and arrows for hunting and fowling , the heads of which are proportioned in size to the game they pursue .
For oxen , stags , or wild boars , they have arrows or javelins with heads weighing a pound and a half , which they discharge near hand , and which scarcely ever fail of being mortal .
Their second sort are about half as heavy as the other , and are generally shot from their bows  these are intended for smaller beasts .
With the third sort , of which the heads are an ounce in weight , they kill birds .
As this nation is in a state which does not set them above continual cares for the immediate  necessaries of life , he that can temper iron best is among them most esteemed  and , perhaps , it would be happy for every nation , if honours and applauses were as justly distributed , and he were most distinguished whose talents were most useful to society .


Every day by sun-rising they began to march , and having travelled till ten , rested near some river till twelve  then travelling again till four , they reposed all night in huts , or wigwams , which the Symerons had either left standing in their former marches , or very readily erected for them , by setting up three or four posts in the ground , and laying poles from one to another , in the form of a roof , which they covered with palmetto boughs and plantain leaves .
In the vallies , where they were sheltered from the winds , they left three or four feet next the ground open  but , on the hills , where they were more exposed to the chill blasts of the night , they thatched them close to the ground , leaving only a door for entrance , and a vent a-top in the middle for the smoke of the fire to escape .


In their march , they met not only with plenty of fruits upon the banks of the rivers , but with wild swine in abundance , of which the Symerons without difficulty killed , for the most part , as many as were wanted .
One day , however , they found only an otter , and were about to dress it  at which Drake expressing his wonder , was asked by Pedro , the chief Symeron , ' `` Are you a man of war , and in want , and yet doubt whether  this be meat that hath blood in it ? '' '
For which Drake in private rebuked him , says the relator  whether justly or not , it is not very important to determine  only it shews the genius of the times when superstition prevailed , and when the greatest men were not wholly exempt from its influences .


On the third day of their march , and the 6th of February , they came to a town of the Symerons , situated on the side of a hill , and encompassed with a ditch and a mud wall , to secure it from any sudden surprize .
Here the inhabitants lived with great neatness , and in plenty  and with some observation of religion , paying great reverence to the cross  a practice which , the relator says , Drake prevailed upon them to change for the use of the Lord 's Prayer  which , we can not help remarking , is very unlikely in so short a stay .
Indeed , it is added , that here they strongly importuned Drake to prolong his abode , promising to double his force  but he , either thinking greater numbers unnecessary , or fearing , that , if any difference should arise between them and his own men , he should be overborne by numbers , he prudently declined both their invitation , and their offer of additional assistance , and that in such terms as expressed his eagerness to engage , and his confidence of success from the bravery of his followers .


The Symerons continued to conduct him on his journey , and led him through rural shades and lofty woods , which sheltered his people so effectually from the sun , that their march was  less toilsome than if they had travelled in England during the heat of summer .
Four of the Symerons that were acquainted with the way , went about a mile before the main body , and cut off branches as marks to direct them , for there was no beaten track  then followed twelve Symerons , after whom came the English , with the two leaders  and the other Symerons closed the rear .
In this order , on the 11th of Feruary , they arrived at the top of a very high hill , on the summit of which grew a tree of a wonderful height and magnitude , in which they had cut steps for the more easy ascent to the top , where there was a kind of alcove , to which they invited Drake , and from thence shewed him not only the North Sea , from whence they came , but the great Pacific Ocean , on which no English vessel had ever yet sailed .
This prospect exciting his natural curiosity and ardour for adventures and discoveries , he lifted up his hands to God , and implored his blessing upon the resolution which he that instant formed , of sailing in an English ship on that immense sea .


From this stupendous mountain they descended , after having feasted their eyes with the grandest prospect the earth can furnish  and in two days came into an open level country , where their march was incommoded with the grass , which is of a peculiar kind , consisting of a stalk like that of a bull-rush , and a blade on which the oxen and other cattle feed till it grows too high for them to reach : then it is that the natives set the whole on fire  and it is  no uncommon thing to behold vallies of immense extent in a blaze at once  from whence the cattle fly in the utmost terror , and many perish by the sudden conflagration .
It might be supposed , that this burning of the soil , would , in a hot climate , check the powers of vegetation , and that it would be years before the earth could recover its fertility  but it is just the contrary  the ashes or the reeds are hardly extinguished before a new verdu [ ... ] e begins to appear  and before a month is elapsed , the whole valley , beheld at a distance , looks as green as ever  so astonishingly wonderful are the powers of Nature on this happy soil !


When they had arrived within a convenient distance of the road from Panama , they posted themselves in a grove or wood , near which the treasure was to be conveyed from thence to Nombre de Dios .
They then dispatched a trusty Symeron , in the habit of a slave , properly instructed , to learn on what day the mules , on whose backs the treasure is carried , were to set out .
The man was so well qualified for the service , and so industrious in the prosecution of it , that he soon returned with an account , that the treasurer of Lima , intending to embark for Europe , would pass the night following with eight mules laden with gold , and one with jewels  that it was their custom to travel by night , and to rest in the day , to avoid the heat  and that Venta Cruz was to be their first stage .


On this intelligence , they changed their to it , and immediately directed their march  towards Venta Cruz , sending , for security , two Symerons , habited as before , to examine the way , who , as they passed along , perceived , by the scent of a match , that some Spaniard was before them  and creeping silently forward , surprized a soldier asleep upon the ground .
They bound him , without offering any other violence , and brought him to Drake , who , upon enquiry , found that their spy had not deceived them in his intelligence .
The soldier , having informed himself of the Captain 's name , conceived such a dread of the vengeance he had threatened , that , after having made an ample discovery of the treasure that was now at hand , cautioned them likewise against being deceived by the recoes , or carriers , from Nombre de Dios , who met the others by the way , and who were hourly expected , with merchandize and provisions , but without any gold .
He closed his examination with an humble petition to Drake , to consider his situation , as liable to punishment by his countrymen for his treachery  and to immediate death by the enemy , if he had refused to make full confession of the secrets with which he was entrusted .
He therefore requested to be taken into his protection , and that , when the expected treasure should fall into his hands , he would be graciously pleased to allow him as much of it as would maintain himself and his children during the remainder of their lives , since there would abundantly more arrive than he and his company could carry away .
Drake agreed to his request , upon condition that he led him to a place of secrecy , where  he could conceal his men till the time of action , and where there was no danger of the mules passing by without being perceived .
This the man did  and Drake placed his ambush accordingly .


Before the time expected , the whole company were properly refreshed and instructed .
Oxenham was appointed to head the Symerons , assisted by Pedro their leader  and Drake was to command the English .
The parties were then divided  the English took the right of the way in front , and the Symerons the left at a small distance in the rear .
In this manner they were posted , that one company might be in readiness to seize the hindmost mule at the same time that the other had seized the foremost  for the mules , it seems , being tied together , travel in a line , and are all guided by leading the first .


Every thing being now as well concerted as human prudence could foresee , and the critical moment of action being soon expected , they lay down and covered themselves in the grass at about eighty or ninety paces distance from the road , that the noise of their breathing might not be heard by the guard that convoy'd the treasure .


They had not been more than an hour in this situation , when the bells of the mules on the left , coming from Venta Cruz , began to be heard : but previous orders having been given to meddle only with those from Panama , those from Venta Cruz were suffered to pass unmolested .
Unfortunately , however , it happened , that one Robert Pike , being heated with liquor , prevailed upon the man that was next him to  creep forward with him , in order to be in readiness to signalize themselves , by being the first to seize the mules from Panama .
At that instant , an officer , who accompanied the recoes from Venta Cruz , perceiving something white moving in the grass ( for Drake had ordered all h [ ... ] s company to put their shirts over their clothes , to distinguish them in the night , ) took the alarm , and , from a walk , was observed to push his horse forward on a smart trot  and , before he had passed the hindmost ambuscade , he was heard to ride along in a full gallop  but neither Drake , who commanded the English , nor Ox [ ... ] n [ ... ] m , who headed the Symerons , being apprized of the reason , had any thought of taking measures to intercept his journey .


It was not , however , long before the recoes from Panama came up , and were eagerly seized by the English in front , and secured by the Symerons , as had been agreed upon , in the rear  but , to their great mortification , they found two of them only loaded with silver , and the rest with provisions , six of those from Panama , which carried the valuable burdens of gold and jewels , being ordered back , and the like number that came from Venta Cruz sent forward in their room .
The drivers were brought immediately to the Captain , and examined , who informed him , that a horseman , riding in haste , had met them , and had talked with the treasurer , and advised him to send back his gold and jewels , and suffer those only to proceed that were now in his [ Drake 's ] power , that he might ,  by that cheap experiment , discover whether there were not ( as he had reason to suspect ) some ambush in the way  or , whether his apprehensions might not betray him into visionary fears , for which there was no real ground .


That Drake was not less enraged than his followers at this disappointment can not be doubted  but there was now no time to be spent in complaints .
The whole country , he knew , would soon be alarmed , and all the force of the Spaniards assembled to overwhelm him  he had no fortress to retire to  every man was his enemy , and every road better known to the Spaniards than to himself .
This was an occasion that demanded all the qualities of an hero , an intrepidity never to be shaken , and a judgment never to be perplexed .
He immediately considered all the circumstances of his present situation , and found that it afforded him only the choice of marching back by the same way through which he came , or forcing his passage through Venta Cruz .
He foresaw many difficulties in marching back , besides the hazard of having his ships seized before his return  he , therefore , determined to pass forwards to Venta Cruz , before the enemy could be prepared to oppose him .
He asked Pedro , the leader of the Symerons , whether he would dare to follow him ?
and , having received from him the strongest assurance that nothing should separate them , he commanded his men to set forwards .
When they came to the gates of the town , they dismissed  the mules they had made use of to carry their prize , and continued their march with as little noise as possible  yet they discovered , that notwithstanding the utmost precaution had been used , the alarm had been spread , and the forces of the town hastily drawn together , to oppose their entrance .
Drake , who was not unacquainted with the behaviour of that kind of town militia , received their first onset , and then breaking in upon them , drove them before him without farther opposition , and was seconded by the Symerons , who could not be restrained from making plunder of the town : but Drake hastened in person to the Spanish ladies , and assured them that no injuries should be offered to them , nor was there the least indecency permitted  and the forces of the Spaniards being dispersed , he continued his march to the ships without any apprehension of danger , yet with great speed , being very solicitous about the state of the crew  so that he allowed his men , harrassed as they were , but little time for sleep or refreshment .
By kind exhortations , gentle authority , and a chearful participation of all their hardships , he prevailed upon them to bear without murmur , not only the toil of travelling , but , on some days , the pain of hunger .
In this march , he owed much of his expedition to the assistance of the Symerons , who , being accustomed to the climate , and naturally robust , when any of the English fainted by the way , two of them would carry him between them for  miles together .
Nor was their valour less than their humanity , after they had learned from their English companions to despise the firearms of the Spaniards .


When they were within five leagues of the ships , they found a town built in their absence by the Symerons , at which Drake consented to halt , sending a Symeron to the ships with his gold toothpick as a token , which , though the master knew it , was not sufficient to gain the messenger credit , till , upon examination , he found that the Captain , having ordered him to regard no message without his hand-writing , had engraven his name upon it with the point of his knife  the master then sent the pinnace up the river to meet the Captain , and afterwards sent to the town for those whose weariness had made them unable to march farther .


On February the 23d , the whole company was re-united  and Drake , whose good or ill success never prevailed over his shew of piety , celebrated their meeting with thanks to God .


Drake , not yet discouraged , soon turned his thoughts to new projects  and , without languishing in melancholy reflections upon past miscarriages , employed himself in forming schemes for repairing them .
Eager of action , and acquainted with man 's nature , he never suffered idleness to infect his followers with cowardice  but kept them from sinking under any disappointment , by directing their attention to some new enterprize .


 Upon consultation with his own men , and the Symerons , he found them divided in their opinions  some declaring , that , before they engaged in any new attempt , it was necessary to increase their stores of provisions  and others urging that the ships , in which the Spanish treasure was embarked , should be immediately attempted .
The Symerons proposed a third plan , and advised them to undertake another journey over-land , to the house of one Pezaro , near Veragua , whose slaves brought him every day more than 200 pounds sterling from the mines , which he heaped together in a strong stone house , that might , by the help of the English , be easily forced .
But Drake , being unwilling to fatigue his followers with another journey over-land , determined to steer a middle course between these variable opinions  and , manning his two pinnaces , the Bear and the Minion , he sent John Oxenham in the Bear towards Tolu , to seek provisions  and went himself in the Minion to the Cabezes , to endeavour to intercept the treasure that was to be transported from Veragua and that coast , to the fleet at Nombre de Dios  first dismissing with presents those Symerons who desired to return to their wives , and ordering those that chose to remain with him to be kindly entertained .
Drake took at the Cabezes a frigate of Veragua , the pilot of which informed him , that there was in the harbour of Veragua a ship freighted with more than a million of gold  to which he offered  to conduct him , being well acquainted with the soundings , if he might be allowed his share of the prize  so much was his avarice superior to his honesty .


Drake , after some deliberation , complying with the pilot 's conditions , sailed towards the harbour  but had no sooner entered the mouth of it than he heard the report of artillery , which was answered by others at a greater distance  upon which the pilot told them that they were discovered , this being the signal appointed by the Governor to alarm the coast .


Drake now thought it convenient to return to the ships , that he might enquire the success of the other pinnance , which he found with a frigate that she had taken with twenty-eight fat hogs , 200 hens , and a great store of maize or Indian corn .
The vessel itself was so strong and well-built , that he fitted it for war , determining to make a second attempt on Nombre de Dios .


On March the 21st , he set sail with the new frigate and the Bear towards the Cabezes , at which he arrived in little more than two days , and found there one Totu , a Frenchman , with a ship of war .
Having supplied Totu with water , and other articles of which he was in want , he desired to join the Admiral in his new attempt , to which Drake consented , and admitted him to accompany him with 20 of his men , stipulating to allow them a proportionable share of whatever booty they should acquire : yet Drake was not without some suspicions of danger from this  new ally , he having eighty men , and the English reduced to thirty-one .
Manning , however , the pinnaces , they set sail for Rio Francisco , at which place they arrived on the 29th of March .
Here they landed  and , having dismissed their pinnaces for fear of discovery , and ordered them to repair to the same place on the fourth day following , they began their march through the woods towards Nombre de Dios , and continued it with such silence and regularity as surprized the French , who did not imagine the Symerons so discreet and obedient to command as they appeared to be , and were therefore in perpetual anxiety about the fidelity of their guides : nor did the Symerons treat the Frenchmen with that submission and regard which they paid to the English , whose bravery and conduct they had already tried .
At length , after a laborious march of more than seven leagues , they began to hear the hammers of the carpenters in the bay , it being the custom in that hot season to work in the night , and to rest in the day  and , in a short time , they perceived the approach of the recoes , or droves of mules , from Panama .
They now no longer doubted that their labour would be rewarded , and every man imagined himself secure from poverty for the remaining part of his life  they , therefore , when the mules came up , rushed out , and seized them with an alacrity proportioned to their expectations .
The three droves consisted of one hundred and nine mules , each of which carried  300 pounds weight of silver .
It was to little purpose that the soldiers , ordered to convoy the treasure , attempted resistance .
After a short combat , in which the French Captain and one of the Symerons were wounded , it appeared with how much greater ardour men are animated by interest than fidelity .


As it was possible for them to carry away but a small part of this treasure , after having wearied themselves with hiding it in the thickets , they determined to return by the same way they came  and , without being pursued , they traversed the woods , where the French Captain , being disabled by his wound , was obliged to stay , two of his company continuing with him .
When they had gone forward about two leagues , the Frenchmen missed another of their company , who , upon enquiry , was known to be intoxicated with wine , and supposed to have lost himself in the woods by neglecting to observe the guides  but common prudence not allowing them to hazard the whole company by too much solicitude for a single life , they travelled on towards Rio Francisco , at which they arrived on the 3d of April  and , looking out for their pinnaces , were surprised with the sight of seven Spanish sloops , and immediately concluded , that some intelligence of their motions had been carried to Nombre de Dios , and that these vessels had been fitted out to pursue them , which might undoubtedly have overpowered the pinnaces and their feeble crews .
 Nor did their suspicions stop here  but immediately it occurred to them , that their men might be compelled by torture to discover where their frigate and ship were stationed , which being weakly manned , and without the presence of the chief Commander , would fall into their hands almost without resistance , and all possibility of escaping be entirely cut off .
These reflections sunk the whole company into despair  and every one , instead of endeavouring to break through the difficulties that surrounded him , resigned himself up to his ill fortune  when Drake , whose intrepidity was never to be shaken , represented to them , that , though the Spaniards should have made themselves masters of the pinnaces , they might yet be hindered from discovering the ships .
He put them in mind , that the pinnaces could not be taken , the men examined , their examinations compared , their resolutions formed , their vessels sent out , and the ships taken , in an instant .
Some time must necessarily be spent before the last blow could be struck  and , if that time were not neglectfully lost , it might be possible for some of them to reach the ships before the enemy , and direct them to change their station .


They were animated with this discourse , by which they observed that their leader was not without hope  but , when they came to look more narrowly into their situation , they were unable to conceive upon what it was founded .
To pass by land was impossible , as the way lay  Figure 3 .
illegible off to Sea on a Rillegible in Quest of his illegible  over high mountains , thick woods , and deep rivers  they had not a single boat in their power , so that passage by water seemed equally impracticable .
But Drake determined upon the only means of success which their condition afforded them  and , ordering his men to make a raft out of the trees that were then floating in the river , offered himself to put out to sea upon it , and chearfully asked , who would accompany him .
John Owen , John Smith , and two Frenchmen , who were willing to share his fortune , embarked with him on the raft , which was fitted out with a sail made of the biscuit sacks in which they had carried their provisions , and formed a kind of oar to direct its course instead of a rudder .
Then , having comforted the rest with assurances of his regard for them , and resolution to leave nothing unattempted for their deliverance , he put off  and , after having with much difficulty failed three leagues , descried two pinnaces hasting towards him , which  upon a nearer approach , he discovered to be his own  and , hailing them , proposed that they should anchor behind a point that jutted out into the sea , while he put to shore  and , crossing the land on foot , was received by his company with that satisfaction , which is only known to those who have been acquainted with dangers and distresses .
The same night they rowed silently to Rio Francisco , where they embarked the whole company , with what treasure they had been  able to bring with them through the woods  then sailing back with the utmost expedition , they returned to their frigate , and soon after to their ship , where Drake divided the gold and silver equitably between the French and English .


Here they spent fourteen days in fitting out their frigate more completely  during which time , the Frenchmen , with their ship , lay among the Cabezes , while twelve English and sixteen Symerons travelled once more into the country , as well to recover the French Captain , whom they had left wounded , as to bring away the treasure which they had hid in the woods .
Drake , whom his company would not suffer to hazard his person in another land expedition , went with them to Rio Francisco , where he found one of the Frenchmen who had staid to attend their Captain , and was informed by him , upon his enquiries after his fortune , that , half an hour after their separation , the Spaniards came upon them , and easily seized upon the wounded Captain  but that his companion might have escaped with him , had he not preferred money to life  for seeing him throw down a box of jewels that retarded him , he could not forbear taking it up , and , with that and the gold which he had already , was so loaded that he could not escape .
With regard to the bars of gold and silver which they had concealed in the ground , he informed them that 200 men had been employed in searching for them .
The people , however , either mistrusting the informer 's veracity , or  confident that what they had hidden could not be found , pursued their journey  but upon their arrival at the place , found the ground turned up for two miles round , and were able to recover no more than 13 bars of silver , and small quantity of gold .
They discovered afterwards , that the Frenchman who was left drunk in the woods , falling into the hands of the Spaniards , was tortured by them till he confessed where Drake and his company had concealed their plunder  so fatal to Drake 's expedition was the drunkenness of his followers .


Then , dismissing the French , they passed by Carthagena with their colours flying , and soon after took a frigate laden with provisions and honey , which they valued as a great restorative , and then sailed away to the Cabezes .
Here they staid about a week to careen their vessels , and fit them for a long voyage , determining to set sail for England  and that the faithful Symerons might not go away unrewarded , broke up their pinnaces , and gave them the iron , the most valuable present in the world to a nation whose only employments were war and hunting , and amongst whom show and luxury had no place .
Pedro , their Captain , being desired by Drake to go through the ships , and to chuse what he most desired , fixed his eye upon a scymetar set with jewels , which the French Captain had presented to Drake for the provisions with which he had supplied him , and , being unwilling to ask for so valuable a present ,  offered for it four large quoits , or thick plates of gold , which he had formerly concealed in the waters  but Drake , desirous to shew him , that fidelity seldom is without a recompence , gave it him with the highest professions of satisfaction and esteem .
Pedro , receiving it with the utmost gratitude , informed him , that by bestowing it he had conferred greatness and honour upon him  for , by presenting it to his King , he doubted not of obtaining the highest rank among the Symerons .
He then persisted in his resolution of giving him the gold , which was ostentateously thrown by Drake into the common stock  pretending , that those at whose expences he had been sent out , ought to share in all the gain of the expedition .
Thus was Drake 's character consistent with itself  he was equally vain and avaricious  and by this specious shew of honesty , his view was to engage his followers to do the like  yet whatever lengths he might go to save appearances , he had scarce cunning enough to disguise the artifice .


They now forsook the coast of America , which for many months they had kept in perpetual alarms , having taken more than 100 vessels of all sizes between Carthagena and Nombre de Dios , of which , however , they never destroyed any , unless they were fitted out against them , nor ever detained the prisoners longer than was necessary for their own security or concealment  a behaviour which humanity dictates , and which even policy can not disapprove .
He must , certainly ,  meet with obstinate opposition who makes it equally dangerous to yield as to resist , and who leaves his enemies no hopes but from victory .


What riches they acquired is not particularly related  but , it is not to be doubted , that the plunder of so many vessels , together with the silver seized at Nombre de Dios , must have amounted to a very great sum , though the share that was allotted to Drake was not sufficient to lull him into effeminacy , or to repress his natural inclination to adventures .
They arrived at Plymouth on the 9th of August , 1573 , on Sunday in the afternoon  and so much were the people elated with the news of their arrival , that they left the preacher , and ran in crouds to the key with shouts and congratulations .


Drake having , in the voyage just mentioned , had a view of the South Sea , as has already been related , and formed a resolution to sail upon it , did not suffer himself to be diverted from his design by the prospect of any difficulties that might obstruct the attempt , nor any danger that might attend the execution .
His reputation was sufficiently established to remove all obstacles ( for obstacles he met with , ) and to obviate the motives that produced them  but it was not till the year 1577 , that he was able to assemble a force proportioned to his design , and to obtain a commission from the Queen * , by  which he was constituted Captain-General of a squadron , consisting of five vessels , of which the Pelican , of 100 tons , was commanded by himself as Admiral  the Elizabeth , of 80 tons , Vice-Admiral , commanded by John Winter  the Marygold , of 30 tons , by John Thomas  the Swan , of 50 tons , by John Chester  and the Christopher , of 15 tons , by Thomas Moon , the honest carpenter , who , on the former voyage , destroyed the Swan by Drake 's direction .


These ships , equipped partly by himself , and partly by other private adventurers , he manned with 164 stout sailors , and furnished with such provisions , as he thought necessary for so long and hazardous a voyage : nor did he confine his concern to the ordinary equipment of his ships with naval stores and military preparations , but carried with him whatever he thought might contribute to raise , in those nations with which he should have intercourse , the highest ideas of the arts and grandeur of his native country .
He , therefore , not only procured a complete service of silver-plate for his own table , and furnished the cook-room with many vessels of the same metal , but engaged several musicians to accompany him  rightly judging , that nothing would more excite the admiration of savages , or uncivilized people , than the powers of music .
On this occasion , however , it must not be concealed , that he engaged his men on the false pretence of sailing to Alexandria  and  that it was not till after he arrived on the coast of Brazil , that he acquainted them with his design of passing the Straits , and entering the South Seas .


On the 15th of Nov. 1577 , about three in the afternoon , he sailed from Plymouth  but a heavy storm ( such as no man on board had ever seen the like , ) taking him almost as soon as out of port , forced him into Falmouth , where he staid till the 13th of December to refit .
He then took his departure , and on the 25th of the same month fell in with the coast of Barbary , and on the 27th cast anchor at the island of Mogadore , about one mile distant from the main , between which and the isle they found a very convenient harbour .
Here he began to build the pinnaces , the frames of which he brought ready from Plymouth to be put together , as in his former voyage .
While the carpenters were employed in this service , they were discovered by the Moors that inhabit those coasts , who sent two of their Chiefs on board Drake 's ship , receiving at the same time two of his company as hostages .
These men he not only treated in the most hospitable manner , but presented them with such things as they appeared most to admire  it being with him an established maxim , to endeavour to secure in every country a kind reception to such Englishmen as should come after him , by treating the inhabitants with a shew of kindness and generosity .


 But this friendly intercourse was in appearance soon broken  for , on the next day , observing the Moors making signals from the land , they sent out their boat , as before , to fetch them to the ship  and one John Frye leapt ashore , intending to become an hostage , as on the former day , when immediately he was seized by the Moors  and the crew , observing great numbers start from behind a rock with weapons in their hands , thought it next to madness to attempt his rescue , and , therefore , provided for their own security by returning to the ship .
Frye was mounted on horseback , and immediately carried up into the country to their King , who being then in continual expectation of an invasion from Portugal , suspected that these ships were sent only to reconnoitre the coast , and discover a proper harbour for a more formidable fleet  but , being informed who they were , and whither they were bound , not only dismissed the captive , but made large offers of friendship and assistance  which Drake , however , did not stay to receive  but being disgusted at this breach of the laws of commerce , and apprehending further treachery , he quitted the coast on December 31 , and on the 17th of January arrived at Cape Blanco , having in their passage taken several Spanish vessels , and found one in the harbour with no men .


Here , while Drake was employing his men in catching fish , and training them for land as well as sea service , the natives came down to  the sea side with ambergrease and other gums , to traffic for such commodities as they then stood most in need of , and with which Drake very copiously supplied them .


Having rifled and discharged the Spanish ships which they had taken , they sailed on the 22d of January towards the isles of Cape Verd , and on the 27th came to anchor before Mayo , hoping to furnish themselves with fresh water  but , having landed , they found the chief town deserted  and , marching farther up the country , saw the vallies extremely fruitful , and abounding with ripe figs , cocoes , and plantains , but could by no means prevail upon the inhabitants to converse or traffic with them .
However , they were suffered by them to range the country without molestation , but found no water , except at such a distance from the sea , that the labour of carrying it to their ships was greater than it was at that time necessary for them to undergo .
Salt , had they wanted it , might have been obtained with less trouble , being left by the sea upon the sands , and hardened by the sun during the ebb , in such quantities , that the chief traffic of this island is carried on by means of it .
Thus , though the island abounded with goats , poultry , and delicious fruits of various kinds , they could procure none of any consequence , because the Portuguese , who were then in possession of it , were prohibited all commerce with strangers on very severe penalties .


 On the 31st of January they made St. Iago , an island at that time divided between the natives and the Portuguese , who , first entering these islands under the shew of traffic , by degrees established themselves , claimed a superiority over the natives , and harrassed them with such cruelty , that they obliged them either to fly to the woods and mountains , where many of them perished with hunger , or to take arms against their oppressors , and , under the insuperable disadvantages with which they contended , to die almost without a battle .
Such treatment had the natives of St. Iago received , which had driven them into the rocky parts of the island , from whence they made incursions into the plantations of the Portuguese , sometimes with loss , but generally with that success which desperation produces  so that the Portuguese were in continual alarms , and lived with the natural consequences of guilt , terror , and anxiety .
They were wealthy but not happy , and possessed the island , but did not enjoy it .


In passing this island , the garrison of the fort discharged three pieces of cannon at them , but without effect .
For this insult they took a Portuguese ship laden with wines , the pilot of which they retained , but set the rest of the crew on shore .
This man , Nuno da Silva by name , was very useful to them in traversing the coast of Brazil , being acquainted with the bays and harbours where fresh water and provisions were to be obtained .
Him they continued to detain  captive , though they broke up his ship before they entered the Straits , till they were about to leave the coasts of Peru , when finding him no longer serviceable , they set him on shore in the Spanish settlements , from whence he afterwards returned home , and wrote an account of the voyage as far as he went , which is thought by many to be very authentic .


It was soon after the capture of this ship that a difference arose between Drake and his friend , Mr. Thomas Doughty , which gradually increasing , grew into inveteracy , and terminated at last in the death of the latter .
Doughty was a gentleman and a scholar , whom Drake had persuaded to embark in this expedition to better his fortune  and to whom , till the incident happened which we are about to relate , he had shewn particular marks of favour and friendship  but trivial beginnings are often productive of the most important events .


The ground of the malevolence with which Drake pursued Doughty , under the colour of justice , has hitherto lain concealed from the public eye  but we shall now trace it , step by step , till the fatal period when the unhappy victim was brought to the block , and when Drake , by suffering revenge to triumph over virtue , left an indelible blot upon his character , which no panegyric can wipe away .


Among the Harleian manuscripts there is a written account of this voyage , in which the author has particularly had his eye on this transaction .
 As he was an eye-witness of all that passed , his relation will best appear in his own words :


`` Captain Drake , says he , having boarded the ship of Nuno da Sylva , and feasted his eyes with the view of the commodities , he committed the custody and well-ordering of this prize unto Master Thomas Doughty , as his good and esteemed friend , praying him in any case to see good order kept , and whoso should be the breaker thereof , to give him to understand of any such without exception of any .
`` It thus chanced that General Drake had a brother ( not the wisest man in Christendom ) , whom he put into this said prize , as also divers others .
This Thomas Drake , as one more greedy of prey than covetous of honesty or credit , offered himself the first and only man to break the General his brother 's commandment  for he , contrary to his strict prohibition , did not only break open a chest , but did dive suddenly into the same , that Master Doughty knew not how to discharge himself against the General but by revealing it unto him  yet first Master Doughty called Thomas Drake unto him , and shewed him his great folly in this behalf , who , yielding unto his fault , prayed Master Doughty to be good unto him , and keep it from the General  but he briefly told him he could not keep it , but he would deliver it with what favour he might .
So at the General 's next coming on  board the prize , Master Doughty opened the same unto him , who presently falling into a rage , not without some great oaths , seemed to wonder what Thomas Doughty should mean to touch his brother  and did , as it were , assure himself that he had some farther meaning in this , and that he meant to strike at his credit , and he would not , or could not , by God 's life ( as he phrased it , ) suffer it .
From this time forth grudges did seem to grow between them from day to day , to the no small admiration of the rest of the company , although some envying his former favour and friendship with the General , and some , I think , doubting that his capacity would reach too far to the aggrandizing his credit in the country , talked variously of the matter  however , Master Doughty was put again into the Pelican .
Thus grudges , although they had not long rested , yet were they grown to great extremities , such and so great as a man of any judgment would verily think that his love towards him in England was more in brave words than hearty good will or friendly love . ''


So writes our author .
In proceeding on their voyage , they came within sight of Fogo , an island so called from a mountain about the middle of it continually burning , and like the rest inhabited by the Portuguese .
Two leagues to the south of Fogo lies Brava , which has received its name from its fertility , abounding with all kinds of fruits ,  and watered with great numbers of springs and brooks , but , having neither harbour nor anchorage , was at that time uninhabited .


Drake , having sent out his boats with plummets to sound , was not able to find any ground about it  and it is reported , that many experiments of the like kind have been made without success .
However , he took in water sufficient  and on the 2d of Feb. set sail for the coast of Brazil .


On February the 17th , he passed the equator , after being becalmed near three weeks , during which time they had dreadful storms of thunder with lightning , but without any memorable accident , till , continuing their voyage , on March 28 , one of their vessels with 28 men , and the greatest part of the fresh water on board , was , to their great discouragement , separated from them  but their perplexity lasted not long , for on the next day they discovered her , and she again joined her associates .
In their long course , which gave them opportunities of observing several animals , both in the air and water , at that time very little known , nothing entertained or surprized them more than the flying-fish , which is nearly of the same size with a herring , and has fins of the length of his whole body , by the help of which , when he is pursued by the benito ( a large kind of mackarel , ) as soon as he finds himself upon the point of being taken , he springs up into the air , and flies forward as long as his wings continue wet , moisture being , as it seems , necessary to make them  pliant and moveable  and , when they become dry and stiff , he falls down into the water , unless some vessel intercepts him , and dips them again for a second flight .
This unhappy animal is not only pursued by fishes in his natural element , but attacked in the air , where he hopes for security , by the don or spar kite , a great bird that preys upon fish  and their species must certainly be destroyed , were not their increase so great , that the young fry , in one part of the year , covers that part of the sea .


There is another fish , named the cuttle , of which whole shoals will sometimes rise at once out of the water , and of which a great multitude fell into their ship .


At length , having sailed without sight of land for 54 days , they arrived April the 5th on the coast of Brazil . '
`` In the mean while , you shall hear , says our author , what befel : Master Drake , never leaving to seek and force upon Master Doughty , found , in the end , this opportunity to degrade him .
Whether of purpose , or his own voluntary , it chanced John Brown the trumpet to go aboard the Pelican , where , for that he had been long absent , the company offered him a hobbey , among the which , Master Doughty putting in his hand , said , Fellow John , you shall have in my hand , although it be but light amongst the rest  and so laying his hand on his buttock , which perceived of John Trumpet , he began to swear wounds and blood to the company to let him  loose , for they are not all ( said he ) the General 's friends that be here  and with that turned him to Master Doughty , and said unto him , ( as himself presently after told me in the prize ) God 's wounds , Doughty , what dost thou mean to use this familiarity with me , considering thou art not the General 's friend  who answered him , What , fellow John !
what moves you to this , and to use these words to me , that am as good and as sure a friend to my good General as any in this place , and I defy him that shall say the contrary .
But is the matter thus ?
why yet , fellow John , I pray thee let me live until I come into England .
Thus , John Brown coming again presently aboard the prize , had not talked any long time with the General , but the boat went aboard and rested not , but presently brought Master Doughty to the prize 's side , General Drake sitting in the midst of his men , who hearing the boat at the ship 's side stood up , and Master Doughty offering to take hold of the ship to have entered , said the General , Stay there , Thomas Doughty , for I must send you to another place , and with that commanded the mariners to row him on board the fly-boat , saying unto him , it was a place more fit for him than that from whence he came : but Master Doughty , although he craved to speak with the General , could not be permitted , neither would he hear him . '' '
Soon after this , the  fly-boat here mentioned , ( called the Swan , ) was separated from them by a violent storm , ' `` in all whose absence , says our author , the General never ceased to inveigh against Master Doughty , terming him a conjurer and a witch  and , at any time when we had foul weather , he would say that Tom .
Doughty was the occasion thereof , and that it came out of Tom .
Doughty 's capcase , and would avouch the same with oaths . '' '


After the storm above-mentioned , they steered near the land to the southward  and on the 14th anchored under a cape , which they afterwards called Cape Joy , because in two days the vessel that was missing returned to them .
Here they refreshed their weary crews , and took in fresh water  but , finding the country , though pleasant , without inhabitants , they weighed anchor , and , by running a little farther to the southward , found a small harbour between a rock and the main , where the rock breaking the force of the sea , the ships rode at anchor with the greatest security .
On this rock they killed several seals , keeping them for food , and found them wholesome , though not palatable .


Their next course was directed to the great river of Plate , in 36 deg .
of south latitude  but , not finding anchorage in that river , they sailed in quest of a more convenient harbour , when they were surprized by a sudden storm , in which they again lost sight of the fly-boat .
This accident determined Drake to contract the number of his  ships , that he might not only avoid the inconvenience of such frequent separations , but ease the labour of his men , by having more hands in each vessel .
For this purpose he sailed along the coast  and on May the 13th discovered a bay , which , though it promised fair , he durst not enter before it was examined : he , therefore , ordered his boat to be hoisted out , and , taking the line into his own hand , went on sounding the passage till he was three leagues from his ship , when on a sudden the weather changed , the skies blackened , the wind rose , and all the usual forerunners of a storm began to threaten them .
Nothing was now thought of but the means of returning to the ship  but the thickness of the fog intercepting it from their sight , made the attempt almost impracticable .
In this perplexity , which Drake was not more sensible of than those whom he had left in the ships , nothing was to be omitted , however dangerous , that might tend to extricate them from it .
Captain Thomas , therefore , having the lightest vessel , steered boldly into the bay , and , taking the Admiral on board , dropt anchor , and lay out of danger  while the rest that were in the open sea suffered much from the tempest , and the Mary , ( the Portuguese prize ) was driven before the wind .
The others , as soon as the tempest was over , discovering by the fires that were made on shore where Drake was , repaired to him .


 Here they met with no inhabitants , though there were several wigwams or huts standing , in which they found some dried fowls , and among them ostriches , of which the thighs were as large as those of a sheep .
These birds are too unwieldy to rise from the ground  but with the help of their wings , or rather stumps , they run so swiftly , that the English could never come near enough to shoot any of them .


Not finding this harbour convenient , or well stored with wood and water , they left it on the 15th of May , and on the 18th entered another much safer and more commodious , which they no sooner arrived at , than Drake sent Winter to the southward in search of those ships that were absent , and immediately after sailed himself to the northward , and happily meeting with the Swan , conducted her to the rest of the fleet  after which , in pursuance of his former resolution , he ordered her to be broken up , preserving the iron work for a future supply .
The other vessel which was separated in the late storm , could not be discovered .
While they were thus employed upon an island about a mile from the main land , to which , at low water , there was a passage on foot , they were discovered by the natives , who appeared upon a hill at a distance , dancing , and holding up their hands , as beckoning to the English to come to them , which Drake observing , sent out a boat with knives , bells , and bugles , and such things as by their usefulness or novelty he imagined  would be agreeable .
As soon as the English landed , they observed two men running towards them as deputed by the company , who came within a little distance , and then standing still , could not be prevailed upon to come nearer .
The English , therefore , tied their presents to a pole , which they fixed in the ground , and then retiring , saw the Indians advance , who taking what they found upon the pole , left in return such feathers as they wore upon their heads , with a small bone about six inches in length , carved round the top , and burnished .
Drake observing their inclination to friendship and traffic , advanced with some of his company towards the hill , upon sight of whom the Indians ranged themselves in a line from east to west , and one of them running from one end of the rank to the other , backwards and forwards , bowed himself towards the rising and setting of the sun , holding his hands over his head , and , frequently stopping in the middle of the rank , leaped up towards the moon , which then shone directly over their heads  thus calling the sun and moon , the deities they worship , to witness to the sincerity of their professions of peace and friendship .
While this ceremony was performing , Drake and his company ascended the hill , to the apparent terror of the Indians , whose apprehensions when the English perceived , they peaceably retired , which gave the natives so much encouragement , that they came forward immediately , and exchanged their arrows , feathers ,  and bones , for such trifles as were offered them .
Thus they traded for some time  but by frequent intercourse , finding that no violence was intended , they became familiar , and mingled with the English without the least distrust .
They go quite naked , except the skin of some animals , which they throw over their shoulders when they walk or lie in the open air .
They roll up their hair , which is very long , with a plume of ostrich 's feathers , and usually stick their arrows in it , that they may not encumber them , they being made with reeds headed with flint , and therefore not heavy .
Their bows are about an ell long .
Their chief ornament is paint , which they use of several kinds , delineating generally upon their bodies the figures of the sun and moon in honour of their deities .


It is observable , that the inhabitants of most nations amongst whom the use of cl [ ... ] aths is unknown , paint their bodies .
Such was the practice of the inhabitants of our own country .
To this custom did our earliest enemies , the Picts , owe their denomination .
As it is not probable that caprice or fancy should be uniform , there must be doubtless some reason for a practice so general , and prevailing in distant parts of the world which have no communication with each other .
The original end of painting their bodies was probably to exclude the cold  an end , which , if we believe some relations , is so effectually produced by it , that the men thus painted never shiver at the most piercing  blasts : but , doubtless , any people so hardened by continual severities , would , even without paint , be less sensible of the cold than the civilized inhabitants of the same climate .
However , this practice may contribute in some degree to defend them from the injuries of winter , and , in those climates where little evaporates by the pores , may be used with no great inconvenience : but in hot countries , where perspiration in a greater degree is necessary , the natives only use unction to preserve them from the other extreme of weather , or , more probably , from the inconvenience of the flies , which , were it not for that or some such defence , would be intolerable .


These savages had no canoes , like the other Indians , nor any method of crossing the water  which was probably the reason why the birds in the adjacent islands were so tame that they might be taken with the hand , having never been before frighted or molested .
The birds here spoken of are , without doubt , the penguins , of which so ample a description is given in the Voyages of Byron and Wallis .
The great plenty of these fowls , and of the seals that were found every-where on the shores of this coast , contributed much to the refreshment of the English , who named the bay where they then lay , Seal-bay , from the number they there killed of those animals .


These seals seem to be the chief food of the natives  for the English often found raw pieces  of their flesh half eaten , and left , as they supposed , after a full meal , by the savages , whom they never knew to make use of fire , or any art in dressing or preparing their victuals .
Nor were their other customs less wild or uncouth than their way of feeding .
One of them , having received a cap off the General 's head , and being extremely pleased as well with the honour as the gift , to express his gratitude , retired to a little distance , and thrusting an arrow into his leg , let the blood run upon the ground , testifying , as it is probable , that he was ready to shed his blood in his defence .


When the Swan fly-boat was separated from the fleet in the storm off the coast of Brazil , the crew , despairing of ever being able to rejoin it , began to be in fear for provisions .
They were on a desart coast , had no place of rendezvous , and were ignorant even of their place of destination .
In this untoward situation a dispute arose among the officers , of which the author of the manuscript before cited , gives the following relation : - He had already taken notice , that Master Thomas Doughty had been sent on board this vessel as a kind of punishment , and in truth so it proved  for the master of the vessel , who seems also to have been the purser , knowing upon what terms he stood with Drake , took every occasion to insult , or , as our author 's phrase is , to discredit him  for those were always ranked among Drake 's friends who were enemies to Master Doughty .


`` This man ,  foreseeing that provisions might run short , put himself from the mess of Master Doughty , Captain Chester , and the rest of the gentlemen , and did set himself amongst the sailors , nothing at all sparing , but rather augmenting his own diet  but how scantily those gentlemen did fare , there be some come home , that , except they will deny their own words , can make relation thereof .
`` Master Doughty , with Master Chester , whom the General had made Captain of the fly-boat , found themselves so ill used , that Master Doughty accosted his friend one day in these words : I marvel , Master Chester , that you will take it at his hands to be thus used , considering that you were here authorized by the General to be our Commander .
And , at the same time , he spoke to the Master , and told him , that he used so much partiality in the distribution of his provisions , that the same could not be borne , considering the extremity they were like to fall into for want of victuals  and that it was against reason that he and his messmates should be so plentifully fed , while others were at the point to starve .
The Master hereat putting himself in a rage , swore that such rascals as he was should be glad to eat the shoals ( husks ) when he would have them .
Master Doughty answered him again , that reason would will that he should be used as well as other men , considering his advantages .
Thou any advantage here !
replied the Master ,  I would not give a point for thee nor thy advantages  and if ever thou comest home to enjoy any advantages , I will be trussed up .
Then in multiplying words , and as I heard a blow or two passing between them , the Master , in the spleen of his heart , looking at him with an evil eye .
Thou !
will thou have victuals !
thou shalt be glad , if we do not meet with the General , the rather to eat that falls from my tail on the anchor-fluke ere thou gettest home again .
Then Master Doughty , turning to Master Chester , said unto him , Master Chester , let us not be thus used at this knave 's hands .
Lose nothing of that authority that the General committed unto you .
If you will , we will put the sword into your hands again , and you shall have the government .
This case I will aver to be true , for there were two or three witnesses sworn to these articles , as some of the special matter that he had to lose his head for . ''


It was not many days after this quarrel before the Swan fell in again with the fleet  when Drake , as has been said , caused her to be hauled on shore , set on fire , and burnt  or , as others say , broke up and converted into fire-wood for the use of the fleet .


Mr. Doughty , being here delivered from the fly-boat , was again restored to the Pelican , where the master with whom he had the dispute appears to have preferred a complaint against him , and with such aggravations as he thought proper  to add  all which were favourably heard , and credit given to the whole relation by the General , who wanted only a pretence to persevere in his severity to the man who , being once his favourite , was now become the object of his aversion .


Doughty , provoked , no doubt , by the misrepresentations of the master , and the partiality with which they were heard , gave the General some opprobrious language , adding , ' `` that the lightest word that came out of his ( Doughty 's ) mouth was to be believed as soon as the General 's oath .
Whereupon the General did not only strike him , but commanded him to be bound to the mast  for the accomplishment of which , the master of the fly-boat took no little pains .
This happened as the two ships ( the Pelican and the Canter ) lay together  and as soon as Doughty was released , he was put into the Canter , although greatly against his will , for that he said he knew them to be there that sought his life , as namely the master of the fly-boat , and some other desperate and unhonest people  but would he or no , thither he must , or else the General swore he would lift him out with the tackle , and for that purpose commanded the tackle to be loosed .
Thus aboard the Canter he went , and his brother John Doughty with him . '' '
The Canter was a vessel taken from the Spaniards on the coast of Africa .


 While they lay in this harbour , there is one remarkable incident related by this author that deserves particular notice , as it tends to illustrate the previous steps that were pursued to accomplish the ruin of this unfortunate gentleman .


' `` On board the fly boat , says he , was one Thomas Cuttle , who some time had been Captain of the Pelican under Drake , with whom the General had been tampering .
This man came out from him in great wrath , and offering to go over to the main , between the which , and the island where they then lay , was ( as has been said ) but a shallow water .
He , standing well nigh up to the middle in the water with his piece , uttered these words , Well , my Masters , quoth he , I find I am heavily borne with here , because I will not accuse this gentleman ( meaning Doughty ) of that , as I take God to witness , I know not by him  and , therefore , I declare before you all , that , whatsoever becomes of me , I never knew any thing by him but to be the General 's friend  and , rather than I will bide this hard countenance at the General 's hands , I will yield myself into cannibal 's hands  and so I pray you all to pray for me . '' '


After this public declaration the man departed  and , having reached the opposite shore , he went up into the country , where firing his piece to bring the natives to him , Drake taking it for a signal that he wanted to return , sent a boat over to the main , and brought him back .


 Just before their departure from this harbour , which lay in a bay a little to the southward of Cape Hope , ' `` Captain Drake himself came on board the Elizabeth , and calling all the company together , told them , that he was to send thither a couple of men , the which he did not know how to carry along with him this voyage , and go thro ' therewithal , as namely , quoth he , Thomas Doughty , who is a commotioner and a seditious fellow , and a very bad and lewd fellow , and one that I have made that reckoning of as of my left hand  and his brother the young Doughty , a witch , a poisoner , and such a one as the world can not judge of , having his knowledge from the devil  and so warning the company that none should speak to them , nor use any conference with them  if they did , he would hold them as his enemies , and enemies to the voyage .
And he willed that great care should be taken that they should neither write nor read  and then he declared what wealth the worst boy in the fleet should get by this voyage , and how the worst boy should never need to go again to sea , but should be able to live in England with a right good gentleman  for , quoth he , you shall see that we will have gold come as plentiful as wood into the ships .
Having finished his speech , he departed , and shortly after sent the said Thomas Doughty and his brother aboard the Elizabeth , commanding them , as they would answer it with  their lives , not to set pen to paper , nor yet to read but what every man might understand and see .
And sure , adds our author , their entertainment there was accordingly  for men durst not speak to them , although willingly perhaps they would  and as their fare was with the simplest in the ship , so was their lodging .
But he , Thomas Doughty , having agreed with the boatswain of the ship for a cabin which stood , God knows , in an uncomfortable room , yet must he pay 31 .
for the same in England .
But what came of this to the poor fellow !
he was fain for his friendly using him to lose his office , and continue in heavy displeasure . '' '


Having staid fifteen days in the harbour , during which time they continued their friendly intercourse with the savages , on June the 3d they set sail towards the South Sea , and six days afterwards stopt at a little bay to break up the Christopher , which from the smallness of its size was found incapable of living in those boisterous seas , of which , before they entered them , they had conceived no adequate idea .
Then passing on , they found it necessary to cast anchor in another bay , with a view to recover the Portuguese prize , which was separated from them in the storm of the 27th of April , and had not yet rejoined them .
To return in search of it was sufficiently mortifying  to proceed without it , was not only to deprive themselves of a considerable part of their force , but to expose their  friends and companions , who had voluntarily embarked on board her , to certain death or certain captivity .
This consideration prevailed  and , therefore , on the 18th , after prayers to God , with which Drake ( for example 's sake ) never forgot to begin an enterprize , he put to sea , and the next day near Port Julian discovered their associates , whose ship was now grown leaky , having suffered much in the first storm by which they were separated , and afterwards in the fruitless attempts to regain the fleet .
Drake , therefore , being desirous to relieve their fatigues , entered Port Julian .
They no sooner landed than they were accosted by two of the natives , of whom Magellan left a very terrible account , having described them as a nation of giants and monsters : nor did they find his narrative entirely without foundation  for the least of those they saw was larger and taller than the largest of their company .
The two who accosted the English appeared much pleased with their new guests , received willingly whatever was given them , and very exactly observed every thing that passed , seeming more particularly delighted with seeing Oliver , the master-gunner , shoot an English arrow .
They shot themselves likewise in emulation , but their arrows always fell to the ground far short of his .


Soon after this friendly contest came another , who , observing the familiarity of his countrymen with the strangers , appeared much displeased  and , as the Englishmen perceived , endeavoured  to persuade them from such an intercourse .
What effect his arguments had was soon after apparent  for another of Drake 's companions , being desirous to shew the third Indian a specimen of the English valour and dexterity , attempted likewise to shoot an arrow  but , drawing it with his full force , burst the bow-string : upon which , the Indians , who were unacquainted with their other weapons , imagining them disarmed , followed the company as they were walking negligently down towards their boat , and let fly their arrows , aiming particularly at Winter , who had the bow in his hand .
He , finding himself wounded in the shoulder , endeavoured to refit his bow  and , turning about , was pierced with a second arrow in the breast .
Oliver , the gunner , immediately presented his piece at the insidious assailants , which failing to take fire , gave them time to level another flight of arrows , by which he was killed  nor , perhaps , had any of them escaped , surprized and unprepared as they were , had not Drake animated their courage , and directed their motions , ordering them , by perpetually changing their places , to elude as much as might be the aim of their enemies , and to defend their bodies with their targets  and instructing them by his own example to pick up and break the arrows as they fell , which they did with so much diligence that the Indians were soon in danger of being disarmed .
Then Drake himself taking the gun , which Oliver had so unsuccessfully attempted  to make use of , discharged it at the Indian that first began the fray and had killed the gunner , aiming it so happily that the hail-shot , with which it was loaded , tore open his belly , and forced him to such terrible outcries , that the Indians , though their numbers increased , and many of them shewed themselves from different parts of an adjoining wood , were too much terrified to renew the assault  and suffered Drake without molestation to withdraw his wounded friend , who , being hurt in his lungs , languished two days , and then dying , was interred with his companion with the usual ceremony of a military funeral .


They staid here two months after this quarrel , without receiving any other injury from the natives , in which time they discovered the gibbet on which Magellan had formerly executed some of his mutinous company , and where ' `` Drake , according to the writers of the Biographia Britannica , did the least commendable action of his life , in executing Mr. John Doughty , a man next in authority to himself  in which , however , he preserved a great appearance of justice . '' '


To clear this matter fully , it will be necessary to bring together the substance of what these authors have said on the subject , and then to add the plain relation from the manuscript already quoted .


` Here it was ( at Port St. Julian , ) say these writers , that on a sudden , having carried the  principal persons engaged in the service to a desart island lying in the bay , he called a kind of council of war , or rather court-martial , where he exposed his commission , by which the Queen granted him the power of life and death , which was delivered him with this remarkable expression from her own mouth  We do account that he , Drake , who strikes at thee , does strike at us .
He then laid open , with great eloquence , ( for , though his education was but indifferent , he had a wonderful power of speech ) the cause of this assembly .
He proceeded next to charge Mr. John Doughty , who had been second in command during the whole voyage , when Drake was present , and first in his absence , with plotting the destruction of the undertaking , and the murder of his person .
He said he had the first notice of this gentleman 's bad intentions before he left England  but that he was in hopes his behaviour towards him would have extinguished such disposition , if there had been any truth in the information .
He then appealed for his behaviour to the whole assembly , and to the gentleman accused .
He next exposed his practices from the time that he left England , while he lived towards him with all the kindness and cordiality of a brother  which charge he supported by producing papers under his own hand , to which Mr. Doughty added a full and free confession .
After this , the Captain , or , as in the language of those times he is called , the General , quitted the place , telling the  assembly he expected that they should pass a verdict upon him , for he would be no judge in his own cause .
Camden , as the reader will see , says , that he tried him by a jury  but , other accounts affirm , that the whole forty persons of which the court was composed , had judged him to death , and gave this in writing under their hands and seals , leaving the time and manner of it to the General .
Mr. Doughty himself said , that he desired rather to die by the hands or justice than to be his own executioner .
Upon this , Captain Drake , having maturely weighed the whole matter , presented three points to Mr. Doughty 's choice : first , to be executed upon the island where they were  next , to be set on shore on the main land  or , lastly , to be sent home to abide the justice of his country .
He desired he might have till the next day to consider of these , which was allowed him , and then , giving his reasons for rejecting the two last , he declared that he made the first his choice  and , having received the sacrament with the General , from the hands of Mr. Francis Fletcher , Chaplain to the fleet , and made a full confession , his head was cut off with an axe by the Provost-Marshal , July the 2d , 1578 .
` As to the imputation which this matter brought upon Drake , we will first cite what Camden says of this transaction : ' `` On the 26th of April , entering into the mouth of the river of Plate , he saw an infinite number of  sea-calves  from thence sailing into the haven of St. Julian he found a gibbet , set up , as it was thought , by Magellan for the punishment of certain mutineers .
In this very place John Doughty , an industrious and stout man , and the next unto Drake , was called to his trial for raising a mutiny in the fleet , found guilty by twelve men after the English manner , and condemned to death , which he suffered undauntedly , being beheaded , having first received the holy communion with Drake .
And , indeed , the most impartial persons in the fleet were of opinion , that he had acted seditiously , and that Drake cut him off as an emulator of his glory , and one that regarded not so much who he himself excelled in commendation for sea matters , as who he thought might equal him  yet wanted there not some who , pretending to understand things better than others , gave out that Drake had in charge from Leicester to take off Doughty upon any pretence whatever , because he had reported that the Earl of Essex was made away by the cunning practices of that Earl . '' '


` We find this matter , add the writers just cited , touched in several other books , and particularly in two , which were written on purpose to expose the Earl of Leicester , and , perhaps , deserving the less credit for that reason .


` It may be offered in defence of Sir Francis Drake , that this man was openly put to death , after as fair a trial as the circumstances of time  and place would permit  that he submitted patiently to his sentence , and received the sacrament with Drake , whom he embraced immediately before his execution .
Besides these , there are two points that deserve particular consideration : first , that , in such expeditions , strict discipline , and legal severity , are often absolutely necessary  secondly , that , as to the Earl of Essex , for whose death Doughty had expressed concern , he was Drake 's first patron , and it is , therefore , very improbable he should destroy a man for endeavouring to detect his murderer .
We may add to all this , if liberty may be indulged to conjectures , that this man , presuming upon the Earl of Leicester 's favour ( who very probably imposed him upon Drake to be rid of him , ) was from thence encouraged to form designs against Drake  and this might also be the reason which hindered him from inclining to an absolute pardon , as doubting whether it was possible to trust one who had so far abused his confidence already , and whose known interest with so great a man might always enable him to find instruments , in case he was wicked enough to enter upon fresh intrigues . '


We shall just remark upon what is above quoted , that the authors do not seem to have been well informed  for they have all along imputed to John Doughty what related to his brother Thomas  and , if credit may be given to the author of the manuscript ( John Cook by  name ) , this unfortunate Thomas fell a sacrifice to Drake 's resentment .


`` On this island in Port St. Julian , says he , passed many matters , which , I think , God would not have to be concealed , especially for that they tended to murder  for he ( Drake ) spewed out against Thomas Doughty his venom .
Here he ended all his conceived hatred , not by courtesy and friendly reconcilement , but by most tyrannical blood-spilling  for he was never quiet while he lived , who in wisdom and honest government as far surpassed him , as he in tyranny surpassed all men .
The world never committed a fact like unto this  for here he murdered him that , if he had well looked unto himself , had been a more sure and stedfast friend unto him than ever was Pythias to his friend Damon , as I think the sequel of this case will shew .
`` The last day of June , the General himself , being set in place of judgment , and having the whole company brought on shore , and having Captain John Thomas set close by him , who opened a bundle of papers that were rolled up together , wherein was written divers and sundry articles , the which , before they were read , the General spoke unto the purport of them , and turning himself to Thomas Doughty , who was there present , being before brought thither more like a thief than a gentleman of honest conversation , he began his charge thus : Thomas Doughty , you have here sought by divers means , in as much as  you may , to discredit me , to the great hinderance and overthrow of this voyage  besides other great matters with which I have to charge you , the which , if you can clear yourself of , you and I shall be very good friends  whereof if you can not , you have deserved death .
Master Doughty answered , It should never be approved that he had merited ill by undertaking any villainy towards him , By whom , quoth the General , will you be tried ?
Why , good General , said he , let me live to come unto my country , and I will there be tried by her Majesty 's laws .
Nay , Thomas Doughty , said he , I will here impannel a jury on you , to enquire into those matters that I have to charge you withal .
Why , General , replied Doughty , I hope you will see your commission be good .
I 'll warrant you , answered the General , my Commission is good enough .
I pray you then let us see it , said Master Doughty  it is necessary that it should be here shewn .
Well , quoth he , you shall not see it .
Then , addressing himself to the company , You see , my Masters , how this fellow is full of prating , bind me his arms , for I will be safe of my life .
My Masters , you that be my good friends , Thomas Good , Gregory - , you there , my friends , bind him  so they took and bound his arms behind him .
Then he uttered divers furious words unto Thomas Doughty , as charging him to be the man that poisoned my Lord of  Essex  whereas Master Doughty avouched it to his face , that he was the man that brought the General first to the presence of my Lord in England .
Thou bring ME , quoth the General , to my Lord !
See , my Masters , see here how he goeth about to discredit me .
This fellow with my Lord was never of any estimation .
I think he never came about him as a gentleman  for I that was daily with my Lord never saw him there above once , and that was long after my entertainment with my Lord .


`` Then , in fine , was there a jury called , whereof Master John Winter was foreman .
Then by John Thomas were the articles read unto them , even once over for a last farewel , for fear that men should have carried them away by memory  all which appeared to consist of words of unkindness , and to proceed of some choler when the prisoner was provoked , all which Doughty did not greatly deny  until at length came in one Edward Bright , whose honesty of life I have nothing to do with , who said , Nay , Thomas Doughty , we have other matter for you yet , that will a little nearer touch you .
It will i ` faith bite you to the girskin .
I pray thee , Ned Bright , said the prisoner , charge me with nothing but truth , and spare me not .
Then John Thomas read further for his last article to conclude the whole withal , That Thomas Doughty should say to Edward Bright , in Master  Drake 's garden , that the Queen 's Majesty and Council would be corrupted .
So Bright holding up his finger , said , How like ye this gare , sirrah ?
Why , Ned Bright , said Master Doughty , what should induce thee thus to belye me ?
thou knowest that such familiarity was never between thee and me : but it may be , that I have said , if we brought home gold , we should be the better welcome  but yet this is more than I do remember .
Then it came out , on farther evidence , that Master Doughty should say , that my Lord Treasurer had a plot of the present voyage .
No , that he hath not , quoth General Drake .
The other replied , that he had , and had it of him .
See , my Masters , said Drake , what this fellow hath done , God will have his treachery all known  for her Majesty gave me special commandment , that of all men my Lord Treasurer should not know it  but you see his own mouth hath betrayed him : so this was a special article against him to hurt his throat , and greatly he seemed to rejoice at this advantage .


`` Then Master Doughty offered him , if he would permit him to live , and to answer these objections in England , he would set his hand to whatso was there written , or to any thing else that he would set down .
Well , once let these men , quoth the General , first find whether you are guilty in this or no , and then we will talk further of the matter .
 And then he delivered ( after they had all taken their oaths given by John Thomas ) the bills of indictment , as I may term them , unto Mr. John Winter , who was foreman of this inquest .
Then Master Leonard Vicary , a very assured friend of Master Thomas Doughty 's , said unto him , General , this is not law , nor agreeable to justice , that you offer .
I have not to do with you crafty lawyers , neither do I care for the law  but I know what I will do .
Why , quoth Master Vicary , who was one of his jury , I know not how we may answer his life .
Well , Master Vicary , quoth he , you shall not have to do with his life  let me alone with that  you are but to find whether he be guilty in these articles that here are objected against him , or no .
Why , very well , said Master Vicary , then there is , I trust , no matter of death .
No , no , Master Vicary , quoth he  so with this the jury went together , finding all to be true , without any doubt or stop made , but only to that article that Edward Bright had objected against him  for it was doubted of some whether Bright were sufficient with his only word to cast away the life of a man .
And truly it did argue small honesty in a man to conceal such a matter if it had been spoken in England , and to utter it in this place where will was law , and reason put in exile  for , an honest subject would not have concealed such matter , which made some doubt of an honest  dealing .
But , to be brief , answer was made , that Bright was a very honest man  and so the verdict being given in , it was told to the General , that there was doubt made of Bright 's honesty .
Why , quoth Master Drake , I dare to swear that what Ned Bright has said is very true ( yet within a fortnight after , the same Bright was in such disliking with him , as he seemed to doubt his life  and having displaced him of the Pelican , and put him into the Marygold , he gave for reason , that himself would be safe , and he would put him far enough from him . )
Thus having received in the verdict , he rose off the place , and departed towards the water-side , where , calling all the company with him , except Master Thomas Doughty and his brother , he there opened a certain bundle of letters and bills , and , looking on them , said , God 's will !
I have left in my cabin that I should especially have had ( as if he had there forgotten his Commission :) but , whether he forgot his Commission or no , he much forgot himself , to sit as Judge without shewing that he had any  but , truly , I think he shewed to the uttermost what he had : for here he shewed forth , first , letters that were written , as he said , by Master Hankins to my Lord of Essex for his entertainment  secondly , he shewed letters of thanks from my Lord of Essex unto Master Hankins , for preferring so good a servitor unto him , and how much  he had pleasured him  then read the letters that past from my Lord of Essex unto Secretary Walsingham in his great commendation  then shewed he letters of Master Hatton 's unto himself , tending for the acceptance of his men John Thomas and John Brewer , for their well usage in this voyage  and , lastly , he read a bill of her Majesty 's adventure of a thousand crowns ( but I most marvelled that so many noblemen and gentlemen did leave their letters in his hands , except it were to shew in this place for his credit . )
So when he had all done , he said , Now , my Masters , you may see whether this fellow hath sought my discredit or no , and what should hereby be meant but the very overthrow of the voyage  as , first , by taking away of my good name , and altogether discrediting me , and then my life , which I being bereaved of , what then will you do ?
You will fain one to drink another 's blood , and so to return again unto your own country  you will never be able to find the way thither .
And now , my Masters , consider what a great voyage we are like to make , the like was never made out of England  for by the same the worst in this fleet shall become a gentleman  and , if this voyage go not forward , which I can not see how possibly it should , if this man live , what a reproach it will be , not only unto our country , but especially unto us , the very simplest here may consider of .
Therefore ,  my Masters , they that think this man worthy to die , let them with me hold up their hands  and , they that think him not worthy to die , hold down their hands  at the which , divers that envied his former felicity , held up their hands  some others , again , for fear of his favouritry , sticked not to lift their hands , although against their hearts  but some , again , lifted up their hands and very hearts unto the Lord , to deliver us of this tyrannous and cruel tyrant  who upon the same , coming to his former judgment-seat , pronouned him the child of death , and persuaded him withal , that he would by this means make him the servant of God : and said farther , if any man could , between this and next meeting , devise any way that might save his life , he would hear it  and wished himself to devise some way for his own safeguard .
Well , General , quoth he , seeing it is come to this pass , that I see you would have me made away , I pray you carry me with you to Peru , and there set me ashore .
No , truly , Master Doughty , I can not answer it to her Majesty , if I should so do  but , how say you , Thomas Doughty , if any man will warrant me to be safe from your hands , and will undertake to keep you sure , you shall see what I will say unto you .
Master Doughty then calling on Master Winter , said unto him , Master Winter , will you be so good as to undertake this for me ?
Then Master Winter said unto Master Drake , that he should be safe of  his person , and he would warrant him , if he did commit him to his custody .
Then Drake , a little pausing , said , See then , my Masters , we must thus do  we must nail him close under the hatches , and return home again without making any voyage , and if you will do so , then speak your minds .
Then a company of desperate bankrupts that could not live in their own country without the spoil of that as others had got by the sweat of their brows , cried , God forbid , good General !
which voice was no less attentively heard , for there needed no spur to a willing horse .
Thus , telling Master Doughty to prepare for his death , and having given him one whole day 's respite to set all things in order , he rose and departed , promising that his continual prayers to God should not cease , that it would please God to put it into his head how he might do him good : but he had so often before sworn that he would hang him , that I think at this present he meant to do him little good .
Thus Master Doughty continuing all this night , the next day , and the second night in his prayers , except some small time that he used in setting his wordly business in some way , and distributing to such as he thought good , such things as he then had with him , was the 2d day of July commanded to prepare himself , and to make ready to die .
Then master Doughty , with a more chearful countenance then ever he had in all his life , to the show , as one that  did altogether contemn life , prayed him , that , ere he died , he might receive the sacrament  which was not only granted , but Drake himself offered to accompany him to the Lord 's Table , for the which Master Doughty gave him hearty thanks , never worse terming him than my good Captain .
Master Drake offered him withal to make choice of his own death , and for that he said he was a gentleman be should but lose his head , the which kind of death was most agreeable to his mind , in as much as he must needs die .
And , truly , I heard say , that Master Drake offered him , if he would , that he should be shotten to death with a piece , and that he himself would do that exploit , and so he should die by the hands of a gentleman .
But , in fine , they together received the Lord 's Supper  the which , I do ever assure myself , that he did take with as uncorrupted a mind as ever did any innocent of the world  for he , sure , shewed himself to have all his affiance and only trust in God  he shewed himself so valiant in this extremity as the world might wonder at it  he seemed to have conquered death itself , and it was not seen , that on all this day before his death , that ever he altered one jot of his countenance , but kept it as staid and firm as if he had some message to deliver to some nobleman .
They having thus received the sacrament , there was a banquet made , such as the place might yield , and there they dined  together , in which time , the place of execution being made ready , after dinner , as one not willing any longer to delay the time , he told the General , that he was ready as soon as pleased him  but prayed him , that he might speak alone with him a few words , with the which they talked a-part the space of half a quarter of an hour , and then with bills and staves he was brought to the place of execution , where he shewed himself no less valiant than all the time before  for , first , here kneeling on his knees , he first prayed for the Queen 's Majesty of England his Sovereign lady and mistress  he then prayed to God for the happy succcess of this voyage , and prayed to God to turn it to the profit of his country : he remembered also therein divers his good friends , and especially Sir William Winter , praying Master John Winter to commend him to that good Knight  all which he did with so chearful a countenance , as if he had gone to some great prepared banquet , the which , I sure think , that he was fully resolved that God had provided for him  so , at the last , turning to the General , he prayed him that he might make water ere he died , for , quoth he , the flesh is frail , and withal turned him about and did so  and , coming again , said , Now , truly , I may say as said Sir Thomas More , that he that cuts off my head shall have little honesty , my neck is so short : So turning him , and looking about  on the whole company , he desired them all to forgive him , and especially some that he did perceive to have displeasure borne them for his sake , whereof Thomas Cuttle was one , Hugh Smith was another , and divers others : whereupon , Smith prayed him to say before the General then , whether ever they had any conference together that might redound to his ( the General 's ) prejudice or detriment .
He declared it at his death , that neither he , nor any man else , ever practised any treachery towards the General with him  neither did he himself ever think any villainous thought against him .
Then he prayed the General to be good unto the same Hugh Smith , and to forgive him for his sake .
So the General said , Well , Smith , for Master Doughty 's sake , and at his request , I forgive thee  but become an honest man hereafter .
So then , Master Doughty embracing the General , naming him his good Captain , bid him farewel  and so bidding the whole company farewel , he laid his head to the block , the which being stricken off , Drake most despitefully made the head to be taken up and shewed to the whole company , himself saying , See , this is the end of traitors !
So he being buried , and those things finished , the whole company being together , Master Drake protested before God , that whosoever he was who should offend but the eighth part that Thomas Doughty had done , should die  Figure 4 .
The beheading of Capn .
Doughty by Drake .
 for it .
He also protested , and swore by the life of God , and the blessed sacrament which he that day had received , that whosoever he were within the fleet that did give another a blow , should lose his hand , without exception of any  and yet , the next day , it fortuned that Master Doughty 's younger brother , walking both silently and mournfully , as well for remembrance of his brother 's late death , as also weighing the imminent peril over his own head , ( as what has been already said and the present consequence may purport ) , there comes unto him this Edward Bright , the chief instrument of his Brother 's death , saying unto him , God 's wounds !
thou villain , what knowest thou by my wife ?
and withal struck at him with his ruler , as of purpose to pick a quarrel , to hasten his end also .
Why , Ned Bright , quoth he , thou seest in what case I am , I pray thee let me alone  and withal bore off the blow with his arm , wherewith the ruler broke : but Bright , seeming very furious , thrust him in the face with the piece that remained in his hand , the splinters whereof entered an inch into his face  presently upon the which , he went unto the General to complain of Bright .
Why , John Doughty , quoth he , without having any regard of his oath the day before made , Ned Bright will be open to your revenge in England  for , I dare say , thy brother did belye her , when he said that she had an ill name in  Cambridge .
Then might every man perceive the little-meant honesty . ''
From this plain narrative of the trial and execution of Doughty , of the genuineness of which there can not be the least doubt , as the concomitant little circumstances all concur to confirm the author both an eye and ear witness of what he has related , there is reason to believe , that the success of the voyage covered the iniquity of the undertaker  and that the immense booty which Drake brought to England , enabled him to stifle the complaints of individuals  and , by a proper address , to convert the acts of oppression , murder and pyracy , of which he was guilty , into so many deeds of necessary duty , in order to the accomplishment of the main object , the acquisition of wealth at the expence of honesty .


That Drake never had a Commission from the Queen , as his friends would suggest , appears not only from his not producing it at the trial of Doughty ( which can hardly be justified , in contempt to the prisoner ) , but from his not producing it upon another occasion , when , as shall be shewn immediately , he vauntingly produced other credentials of far less moment , in order to justify his conduct , and give him credit with his company .
The story , then , of the remarkable words foisted into the mouth of his Sovereign , and recited by his biographer , is as false as inconsistent with the character of that wise Princess , who , though there is reason from her after-conduct  to conclude that she was privy to the voyage , yet never openly countenanced it , till after it was compleated , and the issue of it determined  as appears from the account of the conversation which Drake himself gave to his followers , a few days before he left Port St. Julian to seek a passage into the South Seas .


' `` On the 6th of August , says our Author , he commanded his whole company to be ashore , and , placing himself in a tent , one side of which was open , and calling Master Winter on one side of him , and John Thomas on the other side , his man laid before him a great paper book , and withal Master Fletcher offered himself to make a sermon .
Nay soft , Master Fletcher , said he , I must preach this day myself , although I have small skill in preaching .
Well , all ye the company , here are ye , or not ?
Answer was made , that they were all here .
Then commanded he every ships company severally to stand together  which was also done .
Then , said he , My Masters , I am a very bad orator , for my bringing up hath not been in learning  but what so I shall here speak , let every man take good notice of , and let him write it down , for I will speak nothing but what I will answer it in England , yea , and before her Majesty , as I have it here already set down [ but whether it were in his book or not , that I know not , but this was the effect of it , and very near the words ] : Thus it is , my Masters , that we 're  very far from our country and friends  we are compassed in on every side with our enemies  wherefore we are not to make small reckoning of a man , for we can not have a man if we would give for him ten thousand pounds  wherefore we must have these mutinies and discontents that are grown amongst us redressed  for , by the life of God , it doth even take my wits from me to think on it .
Here is such controversy between the sailors and the gentlemen , and such stomaching between the gentlemen and sailors , that it doth even make me mad to hear it .
But , my Masters , I must have it cease  for I must have the gentlemen to haul and draw with the mariners , and the mariners with the gentlemen : and let us shew ou [ ... ] selves to be all of a company  and let us not give occasion to the enemy to rejoice at our decay and overthrow .
I would know him that would refuse to set his hand to a rope  but I trust there is not any such here  and , as gentlemen are very necessary for government sake on the voyage , so have I shipt them for that purpose , and to some further intent  and yet , though I know sailors to be the most envious people of the world , and so unruly without government , yet may not I be without them .
Also , if there be any here willing to return home , let me understand of them  and here is the Marygold , a ship that I can very well spare , I will furnish her to such as will return with the most  credit that I can give them , either by my letters or any way else  but let them take care that they go homeward  for , if I find them in my way , I will surely sink them  therefore , you shall have time to consider hereof until to-morrow , for , by my troth I must needs be plain with you  I have taken that in hand that I know not in the world how to go through withal  it passeth my capacity  it hath even bereaved me of my wits to think on it .
[ Well , yet the voice was , that none would return  they would all take such part as he did . ]
Well , then , my Masters , quoth he , Came ye all forth with your own good wills , or no ?
They answered , All , willingly .
At whose hands , my Masters , take ye to receive your wages ?
At yours , answered the company .
Then , said he , how say you , will you take wages , or stand to my courtesy ?
To your courtesy , good Captain , was the reply .
Then he commanded the steward to the Elizabeth to bring him the key of the stores , the which he did  then , turning him unto Master Winter , he said , Master Winter , I do here discharge you of your Captainship  and so in brief he said to all the Officers .
Then Master Winter and John Thomas asked him what should move him to displace them ?
He asked in return , whether they could give any reason why he should not do so ?
So willing them to content themselves , he willed silence in those matters , saying , Ye see here the great disorders  we are entangled into  and , altho ' some have already received condign punishment , as by death , who , I take God to witness , as you all know , was to me as my other hand , yet you see , over and besides the rest , his own mouth did bewray his treacherous dealings : and see , how trusting to the singularity of his own wit , he over-reacht himself at unawares .
But see what God would have to be done  for her Majesty commanded , that of all men my Lord Treasurer should have no knowledge of this voyage , and to see that his own mouth hath declared that he had given him a plot thereof .
But , truly , my Masters , and as I am a gentleman , there shall no more die  I will lay my hand on no more , although there be here who have deserved as much as he  and so charging one Worrall that was present , that his case was worse than Doughty 's , who , in Master Doughty 's extremities , was one of Drake 's chief confellows , who , humbling himself to Drake , even upon his knees , prayed him to be good unto him .
Well , well , Worrall , said he , you and I shall talk well enough of this matter hereafter .
Then he charged one John Audley with some ill dealings towards him , but opened no matter , but said , he would talk with him alone after dinner .
Here is some again , my Masters , not knowing how else to discredit me , say and affirm , that I was set forth on this voyage by Master  Hatton  some by Sir William Winter  and some by Master Hankins  but these are a company of idle heads that have nothing else to talk of .
And , my Masters , I must tell you , I do know them as my very good friends  but to say that they were the fitters forth of this voyage , or that it was by their means , I tell you it was nothing so .
But , indeed , thus it was , My Lord of Essex wrote in my commendation unto Secretary Walsingham more than I was worthy  but by like I had deserved somewhat at his hands , and he thought me in his letters a fit man to serve against the Spaniards for my practice and experience that I had in that trade  whereupon , indeed , Secretary Walsingham did come to consult with his Lordship , and declared unto him , that for that her Majesty had received divers injuries of the King of Spain , for the which , she desired to have some revenge  and withal , he shewed me a plot , willing me to set my hand , and to write down where I thought he might most be annoyed  but I told him some part of my mind , but refused to set my hand to any thing , affirming , that her Majesty was mortal , and that , if it should please God to take her Majesty away , it might so be that some person might reign that might be in league with the king of Spain , and then will mine own Hand be a witness against myself .
Then was I very shortly after , and on an evening , sent for unto her Majesty by Secretary Walsingham  and , the next day , coming  to her Majesty , these , or the like words , she said , Drake , so it is that I would gladly be revenged on the King of Spain for divers injuries that I have received : and said further , that he was the only man that might do this exploit , and withal craved his advice therein , who told her Majesty of the small good that was to be done in Spain , but the only way was to annoy him by his Indies .
Then , with many more words , he shewed forth a bill of her Majesty 's adventure of 1000 crowns , which , however , he said at some time before , that her Majesty did give him towards his charges .
He shewed also a bill of Master Hatton 's adventure , and divers letters of credit that had passed in his behalf  but he never let them come out of his own hands .
He said also , that her Majesty did swear by her crown , That , if any within her realm did give the King of Spain hereof to understand ( as she suspected but two ) , they should lose their heads therefore .
And now , Masters , said he , let us consider what we have done : We have now set together by the ears three mighty Princes , namely , her Majesty , the Kings of Spain and Portugal  and , if this voyage should not have good success , we should not only be a scorning , or a reproachful scoffing stock unto our enemies , but also a great BLOT to our whole country for ever  and , what triumph would it be to Spain and Portugal  and again , the like would never be attempted .
And now , restoring every  man again to his former office , he ended : thus shewing the company that he would satisfy every man , or else he would sell all that he ever had even unto his plate  for , quoth he , I have good reason to promise , and am best able to perform it  for , I have somewhat of mine own in England  and , besides that , I have as much adventure in this voyage as three of the best whatsoever  and , if it so be , that I never come home , yet will her Majesty pay every man his wages , whom indeed you and I all came to serve  and , for to say you came to serve me , I will not give you thanks  for it is only her Majesty that you serve  and this voyage is only her fitting forth : so willing all men to be friends , he willed them to depart about their business .
The 8th of August , they weighed anchor and departed  but , the day before , he came on board the Elizabeth , and swore very vehemently , I know not upon what occasion , that he would hang to the number of 30 in the fleet that had deserved it : and then again charged Worrall that his case was worse than Doughty 's , and that by God 's wounds he had deserved to be hanged .
And , Master Winter , said he , where is your man Ulysses ?
By God 's life , if he were my man , I would cut off his ears : nay , by God 's wounds , I would hang him  but wherefore truly I do not know . '' '


 Nothing can be a clearer proof that Drake had no Government Commission than the above account .
In his speech , which the writer says is nearly in his own words , he does not so much as pretend to have received any Commission , only a private intimation from the Queen and Walsingham , that her Majesty wanted to be revenged of divers injuries received from the King of Spain , but was countenancing four or five piratical plunderers to rob innocent people , a princely way for one Sovereign to take revenge of another , in times of profound peace ?
It was , indeed , a pitiful connivance in Queen Elizabeh to engage 1000 crowns in a piratical adventure of this kind , and what could never have been credited of that magnanimous Princess , had she not afterwards approved of his piracy , by going aboard his ship , and openly approving what , it was even then said , least became a trading nation to encourage , the breach of treaties , and piratical practices .
But , it is remarkable , that five months elapsed after his return to England before her Majesty 's pleasure was publicly known  during which time men talked var [ ... ] | ously of the expedition , and the fate of Drake seemed to hang in suspence  so true proved Doughty 's prediction , that ' `` the Queen 's Majesty and Council might be corrupted . '' '


That Drake bore no naval Commission appears still more clearly , from his displacing the Captains and Officers of all his ships without demanding from them their Commissions  from his  listing his men , not for any hostile expedition , but for a trading voyage to Alexandria  and from his asking them , before his setting sail from the Port of St. Julian to enter the South Seas , from whom they expected their wages .
From these circumstances it follows incontestibly , that , it he had a naval Commission , he was the only Officer in the fleet possessed of one  - Doughty , whom he beheaded , and who , before their falling out , was second in command , bore no naval Commission  and , it is more than probable , that this gentleman 's questioning the Commission of Drake was the real cause of his death , as Drake more than once charges him with the overthrow of the voyage , which he could no otherwise effect than by discrediting a Commission , on the authority of which both Officers and men were to be persuaded to plunder a people at peace with their nation , and without which every man was liable to be executed for piracy , whenever he should be overpowered .


It were needless for us to enlarge our remarks  every reader has now the subject before him , and every reader will form a judgment for himself .


What we have said , in consequence of having traced this transaction from beginning to end , may seem to clash with the opinion we previously entertained of Drake 's humanity , courage , and kindness to his followers , but will not seem strange to those who are acquainted with the nature of periodical writings , where one part of the work is necessarily printed off before the  other is written .
In pursuing the course of this voyage , new authors have been consulted , and new lights collected , which have enabled us to detect not only the errors of other writers , but also to correct our own  and , from the sequel of this voyage , we may venture to foretel , that the reader will concur in sentiment with us , that , though Drake was bold , he was not honest  that , though he did not kill those he plundered and had no motive to destroy , he spared none who opposed his designs , or who did not pay implicit obedience to his arbitrary will  that , though he was an able seaman , he was a jealous rival  and that , though he was a gallant leader , he was a most tyrannical Commander .
We shall now accompany him to the South Seas , where the Spaniards , not suspecting an enemy , were in no condition to defend themselves against his attacks .


Drake having reduced the number of his ships to three , they left the port , and on August the 20th entered the Straits of Magellan , in which they struggled with contrary winds , and the various dangers which the intricacy of that winding passage exposed them to , till night , when they had passed the first narrow , and had entered a wider sea , where they discovered an island , to which they gave the name of Elizabeth , in honour of their sovereign .
On the 24th they came to an island , in which they found such an infinite number of birds , since called penguins , that they killed 3000 of them in one day .
This bird , of  which they then knew not the name , they describe as somewhat less than a wild goose , without feathers , and covered with a kind of down , unable to fly or rise from the ground , but capable of running and swimming with amazing celerity .
They feed on fishes in the sea , and come to land only to rest in the day , and lay their eggs , which , according to later voyagers , they deposit in holes , as regularly dispersed and as numerous as the cells in a bee-hive .


From these islands to the South Sea the strait becomes very crooked and narrow  so that sometimes by the interposition of head-lands the passage seems entirely shut up .
To double these capes they found it very difficult , on account of the frequent variations to be made in the course .
Here are , indeed , as Magellan observes , many harbours  but in most of them no bottom is to be found , which , however , does not seem verified by experience  the harbours being in general good , though the tides and blasts continually rushing in from various directions create the danger .
The land on both sides rises into innumerable mountains  the tops of them were encircled with clouds and vapours , which , being congealed , fall down in snow , and increase their height by hardening into ice  an observation which might naturally occur to Drake , who passed the strait in their winter before the snows were dissolved .
However , even at that season , which answers to our February , they found the vallies , in some places , green , fruitful , and  pleasant .
Anchoring in a bay near Cape Forward , Drake , imagining the strait quite shut up , went in his boat to endeavour to find some other passage out  and , having found an inlet towards the North , was returning to his ships  but curiosity soon prevailed upon him to stop for the sake of observing a canoe or boat with several natives of the country in it .
He could not at a distance help admiring the form of this little vessel , which seemed inclining to a semicircle , the stern and prow standing up , and the body sinking inward  but much greater was his wonder , when , upon a nearer inspection , he found it made only with the barks of trees , sewed together with thongs of seal-skins , so artificially , that scarcely any water entered the seams .


The people were well shaped , and painted like those who have been already described .
On the land they had a hut built with poles , and covered with skins , in which they had water-vessels and other utensils , made likewise with the barks of trees .
Among these people they had an opportunity of remarking , what is frequently observable in savage countries , how natural sagacity and unwearied industry may supply the want of such manufactures or natutural productions , as appear to us absolutely necessary for the support of life .
Though the inhabitants were wholly strangers to iron and to the use we make of it , yet , instead of it , they substituted the shell of a muscle , of prodigious  size , found upon their coasts .
This they ground upon a stone to an edge , which was so firm and solid , that neither wood nor stone were able to resist it .
With instruments made of shells , these simple people were able to perform all their mechanic operations  nor do they seem so deformed and ugly as our late voyagers represent them , who being , perhaps , more refined than those who sailed with Captain Drake , might fancy a greater difference between themselves and these savages than in nature there really is .


On this occasion we can not forbear remarking , that , though Drake entered the strait in what is accounted the most unfavourable season , yet he passed it in sixteen days , though , at that time , wholly unknown  a passage the more extraordinary , as none of our late voyagers made it in less than thirty-six days in the middle of summer , and Captain Wallis was at least four months in making it .


Drake , as has been said , having taken a survey of the country from Cape Forward , continued his course to the North-west-ward , and , on the sixth of September , entered the great South Sea , on which no English vessel had ever been navigated before  and proposed to have directed his course towards the Line , that his men , who had suffered by the severity of the climate , might recover their strength in a warmer latitude .
But his design was scarce formed , before it was frustrated  for on September the seventh ,  after an eclipse of the moon , a storm arose so violent that it left them little hopes of surviving it : nor was its fury so dreadful as its continuance  for it lasted , with little intermission , thirty-two days , in which time they were driven more than 200 leagues out of their course , without being able either to avail themselves of their sails , or make use of their anchors .


In this storm , on the 30th of September , the Marigold , Captain Thomas , was separated from them  and on the 7th of October , having entered a harbour , where they hoped for some intermission of their fatigues , they were in a few hours forced out to sea again by a violent gust , at which time they lost sight of the Elizabeth , Captain Winter , whose crew , as was afterwards discovered , wearied with labour , and discouraged with the prospect of future dangers , recovered the straits the day following , and , returning by the same passage through which they came , sailed along the coast of Brazil , and , in the year following , arrived in England .


They were now driven southward 55 degrees , where they discovered a cluster of islands , in one of which they anchored and staid two days , to the great refreshment of the crew , having met with excellent water , and plenty of greens .
Not far distant from this bay they entered another , where they beheld some naked inhabitants ranging along the coast in their canoes in search of provisions .
With these they exchanged  some toys for such refreshments as they had to spare .


And now , being furnished with wood and water , they again set sail , and were , by a new storm , driven to the latitude of 57 degrees , when they beheld the extremities of the American coast , and the confluence of the Atlantic and Southern oceans .
Here they arrived on the 28th of October , and at last were blest with the sight of a calm sea , having , for almost two months , endured such a storm , as no voyager has given an account of , and such as in that part of the world , though accustomed to hurricanes , the inhabitants were unacquainted with .


On the 30th of October , they steered towards the place appointed for the rendezvouz of the fleet , in case of separation , which was in 30 degrees south  and , on the next day , discovered two islands , so well stocked with fowls , that they victualled their ships with them .
After this supply , they sailed northward , along the coast of Peru , till they came to 30 degrees , where , finding neither ships , nor any convenient port , they came to anchor Nov. the 29th , at Macao , an island inhabited by such Indians as the cruelty of their Spanish conquerors had driven from the continent , to whom they applied for water and provisions , offering them in return such things as they imagined most likely to please them .
The Indians seemed willing to traffic  and , having presented them with  fruits and two fat sheep , shewed them a place where they might come for water .


Next morning , according to agreement , the English landed with their water-vessels , and sent two men forward towards the place appointed , who , about the middle of the way , were suddenly attacked by the Indians and immediately slain .
Nor were the rest of the company out of danger  for behind the rocks was lodged an ambush of 500 men , who , starting up from their retreat , discharged their arrows into the boat with such dexterity , that every one of the crew was wounded by them .
The sea being then high , and hindering them from either retiring or making use of their weapons , Drake himself received an arrow under his eye , which pierced him almost to the brain  and another in his breast .
The danger of these wounds was much increased by the absence of their surgeon , who was in the Elizabeth , so that they had none to assist them but a boy , whose age did not admit of much skill or experience  yet so much were they favoured by Providence , that they all recovered .
No reason could be assigned for which the Indians should attack them with so furious a spirit of malignity , but that they mistook them for Spaniards , whose cruelties might very reasonably incite those to revenge , whom they had driven , by incessant persecution , from their country , wasting immense tracts of land by massacre and devastation .
Nuno da Sylva adds , that none of  the Indians were hurt by the English , though they came so near the boat , as to seize and carry off four of the oars .


On the afternoon of the same day they set sail , and on the 30th of November dropt anchor in Phillip 's bay , where their boat , having been sent out to discover the country , returned with an Indian in his canoe whom they had intercepted .
He was of a graceful stature , drest in a white coat or gown , reaching almost to his knees , very mild , humble , and docile  such as perhaps were all the Indians , till the Spaniards taught them revenge , treachery , and cruelty .
This Indian , having been kindly treated , was dismissed with presents  and informed , as far as the English could make him understand , what they chiefly wanted , and what they were willing to give in return : Drake ordered his boat to attend him , and set him safe on shore .


When he was landed , he made signs for the boat to wait till his return , and meeting some of his countrymen , gave them such an account of his reception , that , within a few hours , several of them repaired with him to the boat , with fowls , eggs , and a hog  and with them one of their captains , who willingly came into the boat , and desired to be conveyed by the English to their ship .


By this man Drake was informed that no supplies were to be expected here  but that Southward , in a place to which he offered to be  his pilot , there was great plenty .
This proposal was accepted , and on the 5th of December , under the direction of the good-natured Indian , they came to anchor in the harbour called by the Spaniards Val Parizo , in 33 deg .
40 min .
S. latitude , near the little town of St. Jago , where they met not only with sufficient stores of provisions , and with storehouses full of the wines of Chili , but with a ship called the Captain of Morial , richly laden , having , together with large quantities of the same wine , some of the fine gold of Baldivia to the amount of threescore thousand pezoes , each pezo of the value of eight shillings , and a great cross of gold set with emeralds .
The Spaniards at first , mistaking the English for friends , invited them to feast with them  but soon being undeceived , one of the crew jumped overboard , and alarmed the town  but the inhabitants , instead of making opposition , fled hastily , and left whatever was in the town a prize to the enemy .
In the chapel Drake and his men found the most valuable booty .


Having spent three days here in storing their ships , and loading the money and effects , they departed , and landed their Indian pilot where they first received him , after having rewarded him much above his expectations or desires .
They had now little other anxiety than for their friends , who had been separated from them , and whom they now determined to seek .
But considering that , by entering every creek and  harbour with their ships , they exposed themselves to unnecessary dangers , and that their boat could not contain such a number as might defend themselves against the Spaniards , they determined to station their ship at some place where they might commodiously build a pinnace , which , being of light burden , might safely sail where the ship would be in danger of being stranded  and , at the same time , carry a sufficient force to resist the enemy , and afford better accommodation than it was possible to obtain in the boat .
To this end , on the 19th of December , they entered a bay near Coquimbo , a town inhabited by the Spaniards , who , discovering them immediately , issued out to the number of 100 horsemen , with about 200 naked Indians running by their sides .
The English , observing their approach , retired to their boat without any loss , except of one man , whom no persuasions or intreaties could move to retire with the rest , and who was therefore overtaken by the Spaniards , who thought to have taken him prisoner , but , having an halbert in his hand , he manfully defended himself , till , being overpowered by numbers , he was run through the body with a lance .
The Spaniards , exulting at the victory , ordered the Indians to draw the dead carcase from the rock on which he fell , and in the sight of the English beheaded it , and then cut off the right hand , and tore out the heart , which they carried away in triumph .


 Leaving this place , they soon found a harbour more secure and convenient , where they built their pinnace , in which Drake went to seek his companions  but , finding the wind contrary , he was obliged to return in two days .


From hence they came to a port called Sarcipaxa , where , being landed , they found a Spaniard asleep with silver bars lying by him to the value of 4000 Spanish ducats  notwithstanding the insults which they had received from his countrymen , they did not think fit to disturb this harmless man 's repose , but , taking the silver , left him quietly to sleep out his nap .


Coasting along the shore , they observed a Spaniard driving eight Peruvian sheep , which on landing they found to be laden with silver , each sheep having 100lb weight in two leather bags across his back .
They delivered the poor animals of their heavy burdens , and lodged the bags in their own ships .


Farther on lay some Indian towns , from which the inhabitants repaired to the ship on floats made of seal-skin blown full of wind , two of which they fasten together , and , sitting between them , row with great swiftness , and carry considerable burdens .
They very readily traded for glass and such trifles , with which the old and the young seemed equally delighted .


Arriving at Marmarena on the 26th of January , Drake invited the Spaniards to traffic with him , which they accepted  and supplied him with necessaries , selling to him , among  other provisions , some of those sheep which have been mentioned , whose bulk is equal to that of a cow , and whose strength is such , that one of them can carry three tall men upon his back  their necks are like a camel 's , and their heads like those of our sheep .
They are the most useful animals of this country , not only affording excellent fleeces and wholesome flesh , but serving as carriers over rocks and mountains , where no other beast can travel  for their feet are of a particular form , which enables them to tread firm on the steepest and most slippery places .


On all this coast , it is said , the mountains are so impregnated with silver , that from one hundred weight of common earth five ounces of fine silver may be separated .


They continued their course towards the North , and on the 7th of February arrived at Arica , in 8 deg .
30 min .
S. latitude , and in this port found three small barks , in which they found 57 slabs of silver , each of the size and shape of an ordinary brick , and weighing about 20lb .
They took no prisoners  for the crews , fearing no interlopers , were all on shore carousing with one another .
At this port the Spaniards were wont to land their merchandize , and to embark the silver , which was transported from thence to Panama  but , since Drake 's incursion , they carry their silver over land to Lima , and load no more treasure here , except what they pay for the purchase of such merchandize as is brought from Europe to supply their market .
Wanting numbers to  assault the town , they proceeded in their course , and falling in with a small coasting-vessel , laden with linen and other cloaths , Drake supplied his crew with what quantity of those articles they stood in need of , and dismissed the Spaniards with the remainder .


From hence they sailed to Chuli  in which port there was a ship that had 300,000 pezoes of silver in bars  but the Spaniards had sent an express from Arica , to acquaint the Governor that Drake was upon the coast .
This express arrived at Chuli , just two hours before Drake entered the port  in which time the master of the ship had thrown his treasure overboard , and had secured himself and crew on shore , leaving only one Indian on board to make the report .
Drake , fearing the alarm would spread faster than he could sail , lost no time in hazardous searches , but instantly departed , and steered for Lima , where they arrived on the 15th of February , and entered the harbour without resistance , in which , according to some writers , there were thirty sail of ships  others say , twelve  but all agree , that several of them were of considerable force  so that Drake 's security consisted not in his strength , but in his reputation , which had so intimidated the Spaniards , that the sight of their own superiority could not rouse them to opposition .
Instances of such panic terrors are to be met with in other relations  but as they are , for the most part , quickly dissipated by reason and resolution , a wise  Figure 5 .
Sir Francis Drake engaging the Cacafuego a illegible Spanish Ship  Commander will rarely ground his hopes of success on them  and , perhaps , on this occasion , the Spaniards scarcely deserve a severer censure for their cowardice , than Drake for his temerity .
A writer of good authority , to reconcile the matter , tells us , that Drake took them at unawares , and that the crews , as is usual in times of perfect security , were with their families on shore  and many of those who were ready to sail , were taking leave of their friends .
Be this as it may , all seem to agree , that Drake made here a considerable booty , having taken from one ship a chest full of rials of plate , which he found concealed under the steerage , and , from other ships , silks and linen cloth to a considerable value .
He did not , however , remain long in this harbour , but hastened in pursuit of the Cacafuego , which ship had sailed but three days before , and which , they were here informed , was bound to Paita .
In the pursuit , they fell in with another ship , out of which they took a large quantity of gold , together with a crucifix of the same metal , richly adorned with emeralds .
They continued the pursuit  but , having gained intelligence , that , instead of Paita , she was gone to Panama , Drake crouded all the sail he could , and , to encourage the pursuers , promised , that whoever first descried the prize should have his gold chain as a reward  which fell to the lot of his brother John .
On the 1st of March they came up with her , and , after exchanging a few shot , they boarded her , and found not only a  quantity of jewels , and thirteen chests of money , but eighty pounds weight of gold , and twenty-six tons of uncoined silver , with services of wrought plate to a great value .
In unlading this prize they spent six days  and then dismissing the Spaniards , stood off again to sea .
Lopez Vaz , a Spanish writer , tells us , that in less than 24 hours after their departure from Lima in pursuit of the Cacafuego , news was brought that Drake was upon the coast , but that the Governor had already assembled the force of the country to oppose his landing  and that , finding he had left the harbour , he ordered three ships with six pieces of cannon ( being all he could collect ) , and 250 men , to pursue him : but , the equipment of these vessels necessarily requiring time , Drake had gained the advantage of them : and , coming within sight of the prize off Cape Francisco , the Captain of which , Juan de Anton , a Biscayan , seeing at a distance a ship crouded with sails , and imagining the Viceroy of Peru had dispatched her on some message to him , struck his sails , and lay to till Drake approaching nearer , he discovered his mistake .
He would then have made his escape , but Drake nearing him fast with his great ordnance , against which the Captain could make no defence , he was constrained to yield .


`` There was in this ship , adds the Spaniard , eight hundred and fifty thousand pezoes of silver , and forty thousand pezoes of gold , all which silver and gold was customed : but what treasure  they had uncustomed , I know not  for many times they carry almost as much more as they pay custom for  otherwise the King would take it from them , if they should be known to have any great sum  wherefore every ship carries a bill of custom , that the King may see it .
All the treasure which Drake took was merchants and other mens goods , saving 180,000 pezoes of the king 's .
He had also out of this ship good store of victuals , with other necessaries , which were to be carried from Panama , and was five days in taking out such things as he needed .
`` This done , he sailed to the coast of New Spain , without going to Panama .
The ships that were sent by the viceroy of Peru from Lima , arrived off Cape St. Francisco 20 days after Drake had taken the Cacafuego , and had intelligence by a ship coming from Panama , which they met at the said Cape , that Francis Drake had taken the ship with silver , and was not gone for Panama  whereupon the Commander of the three ships , thinking that Captain Drake had been gone for the Straits of Magellan , directed his course that way to seek him . ''


Thus Drake , changing his course to the west , escaped his enemies , and fell in with a ship from the East Indies laden with silks , China ware , and cotton .
The owner , a Spaniard , was on board , who presented Drake with a falcon wrought in massy gold , with an emerald set in  the breast of it , the largest he had ever beheld .
With this present , and a golden cup from the pilot , Drake was contented , and dismissed the ship , taking only four chests of China ware , which at that time was of great value in Europe .


On the 13th of March they came in sight of land , which happened to be a small island about , two leagues from the main continent .
There they found a harbour , and anchored in five fathom water , where they staid till the 20th , on which day , a little coasting frigate passing by , was pursued by the pinnace , boarded , and taken .
Being laden with sasaparilla , honey , butter , and other country goods , Drake unloaded the sasaparilla , and in the room of it put the gold and silver from his own ship , in order to heave her up , to new caulk her sides , and stop her leaks  in which service the crew were employed till the 26th of the same month , when having reloaded the cargo , and taken in a sufficient quantity of wood and water , they continued their course westward along the coast , taking the Spanish frigate with them to bear them company .


On April 6 , a little before sun-set , they discovered a ship , that held on her course about two leagues to seaward from the main land .
To this ship they gave chace , and before morning they neared her , and suddenly boarded her while the men slept .
Being masters of this prize without resistance , they ordered the prisoners on board their own ship , among whom was one Don Francisco Xarate , who meant to sail to Panama ,  and from thence to China , with the letters and patents that were found in his possession ( among which were the letters of the King of Spain to the Governor of the Philippines )  as also the sea charts wherewith they were to be directed in their voyage , which were of admirable use to Drake in his return home .
From this ship they took great quantities of bale goods , and other valuable merchandize , and then dismissed her .
They also took a young negro girl , whom Drake or some of his companions having got with child , they afterwards inhumanly set her on shore on an island in their way home , just as she was ready to lie in  of which notice will be taken in its proper place .
Having retained a Spanish pilot from this ship , they obliged him to direct them to a safe harbour , where they might supply themselves with provisions for their intended voyage .
This man brought them to the harbour of Anguatulco , or , as others write , Guatalco , where arriving on the 13th of April , they staid till the 26th of the same month , and then set sail , having first dismissed all their Spanish prisoners , together with Nuno da Sylva , the Portugueze pilot , whom they brought from the Canaries , and who had served them faithfully in all their trials and dangers  in reward for which he was now abandoned by Drake to the mercy of the enemy .
This man , when he landed on the continent , was first carried to Mexico , and there put to the torture to make discoveries .
He was afterwards sent prisoner into Old Spain , and  there examined  and , having given a faithful relation of all he knew , was released , and returned home to his own country , where he published , as has already been said , an account of the voyage as far as he went , which was afterwards translated into all the European language  and universally read .


On their arrival at Anguatulco , they had no sooner landed than Drake with part of his men marched up to the town , where they found the chief magistrate sitting in judgment upon a parcel of poor savages , and ready to pass sentence of death upon almost all of them , they being charged with a conspiracy to kill their masters , and set fire to the town .
Drake changed the scene , and made judges and criminals , without distinction , his prisoners , conducting them all in procession to his ship .
Here he made the judge write an order to the Commanding Officer to deliver up the town , in which they found a great pot , says my author , as big as a bushel , full of rials of plate , a gold chain , and a few jewels .
The gold chain was taken from a gentleman who was making his escape from the town , but was intercepted by an English sailor , who rifled him of all the valuables he had about him , of which the gold chain was thought to be of the least value .


Being now sufficiently enriched , and having given over all hopes of finding their associates , and , perhaps , beginning to be infected with that desire of ease and pleasure which is the natural  Figure 6 .
Drake Conveying the Spanish Judges and Criminal Savages , of Anguatulco , in Procession on Board his own Ship .
 consequence of wealth obtained by successful villainy , or , what is still more probable , being in fear of a surprize before they had secured their booty , they began to consult about their return home  and , in pursuance of Drake 's advice , resolved first to find out some convenient harbour where they might more safely lie and equip themselves for the voyage , and then endeavour to discover a nearer passage from the South Seas into the Atlantic Ocean  a passage that would not only enable them to return home with full security , and in a shorter time , but would much facilitate the navigation into those parts , and of course immortalize their names .
For this purpose they had recourse to a port in the island of Canes , where they met with fish , wood , and fresh water  and , being sufficiently stored with other provisions , with which they had supplied themselves from their prizes and at Anguatulco , they set sail first with a resolution of seeking a passage by the north-west , and , if that failed , by the Moluccas , and thence , following the course of the Portugueze , to return by the Cape of Good Hope .


In pursuance of the first resolution , they sailed about 600 leagues , till coming into the latitude of 43 deg .
north , they found the air so excessive cold , that the men could no longer bear to handle the ropes to navigate the ship : they , therefore , changed their course till they came into the latitude of 38 deg .
and 30 min .
under which height they discovered a very good harbour ,  and , fortunately , had a favourable wind to enable them to enter it .


Here , on the 17th of June , they cast anchor , and , in a short time , had opportunities of observing that the natives of that country were not less sensible than themselves  for , the next day , there came a man rowing in his canoe towards the ship , and , at a distance from it , made a long oration with very extraordinary gesticulations , and great appearance of vehemence  and , a little time afterwards , made a second visit in the same manner  and then returning a third time , he presented them , after his harangue was finished , with a kind of crown of black feathers , such as their kings wear upon their heads , and a basket of rushes filled with a particular herb , both which he fastened to a short stick , and threw into the boat : nor could he be prevailed upon to receive any thing in return , though pushed towards him upon a board , only he took up a hat that was flung in the water .


Three days afterwards , the ship , having received some damage at sea , was brought nearer to land , that her lading might be taken out  in order to which , the English , who had now learned not to commit their lives too negligently to the mercy of savage nations , raised a kind of fortification with earth and palissades , and erected their tents within it .
All this was not beheld by the inhabitants without the utmost astonishment , which incited them to come down in crouds to the coast , with no other view , as it  afterwards appeared , but to compliment the beautiful strangers that had condescended to touch upon their country .


Drake , neither confiding too much in appearances , nor wholly distrusting the friendly disposition of the inhabitants , directed them to lay aside their bows and arrows , and , on their approach , presented them with linen and other necessaries , of which he shewed them the use .
They then returned to their habitations , about three quarters of a mile from the English camp , where they made such loud and violent noises , that they were heard by the English , who had vanity enough to believe that they were paying them a kind of melancholy adoration .


Two days afterwards , they perceived the approach of a far more numerous company , who stopt at the top of a hill which over-looked the English settlement , while one of them made a long oration , at the end of which all the assembly bowed their bodies , and pronounced the syllable Oh with a solemn tone , as by way of confirmation of what had been said by the orator .
Then the men laying down their bows , and leaving their women and children on the top of the hill , came down towards the tents , and seemed transported in the highest degree at the kindness of Drake , who received their gifts , and admitted them to his presence .
The women at a distance appeared seized with a kind of phrenzy , such as that of old among the Pagans in some of their religious ceremonies , and  in honour as it seemed of their guests , tore their cheeks and bosoms with their nails , and threw themselves upon the stones with their naked bodies .


Three days after this , on June 25 , 1579 , Drake received two Ambassadors from the Hioh , or King , of the country , who , intending to visit the camp , required that some token might be sent him of friendship and peace .
This request was readily complied with  and soon after came the King , attended by a guard of about an hundred tall men , and preceded by an Officer of State , who carried a sceptre made of black wood , adorned with chains made of a kind of bone or horn , which are marks of the highest honour among them .
Behind him was the King himself , dressed in a coat of beasts skins , with a crown woven with feathers upon his head .
His attendants followed , dressed nearly in the same manner all but the crown  and after them came the common people , with baskets platted so artificially that they held water , in which , by way of present , they brought roots and fish .


Drake , not lulled into security , ranged his men in order of battle , and waited their approach , who coming nearer stood still , while the scepter-bearer made an oration  at the conclusion of which , they came again forward at the foot of the hill , and then the scepter-bearer began a song , which he accompanied with a dance , in both which the men joined , but the women  Figure 7 .
illegible  danced without singing .
Drake now distrusting them no longer , admitted them into his fortification , where they continued their song and dance a short time  and then both the King and some others of the company made a long harangue , in which it appeared , by the rest of their behaviour , that they entreated them to accept of the government of their country  and the King , with the concurrence of the rest , placed the Crown upon Drake 's head , graced him with the chains and other signs of authority , and saluted him with the title of Hioh .
The kingdom thus offered , though of no farther value to him than that it furnished him with present necessaries , Drake thought it not prudent for him to refuse  and , therefore , took possession of it in the name of Queen Elizabeth , not without ardent wishes that this acquisition might be of use to his native country .
The kingdom being thus consigned , and the grand affair at an end , the common people left their King and his Nobles with Drake , and dispersed themselves over the camp  and when they saw any one that pleased them more than the rest , they tore their flesh and vented their outcries , as before , in token of reverence and respect .
They then proceeded to shew them their wounds and diseases , in hopes , perhaps , of a miraculous cure  to which the English , to benefit and undeceive them at the same time , applied such remedies as they used on like occasions .
 They were now grown confident and familiar , and came down to the camp every day , repeating their ceremonies , till they were more fully informed how disagreeable they were to those whose favour they were so studious of obtaining .
They then visited them without ceremony , indeed , but with a curiosity so ardent , that it left them no leisure to provide the necessaries of life , with which the English were , therefore , obliged to supply them .
They had , then , sufficient opportunity to remark the custom and disposition of these new allies , whom they found tractable and benevolent , strong of body far beyond the English , yet unfurnished with weapons either for assault or defence , their bows being too weak for any thing but sport .
Their dexterity in taking fish was such , that , if they saw them so near the shore that they could come to them without swimming , they never missed them .


The same curiosity that had brought them in such crouds to the shore , now induced Drake and some of his companions to travel up into their country , which they found at some distance from the coast very fruitful , filled with large deer , and abounding with a peculiar kind of cunnies smaller than ours , with tails like rats , paws such as those of a mole , and bags under their chins , in which they carry provisions to their young .


The houses of the inhabitants were round holes dug in the ground , from the brink of which they raise rafters , or poles , shelving towards the middle , where they all met in a  ridge , and are crampt together  the people lie upon rushes , and make the fire in the middle of the house , letting the smoke fly out at the door .
The men are generally naked  but the women make a kind of petticoat of bulrushes , which they comb like hemp , and throw the skin of a deer over their shoulders .
They are very modest , tractable , and obedient to their husbands .
The soil is but badly cultivated  but contentment seems to prevail in a very eminent degree among all ranks of this happy people .


The land was named by Drake New Albion , from its white cliffs , in which it bore some resemblance to his native country , and the whole history of the resignation of it to the English was engraven on a piece of brass , then nailed on a post , and fixed up before their departure , which being now discovered by the people to be near at hand , they could not forbear perpetual lamentations .


When the English on the 23d of July weighed anchor , they saw them climbing to the tops of hills , that they might keep them in sight , and observed fires lighted up in many parts of the country , on which , as they supposed , sacrifices were offered .


Near to this harbour , they touched at some islands where they found abundance of seals  and , despairing now to find any passage through the northern regions , they , after a general consultation , determined to steer away to the Moluccas  and , setting sail July 25 , they held a  western course for 68 days without sight of land  and , on September 30 , arrived within view of some islands , about 20 deg .
northward from the Line , from whence the inhabitants resorted to them in canoes hollowed in the middle , and raised at both ends so high above the water , that they seemed almost a semi-circle  they were burnished in such a manner , that they shone like ebony , and were kept steady by a piece of timber fixed on each side of them .
The first company that came brought fruits , bananas , and other things of no great value , with an appearance of traffic , and exchanged their lading for other commodities with great show of honesty and friendship .
But having , as they imagined , laid all suspicion asleep , they sent another fleet of canoes , of which the crews behaved with all the insolence of savages , and all the rapacity of thieves  for , whatever was suffered to come into their hands , they seemed to consider as their own , and would neither pay for it nor restore it : and , at length , finding the English resolved to admit them no longer , they discharged a shower of stones from their boats , which insult Drake prudently and generously returned , by firing his great guns without hurting them  at which they were so terrified , that they leaped into the water , and hid themselves under their canoes .


Here we can not help remarking how nearly this description agrees with the accounts given by the late navigators , of the temper and disposition of the inhabitants of the islands lately discovered  between the Tropics .
Drake , indeed , found the firing of his guns without hurting them , sufficient to intimidate these ignorant people  but our later voyagers have thought their vengeance not complete for any slight insult , without murdering them by wholesale to strike them with terror .
The writer of the late voyages says , ' `` Our men shewed as much impatience to destroy them as a sportsman to kill his game . '' '


Having for some time but little wind , they did not arrive at the Moluccas till the 3d of November  and then , designing to touch at Tidore , as they coasted along the island Mutua , belonging to the King of Ternate , they were visited by his Viceroy , who informed them , that it would be more advantageous for them to have recourse to his master for supplies , than to the Portuguese , with whom he was at enmity .
Drake was , by the arguments of the Viceroy , prevailed upon to alter his resolution  and , on November the 5th , cast anchor before Ternate .
Scarce was he arrived , before the Viceroy , with others of the chief nobility , came out in three large barges rowed by forty men on each side , to conduct the ship into a safe harbour  and , soon after , the King himself , having received a velvet cloak by a messenger from Drake , as a token of peace , came with such a retinue and dignity of appearance , as was not expected in those remote parts of the world .
He was received with discharges of cannon , and every kind of music ,  with which he was so much delighted , that he invited the performers on board his barge .


The King was of a graceful stature and royal carriage , of a mild aspect and low voice .
His attendants were dressed in white cotton or callico , of whom some , whose age gave them a venerable appearance , seemed as counsellors , and the rest officers or nobles .
His guards were not ignorant of fire-arms , but had not many among them , being equipped for the most part with bows and darts .
The King , having spent some time in admiring the new objects that presented themselves , retired as soon as the ship was brought to anchor , and promised to return on the day following  and in the mean time the inhabitants , having leave to traffic , brought down provisions in great abundance .
The King came not aboard , according to his promise , but sent his brother to excuse him , and withal to invite Drake ashore , proposing to stay himself as an hostage for his return .
Drake declined going himself , but sent some gentlemen of his retinue in company with the King 's brother , and kept the Viceroy till their return .


These gentlemen were received by another of the King 's brothers , and conducted in great state to the castle , where there was a court of , at least 1000 persons , among whom were threescore ancient men , privy counsellors to the King  and on each side of the gate without , stood four old men of foreign countries , who served as interpreters in commerce .
In a short  time appeared the King himself , drest in Cloth of gold , with his hair woven into gold ringlets , a chain of gold upon his neck , and on his fingers rings very artificially set with diamonds and jewels of great value .
Over his head was borne a rich canopy  and by his chair of state stood a page with a fan set with sapphires , to moderate the excess of the heat .
Here he received the compliments of the English , and then honourably dismissed them .
The castle , which they had some opportunity of observing , seemed of no great force .
It was built by the Portuguese , who , attempting to reduce this kingdom into absolute subjection , murdered the King , and intended to pursue their plot by the destruction of all his sons .
But the general abhorrence which cruelty and perfidy naturally excite , armed the whole nation against them , and procured their total expulsion from all the dominions of Ternate , which , from that time , increasing in power , continued to make new conquests , and to deprive them of other acquisitions .


Here they shipt between four and five tons of cloves , intending to bring them to Europe .
While they lay before Ternate , a gentleman came on board attended by his Portuguese interpreter .
He was dressed somewhat in the European manner , and soon distinguished himself from the natives of Ternate , or any country they had ever yet seen , by his civility and quick comprehension .
Such a visitant may easily be  imagined to excite their curiosity , which he gratified by informing them that he was a native of China , of the family of the King then upon the throne  and that being accused of a capital crime , of which , though he was innocent , he had not sufficient evidence to clear himself , he had petitioned the Emperor that he might not be exposed to a trial  but that his cause might be referred to Divine Providence  and that he might be allowed to leave his country , with a prohibition against returning , unless heaven , in attestation of his innocence , should enable him to bring back to the King some intelligence that might be to the honour and advantage of the Empire of China .
In search of such information he had now spent three years , and left Tidore for the sake of conversing with the English General , from whom he hoped to receive such accounts as would enable him to return with honour and safety .
Drake , whether he credited or disbelieved his story , caused a recital to be made by one of the company , who talked the language of the interpreter , of such adventures and observations as he judged would be most pleasing to his visitor , to all which the Chinese Exile gave the utmost attention  and , having caused them to be repeated a second time , to impress them in his mind , thanked the Creator of the World for the knowledge he had gained .
He then proposed to the General to sail to his country , to which he willingly undertook to be his pilot ,  but Drake could not be induced to prolong his voyage .


He therefore set sail , on Nov. the 9th , in quest of a more convenient harbour , where he might clean and refit his ship , which , by the length of the voyage , and the heat of the climate , was now become foul and leaky .
Directing his course southward , he soon fell in with an uninhabited island , which , by its appearance , promised fair to answer his purpose .
At a distance it looked like a beautiful grove  the trees were large , strait , and lofty  but , what was more extraordinary , they were interspersed with such an astonishing number of shining flies , that the whole island in the night seemed to glow with fire .
Here they found a convenient haven , and here they landed and continued 26 days .
They found upon this island tortoise , but of a monstrous size , and various sorts of fruits of a delicious flavour .


Leaving this place on the 12th of December , they cruelly deserted the unhappy mulatto girl , whom they had taken for their pleasure from a ship that fell into their hands on the coast of New Spain .
They had , at the same time , taken on board a negroe youth , who they thought might be serviceable to them in conversing with his nation in their way home  but , finding him of little or no use on board , and provisions beginning to fail , they pretended to send this simple couple far into the country to gather fruits , and , in the mean time , unmoored  the ship , and hoisted sail  and , before the return of the victims , were out of sight of their tears , and out of hearing of their cries : a melancholy instance this of the depravity of man 's heart , and of the relentless cruelty of minds addicted to rapine and lust .
The poor girl , not yet fifteen , was ready to be delivered of an innocent babe  and the youth , not twenty , was the only resource in the midst of her distress .
What befel them can not be known : but Providence seemed to punish the perfidy of the crew by a severe trial of their fortitude soon after .


Having a wind not very favourable , they happened to be intangled among a multitude of islands , interspersed with dangerous shallows , till January the 9th , 1580 .
When they thought themselves clear , and were sailing along with a brisk gale  they were , at the beginning of the night , suddenly surprized in their course by a sudden shock , the cause of which was instantly discovered , for they were thrown upon a concealed rock , and , by the speed of their course , fixed too fast for any hope of escaping .


Here the intrepidity of Drake was shaken , and his dexterity baffled : here all the horrors of mind , attendant on conscious guilt , concurred to aggravate the distress of those who were instrumental in abandoning the harmless slaves .
Those who were innocent reproached the guilty with being the authors of their present distress  and , among the rest , Mr. Fletcher , the Chaplain , exclaimed against the Captain , as one whose crimes of murder and lust had brought down  divine vengeance on all the company .
Drake , who knew well how to dissemble his resentment , judging this an improper time to encourage disputes , endeavoured , by every means in his power , to appease the increasing animosity .
To preserve , therefore , the minds of the company at rest , he found it necessary to keep their hands employed , and , for that purpose , ordered the pumps to be constantly plied .
Convinced by this experiment that the water did not gain upon them in the hold , he conceived hopes , that , by lightening the ship , they might possibly be able to heave her off .
He knew it would be in vain to persuade them to part with their treasure , and , therefore , he first caused the guns to be thrown overboard , and then the spices  and , afterwards , the water-casks to be bulged , being in hopes , that , if they could be released , water might again be supplied from the neighbouring islands , some of which were at no great distance .
His next attempt was to discover about the shallows some place where they might six an anchor , in order to bring their ship to , and , by that means , clear her from the rock : but , upon examination , it was found that the rock on which they had struck , rose , as many others in those seas do , almost perpendicular , and that there was no anchorage , nor any bottom to be fathomed a boat 's length from the ship .
But this discovery was by Drake wisely concealed from the common sailors , lest they should abandon themselves to despair , for which there was , indeed , much cause , there being no prospect left ,  but that they must there sink along with the ship .


In this deplorable situation they had remained for four and twenty hours , when Drake , finding all human efforts vain , addressed himself to his companions in distress , and exhorted them to lay aside all animosities , and prepare themselves , by forgiving each other , for obtaining that mercy through Christ , which they could not hope to receive on any other terms . '
`` On this occasion , '' says my author , `` every thief reconciled himself to his fellow-thief , and Fletcher administered the sacrament to them all . '' '
At length , when their hopes had forsaken them , and no new struggles could be made , they were , on a sudden , relieved by the wind 's shifting , and a fresh breeze springing up , which taking the ship on the leeward quarter , she reeled off the rock , without receiving any very dangerous hurt , to the unspeakable joy of every soul on board .


This was the greatest and most inextricable distress which they had suffered , and made such an impression upon their minds , that for some time afterwards they durst not adventure to spread their sails , but went slowly forward with the utmost circumspection , till , arriving at the fruitful island of Baretene , they entered the port to repair what damage the ship had received upon the rock .
They found the people of this island of an amiable and obliging disposition , courteous in their manners , and honest  in their dealings .
They are finely proportioned , tall of stature , and of comely features , The men , in general , go naked  but the women cover themselves from the waist downwards , are modest , yet not insensible of love and pleasure .
They found the island abounding with every necessary , and not a few of the comforts of life .


Having repaired the ship and refreshed the men , they continued their course without any material occurrence till the 11th of March , when they came to anchor before the island of Java , and sending to the King a present of cloth and silks , received from him in return a present supply of refreshments  and on the day following Drake went himself on shore , and entertained the King with music , and obtained leave to store his ship with provisions .
This island was governed by a great number of petty Kings or Rayas , subordinate to one Chief .
Of these princes three came on board together a few days after their arrival , and having , upon their return , recounted the wonders they had seen , and the civilities with which they had been treated , incited others to satisfy their curiosity in the same manner  and Raya Denan , the chief King , came himself to view the ship , with the warlike armaments and instruments of navigation .
This intercourse of civilities somewhat retarded the business for which they came  but , at length , they not only victualled their ship , but payed the bottom , which was the  more necessary frequently to be repeated , as , at that time , sheathing of ships was not in practice .


The Javans were at this time a warlike people , well armed , with swords , targets , and daggers , forged by themselves , and exquisitely wrought .
They were sociable , full of vivacity , and beyond description happy .
They were likewise hospitable to strangers , and not at all addicted to thievery , the general characteristic of the islanders in the Pacific Sea .


From Java Drake intended to have visited the Malaccas , but his company became troublesome , being desirous of returning home .
On this occasion he called to mind the speech of Master Fletcher , while they remained hopeless upon the rock , and , under pretence of his spiriting up the people to oppose him , he caused him , says my author , ' `` to be made fast by one of his legs with a chain , and a staple knocked fast into the hatches , in the forecastle of the ship .
He called all the company together , and then put a lock about one of his legs  and Drake , sitting cross-legged on a chest , and a pair of pantofles in his hand , he said , Francis Fletcher , I do here excommunicate thee out of the Church of God , and from all the benefits and graces thereof , and I renounce thee to the devil and all his angels  and then he charged him , upon pain of death , not once to come before the must  for , if he did , he swore he should  be hanged , and Drake caused a posey to be written , and bound about Fletcher 's arm , with charge , that if he took it off he should then be hanged  the posey was , FRANCIS FLETCHER , THE FALSEST KNAVE THAT LIVETH . '' '
It does not , however , appear how long he was obliged to wear this posey , as it is called .
But Drake was obliged to alter his resolution , and comply with the company 's desires .


On the 25th of March , 1580 , he , therefore , took his departure , and , on the 15th of June , they doubled the Cape of Good Hope , having then on board his ship fifty-seven men , and but three casks of water .


On the 12th of July they passed the Line , reached the coast of Guinea on the 16th , and on July the 22d arrived at Sierra Leona , after a most delightful passage , in which they discovered how much the Portuguse had abused the world in their false representations of the horrors and dangers that attended the navigation round the Cape .
At Sierra Leona they staid two days to refresh the men , and , having furnished themselves with wood and water for the remainder of the voyage , they set sail for England in high expectation of enjoying in their own country the spoils they had taken from the Spaniards .


On the 11th of September they made the island of Ferara , and , on the third of November , they entered the harbour of Plymouth .
in this voyage Drake surrounded the world ,  which no Commander in Chief had ever done before  and what , at that time appeared a thing extraordinary , by steering a western course they had lost a day in their account .


Their success in this voyage , and the immense wealth * they brought home , raised much discourse throughout the kingdom  some highly commending , and some as loudly decrying the principles upon which it was acquired .
The former alledged , that this enterprize was not only honourable to the Commander who conducted , and the crew who assisted in the performance of it , but to their country  that it would establish our reputation for maritime skill in foreign nations , and raise a laudable spirit of emulation at home  and that , as to the money , our merchants having suffered deeply by the treachery  and villainy of the Spaniards in the new discovered country , there was nothing more just than that the nation should receive an equivalent by the reprisals which Drake and his company , at the hazard of their lives , had bravely extorted .


The other party argued , that Drake , in fact , was no better than a pirate  that , of all others , it least became a trading nation to countenance such depredations  that the expedition was not only a breach of all our treaties with Spain , but likewise of our old leagues with the House of Burgundy  and that the consequences would infallibly involve the Queen in a war , by which the nation would suffer infinitely more than the riches acquired by a single ship could counter-balance .


These were the sentiments , and these the speculations with which the different parties amused themselves for some time after the arrival of Drake in his native country .
At length , the approbation of the Queen determined the dispute  for all acquiesced in the wisdom of their Sovereign .


On the 4th of April , 1581 , her Majesty went to Deptford , and dined on board the ship in which so many Kings had been entertained before  and , after dinner , she conferred the honour of knighthood on her Commander  an honour not to be obtained in those days on trivial occasions , but as a reward for signal services .
This mark of distinction was a full declaration of her Majesty 's approbation , silenced Drake 's enemies , and gave joy to his friends .
She likewise gave  directions for the preservation of the ship , that it might remain a monument of his own and his country 's glory .


What contributed the more to render the fame of Drake illustrious , was the frequent attempts that had been made by navigators , the most renowned in their time , to atchieve the same  but without success .
In 1527 the Spaniards sent Gracca de Loaisa , a Knight of Malta , with a squadron of seven ships to follow the rout of Magellan , who , though his ship returned to Spain , yet he himself lost his life , before he arrived at the Malaccas , the promised islands .
Loaisa passed the straits , indeed , lost some of his ships in the South Seas , others put into the ports of New Spain , and only his own vessel and one more reached the East Indies , where himself and all his people perished .


In 1526 , the Genoese sent two ships to pass the straits , of which one was cast away , and the other returned home without effecting any thing .


Sebastian Cabot , in the service of the crown of Portugal , made the like trial  but , not being able to find the straits , returned into the river of Plate .


Americus Vespusius , a Florentine , from whom the new world received its name , undertook to perform , in the service of the crown of Portugal , what Cabot had promised without effect  but that vain man was still more unfortunate  for he could neither find the straits , nor the river of Plate .


 Some years after this , the Spaniards equipped a stout squadron , under the command of Simon de Alcasara  but , before they reached the height of the straits , the crews mutinied , and obliged their Commander to return .


Such repeated miscarriages , discouraged even the ablest and boldest seamen  so that from this time both Spaniards and others dropped all thoughts of emulating Magellan , till Drake conceiving his designs , as has already been said , concealed it in his breast till ripe for execution .


Being now advanced to eminence , in 1585 he was employed in the Queen 's service , and sent on an expedition to the West Indies as Commander in Chief  and having under him Captain Martin Forbisher , Captain Knollys , and other experienced Officers of the royal navy , he took St. Jago , St. Domingo , Carthagena , and St. Augustin .
He returned elated with his success  but , as my author says , not much enriched by the plunder .


In 1587 , he was again employed in an expedition to Lisbon , in which Captain Forbisher also bore a part .
Here they gained intelligence that a considerable fleet was assembled in the bay of Cadiz , with a view to the forming an armament for the invasion of England  he immediately repaired to their place of rendezvouz , and fell upon them at unawares  and , as it is said , burnt 10,000 tons of shipping , with all the stores which they were amassing for the intended invasion .


 In their return they fell in with a carrack from the East Indies , richly laden , of which they likewise got intelligence in the port of Lisbon .
This was the St. Philip , of which Linschoten gives the following account , when this Dutchman was at Goa , the chief settlement of the Portuguese in the East Indies :


`` There came in , he says , from the island of Japan certain Jesuits , and with them three Princes , being the children of so many Kings of that country , wholly apparelled like Jesuits , not one of them above the age of 15 years , being minded by the persuasion of the Jesuits to visit Portingall , and from thence to go to Rome to see the Pope , thereby to procure great profit , privileges , and liberties for the missionaries in that island .
`` In 1584 , they set sail for Portingallo , and from thence travelled into Spain , where , by the King and all the Spanish nobility , they were with honour received , and presented with many gifts , which the Jesuits kept for themselves .


`` Out of Spain , they rode to see the Pope  that done , they travelled throughout Italy , where they were much honoured , and presented with many rich presents , by means of the great report the Jesuits made of them .


`` To conclude , they returned to Madrid , where with great honour they took their leave of the King , who furnished them with letters of recommendation to the Viceroy , and all  the Portingall Governors of India  so they went to Lisbon , and there took shipping in 1586 , and came to Goa in the ship called St. Philip , which ship , in her return to Portingall , was taken by Captain Drake , being the first that was taken coming from the East Indies  which the Portugueze took for an evil sign , because the ship bore the King 's own name  '' both Spain and Portugal being at that time governed by the same sovereign .


`` When the Princes and Jesuits of Japan arrived at Goa on their return from Europe , they were received , adds Linschoten , with great rejoicings  for it was verily thought they had all been dead .
On their landing they were all three apparelled in cloth of gold and silver after the Italian manner , being the same the Italian noblemen and gentlemen had given them .
They came to Goa very lively and in high spirits  and the Jesuits were not a little proud , that through their means the voyage had heen successfully performed .
In Goa they staid till the monsoon or time of the winds setting in to sail for China , and thence to Japan , where , with great triumph and wondering of all the people , they were received and welcomed home , to the great furtherance of the Jesuits . ''


The St. Philip , in her voyage to Goa , had been driven by stress of weather into Masambique , where she met with the St. Laurence , homeward bound , that had likewise been driven into the  same port disabled , having lost her masts , and received other considerable damage , by which she was rendered unserviceable .
The St. Philip , therefore , as soon as she had landed her passengers at Goa , returned to Masambique , and took in the lading of the St. Laurence , which enabled her to make her voyage to Europe about the usual time  a circumstance fortunate for Drake , as it increased both his fame and his fortune .


In 1588 , Drake was appointed Vice-Admiral under Charles Lord Effingham Howard , High-Admiral of England , to oppose the formidable armada that had for three years before been secretly preparing in Spain for the invasion of England .
In Drake 's letter to Lord Treasurer Burleigh , acquainting him with the approach of the Spaniards , he concludes with this elegant compliment to his superior : ' `` That , though the strength of the enemy out went report , yet the chearfulness and courage which the Lord Admiral expressed , gave all who had the honour to serve under him assurance of victory  '' ' a compliment which was the more admired in Drake , as in a former letter to the same Minister , in which he tells him of his gallant atchievement in the port of Cadiz , ' `` Not resting , said he , at Lisbon , we sailed so close to the Spanish King , that we signed his beard  '' ' a coarse metaphor , it must be owned , but strongly characteristic .


Drake 's good fortune still accompanied him  for in the engagement which afterwards happened on the arrival of the armada , though he committed  the greatest error that ever Commander was guilty of , by pursuing some hulks belonging to the Hans Towns for plunder , when he was entrusted to carry lights in the night for the direction of the English fleet , he misled the Admiral  yet he was the only Commander who profited most by the destruction of the enemy .
Lord Howard , supposing the lights of the Spanish Admiral to be the lights which Drake was ordered to carry , was entangled in the very centre of the Spanish fleet , before he found his mistake  but , fortunately , night favouring his escape , he disengaged himself before he was discovered .
This blunder was afterwards effaced by the gallant behaviour of Drake , than whom no man was ever bolder , or more determined .
We do not , however , find his name among the Commanders whom the Lord High Admiral thought proper to thank for their services on that occasion .
On the 2d of July , says Strype , Sir Francis , observing a large Spanish galleon , commanded by Don Pedro de Valdez , who was the reputed projector of the invasion , floating at a distance from both fleets , sent his pinnace to summon the Captain to surrender , who at first vauntingly set him at defiance  but being told it was Drake that required him to yield , he immediately struck his colours , and , with 46 of his crew , came on board the conqueror .
In this ship he found 50,000 ducats , with other effects to a much greater amount .


 The next year he was appointed Admiral of a squadron sent to place Don Antonio on the throne of Portugual , to which that Prince pretended to have a right .


`` But , says Rapin , ( whose account of this expedition we shall follow ) as the Queen was extremely frugal , and an undertaking against Spain could not but be very expensive , she so ordered it , that Drake and Norris took upon them to be at the charge , in hopes of making themselves amends by the booty they should meet with .
So she only found them six ships of war , with a present of 60,000 l. with leave to raise soldiers and sailors for the expedition .
Drake had already tried the Spaniards in America and in the channel , and was convinced they were more formidable in common opinion than in reality  wherefore , joining with Sir John Norris , and some other private persons , they equipped a fleet , and embarked 11,000 soldiers and 1500 marines .
The Hollanders having also added some ships , the fleet consisted , according to Stow , of 146 sail , transports and victuallers included .
Drake commanded at sea , and Norris was General of the land forces .
They took with them Don Antonio , who hoped by the assistance of the English , to be put in possession of his kingdom , where he pretended to have many friends .
`` They sailed from Plymouth on the 18th of April , and soon after arrived at the Groyne , where landing their troops , they assaulted the  lower town , and carried it by storm .
Then they besieged the upper town .
But Norris , having advice that the Conde di Andrada was approaching with a body of troops to relieve the place , suddenly raised the siege to march against him  and , overtaking him , slew 3000 of his men .
This done , he burnt several villages  and , without returning to the siege , re-embarked his troops , their principal design being against Portugal .


`` Whilst they were sailing towards the coasts of that kingdom , they were joined by the Earl of Essex , with some ships he had armed at his own charge , unknown to the Queen .
Some days after , they arrived at Panicha , a little town in Portugal , and , taking it , restored it to Don Antonio  from thence Norris marched by land to Lisbon , Drake promising to follow with the fleet up the Yagus .
The army marched 40 miles without opposition  and encamping before Lisbon , took the suburbs of St. Catharine : but , as Drake performed not his promise , and the army wanted cannon and ammunition , it was resolved in a council of war to retire .
This resolution was taken , because there was no appearance that the Portuguese were inclined to revolt , as Don Antonio had expected  and also , because there was no news of the succours he had boasted of from the King of Morocco .
The army marching towards the mouth of the Tagus , met Drake , who had taken the town  of Cascaes , and excused himself upon the impossibility of performing his promise , Some days after , the castle of Cascaes surrendering , it was blown up  and , to make themselves amends for the charges of the expedition , the English seized sixty vessels laden with corn , and all manner of naval stores to equip a new fleet against England , belonging to the Hans Towns .
Then they went and took Vigo , which was abandoned by the inhabitants  and , firing the town , returned to England .
This expedition did some damage to the King of Spain , but was of no benefit to Elizabeth  and the booty was not sufficient to pay for equipping the fleet , though Camden says , they brought home 150 pieces of heavy cannon , and a great booty .
Above six thousand men perished in this expedition by sickness . ''


The writers of Drake 's life say , that Norris grievously reproached Drake with breach of his promise , and charged the miscarriage of the expedition to his timidity .
Indeed , Drake 's good genius seems now to have forsaken him  and happy , say the same writers , if , having received this first check at play , he had withdrawn his stake .


As the war with Spain continued , Hawkins and Drake , who , as it should seem , wanted to continue their old game , where the profits were more , and the danger less , united their interest to persuade the Queen and Council to undertake an effectual expedition to the West Indies , by  which the nation might be enriched , and the enemy deprived of those resources by which they were enabled to carry on the war .


For this purpose they procured , according to Rapin , twenty-six of the queen 's ships , the equipment of which , like the former , seems to have been supplied by private adventure  a practice at that time very common , where plunder was to be the reward .
The preparations for this expedition , however , as it far exceeded all former enterprizes to the American Indies , could not be made so privately , or conducted so secretly , but that the Spaniards found means to discover both its strength and destination , and prepared themselves accordingly .


As the places that were to be attacked lay at a great distance , it was necessary to gain time , in order to fortify them .
It was , therefore , found necessary to devise some expedient to prevent the sailing of that formidable armament , till every thing was in readiness to oppose it .
Accordingly , it was given out , that a second invasion was intended against England  and when the Spanish fleet was ready to sail for America , that had been equipping under pretence of an invasion , a sham attack was made upon Cornwall , in order to spread an alarm , and give it countenance .


This had the desired effect .
It was thought improper to part with so many stout ships while the nation was threatened  and the expedition was therefore retarded , till the panic had subsided .


 It was therefore the 28th of August , in 1595 , before the Commanders obtained permission to sail  and in the mean time the Queen having received advice that the plate fleet was safe arrived in Eorope , and that only one ship , which had sprung her mast , remained behind , her Majesty acquainted them with the intelligence , and advised them to attack Porto Rico , before they pursued their grand enterprize , by which they might make themselves masters of the galleon without losing much time in the conquest .


Sir Francis Drake , who was not formed to act in conjunct expeditions , had not been long at sea before he differed in opinion from his fellow Commander , and pursued a project totally different from the first object of the voyage , in which , however , he was seconded by Sir Thomas Baskerville , Commander of the land forces .
This scheme was to attack the Canaries in the way to America  in which , however , they failed  and spending necessarily much time in the island of Dominica in landing and refreshing the men , who , being unused to long voyages in hot climates , were many of them unfit to proceed , the Spaniards had so effectually prepared themselves , that , when the Generals came to action , they found an opposition very different from what they expected  and were soon sensible , that what they had formerly effected by surprize with a handful of sailors , was not now to be accomplished with a whole army of disciplined troops .


 In their course to Porto Rico , one of the sternmost ships of the English fleet fell into the hands of five Spanish frigates that had been sent from Spain to convoy home the galleon from that port .
From this ship they gained the intelligence of the intended attack , the consequences of which being foreseen by Sir John Hawkins , it threw him into a sudden disorder , of which in a few days he died - some say , of a broken heart .


They were now , Nov. 12 , 1595 , before Porto , Rico , and the same Evening that Sir John Hawkins died , as the principal officers were at supper , a cannon-shot from the port pierced the cabin , killed Sir Nicholas Clifford , wounded Captain Stratford , mortally wounded Sir Brute Browne , and struck the stool from under Sir Francis Drake , as he was drinking success to the attack .


The next day , pursuant to a resolution of a council of war , a general attack was made upon the shipping in the harbour , but without effect .
The Spaniards suffered much , but the English more  who , finding it impossible to make an impression upon the fortifications of the town , weighed anchor , and steered to Rio de la Hacha , set fire to the town and burned it to the ground : they likewise performed some other exploits of the like kind  but having landed the troops destined to cross the isthmus to attack Panama , after a fatiguing march in which they were great sufferers , they returned , without being able to  reach the place .
This disappointment materially affected Drake , who having , as he thought , provided a sufficient force to carry into execution the enterprize which he had well-nigh effected with a few sailors and Symerons some years before , could not bear the thought of surviving his disgrace . '
`` Now , says Fuller , began the discontent of Sir Francis Drake to feed upon him .
He conceived , that expectation , a merciless usurer , computing each day since his departure , exacted an interest and return of honour and profit proportionable to his great preparations , and transcending his former atchievements .
He saw that all the good which he had done in his voyage , consisted in the evil he had done the Spaniards afar off , whereof he could present but small visible fruits in England .
These apprehensions , accompanying , if not causing , the disease of the flux , wrought his sudden death  and sickness did not so much untie his cloaths , as sorrow did rend at once the robe of his mortality asunder .
He lived by the sea , died on it , and was buried in it . '' '


This account of the manner of Sir Francis Drake 's death seems to be authentic , though some have not scrupled to insinuate , that sickness had no part in that catastrophe .
Be that as it may , Fuller 's reflections upon it deserve to be remembered . '
`` Thus , says he , we see how great spirits , having mounted to the highest pitch of performance , afterwards strain and  break their credit in striving to go beyond it .
Or , it may be , God oftentimes leaves the brightest men in an eclipse , to shew that they do but borrow their lustre from his reflection . '' '


Thus we have endeavoured to trace the actions of this celebrated navigator from beginning to end .
If we have withdrawn the veil , which has hitherto covered his infirmities , it has been in the pursuit of truth  not with a design to detract from his real merit , but to shew his character in the true light .
In the current of success , crimes of the deepest die are sometimes even patronized by the public .
The actions which gave rise to Drake 's popularity , are such as a courageous leader , with an hundred armed followers , might in these peaceable times easily perform , by entering the cities or towns on the coast of Britain , in the dead of night , cutting the throats of the watch , and all who happen to be awake in the streets , breaking open and plundering houses , and churches , seizing every thing valuable that should fall into their hands , and before the people could recover from their consternation , making their escape with their booty .
Were such a company masters of an armed vessel , if there were no ship of force to oppose them , what should hinder their sailing from place to place , and , provided they could out-run report , performing the like exploits in every town they came to ?
Would there be anything truly great in this ?
Or would the man  who should undertake and execute an enterprize of such a horrid nature , be justly entitled to the name of Hero ?
If not , what shall we say of Drake 's nocturnal enterprize on Nombre de Dios  of his way-laying the treasure in the road from Panama  of his ranging the unarmed coasts of Chili and Peru  and of his plundering villages , towns , and ships belonging to a peaceable unsuspecting people , with whom his nation was at peace , and from whom opposition was not to be dreaded ?
What , indeed , did the people at that time say ?
Those who were the sufferers cried out loudly against the plunderer  and Bernardine de Mendoza , the Spanish Ambassador at the court of Queen Elizabeth , insisted that he should be punished for his robberies , and that all the money and effects he had seized should be restored  but , if the Queen was a private adventurer , as , from Drake 's declaration to his followers , and from other instances of the womanish littlenesses of that Princess , there is reason to suspect , What hope was there of justice or restitution from remonstrance ?
Indeed , it served that avaricious Queen for a pretence to sequester the treasure which Drake brought home , and to convert , it is probable , the greatest part of it to her own use  for , as we have already shewn from good authority in a note , though the whole booty was valued at 800,000 l. yet only 80,000 l. was divided among the plunderers  and Rapin tells us , that some part of the treasure was afterwards repaid  by the Queen to Spain .
If she had not retained enough in her hands , no one will suppose , that the Sovereign , who could cause the goods of her favourite Leicester to be set to public sale after his death , for the payment of money she had lent him , would have repaid to Spain from her own coffers the plunder that had been unjustly taken by one of her meaner subjects .


To dignify actions , therefore , of the most infamous piracy with the name of great , is to exalt vice , and to substitute successful villainy in the place of substantial virtue .
If we view Drake in the light of a courageous plunderer , he may vie with the De la Poles , the Blackbeards , or any of those daring disturbers of the times in which they lived , who struck a panic wherever they roved to commit their ravages : but , consider him as a Commander , employed in the defence of his country , and we shall see nothing to admire , except his courage .
In the first enterprize in which he was engaged , he was indeed successful .
The Queen , suspecting an intention in Philip of Spain to revenge the injuries his subjects had received , pitched upon Drake , who had given the offence , as the fittest man to prevent the consequences .
He , therefore , as he had done before , attacked the enemy by surprize , and set fire to a defenceless number of transports assembled in the harbour of Cadiz , without a ship of war to protect them , or a gun fired by way of opposition .
The accident which afterwards threw the rich India ship in his way ,  on his return home , did him no honour as a Commander , though it gave him credit as a fortunate adventurer : nor did his behaviour in the Channel , when , instead of maintaining his post , he pursued the Hans merchant ships , add at all to his reputation as a Vice-Admiral .
His American enterprize with Lord Carlisle was attended with no laurels  and the only two enterprizes in which he was employed in a joint command , he ruined by his perfidy and self-conceit .


It may , indeed , be urged in Drake 's defence , that it was the policy of the Queen , his Sovereign , to countenance her subjects in distressing Spain , and in mortifying the haughty monarch who sat upon the throne  and that almost all the heroes of her active reign , acquired their glory by practices founded on the same prevailing principle .


This argument in his favour can not be denied its due weight .
The expeditions of Sir John Hawkins  of Sir Walter Raleigh  of Lord Carlisle  of Sir John Norris  of the earl of Essex  of Cavendish  and , indeed , of most others undertaken against Spain  were professedly with a view to plunder  and the charges of fitting them out were chiefly borne by those who were to be sharers in the booty : yet , surely , there is a material difference between the glory that is purchased by valour in the field , and fame that is acquired by compacts to surprize the innocent , and invade the property of the peaceable .


 Having now seen Drake in two distinct points of view , as a leader of a company of plunderers , and as a Commander in the royal navy , let us do justice to his character by viewing him as a mariner , and in that light he will hardly have his equal .
To project a voyage round the globe , and to conduct it without the assistance of a single mariner on board who had ever crossed the Line , Nuno da Silva , the Portuguese pilot , excepted , was , perhaps , one of the boldest exploits that ever man performed .
His navigating his ships along the coast of Brazil  his carrying them through the straits of Magellan in a shorter time than any mariner has ever done since  his keeping the sea in a storm for thirty days together in a small vessel  his skill in navigating the coasts of Chili , Peru , and New Spain , where no English ship had ever sailed  his accuracy in discovering the track of the Spanish ship from the East Indies , and his consummate sagacity in pursuing a new course home to avoid pursuers  can not be enough admired or applauded .
His knowledge of the globe is manifest from the first attempt he made to return home by a northern passage  a passage which he knew would not only secure him from the danger of pursuers , but , were it practicable , would open a free intercourse between his nation and the rich inhabitants of that opulent country in which he was then situated .
Finding himself , however , disappointed in this design , how great was his sagacity in the discovery of an unknown country , wherein to repair  his ship , refresh his followers , take in wood and water , and to supply himself with every necessary for the vast voyage by sea he was to encounter  and yet , such was his knowledge in making provision against every contingency that might happen , that he lost but one man by sickness during the long run from the coast of New Spain to the Ladrones , in which Commodore Anson lost near half his crew .
Nor is his skill less to be admired in his return from the Ladrones , the most dangerous navigation of any part of the known world  for , except the accident upon the rock , as has already been related , he sailed from the Ladrones to Java unembarrassed  from Java to Sierra Leona , on the coast of Africa , without touching at any port , or encountering any difficulty , save from a scarcity of water  a thing hardly to be credited , and which was never performed by any mariner before his time , or since .


3 .
THE VOYAGES OF CAPT. THOMAS CAVENDISH , THE SECOND ENGLISH NAVIGATOR WHO SAILED ROUND THE WORLD .


 THIS Gentleman was descended from an antient family in Suffolk , whose ancestors came into England with William the Conqueror .
His father , William Cavendish , of Trimley St. Martin , near Ipswich , dying young , left his son Thomas a minor , and heir to the manors of Trimley , Stratton , and Grimston , with other lands of inheritance to a very considerable amount : but this youth , whose atchievements we are about to relate , being of a high spirited disposition , and , as soon as he came of age , subject to no controul , fell early into the fashionable gallantries and vices of the times , and dissipated the best part of his ample fortune before he entertained any thoughts of applying to business , or , perhaps , was sensible how deeply his affairs were embarrassed .


But he no sooner began to reflect , and to perceive , that , without application to some kind of employment , he must be undone , than he made choice of a sea-faring life , not only as most suitable to his unsettled turn of mind , but also as the most likely means of restoring his fortune , and establishing his credit .


 The kingdom was now involved in war with the Spaniards , the then most powerful , and consequently the haughtiest and most formidable people in Europe , who , drawing immense riches from their new acquisitions in America , not only raised the envy but the enmity of other powers , by their pride and their perfidy .


Gentlemen of fortune , and gentlemen of no fortune , were about this time equally encouraged to distress the enemy .
The war laid open an immense field for enterprize  and every one was at liberty to share the harvest , who was willing to bestow the pains of gathering the produce and bringing it home .


Among the most active and the most indefatigable was Sir Walter Raleigh , who not only was the most experienced , but the most successful leader of his time .
With him our adventurer first determined to embark  and , as Sir Walter had just projected a new Voyage to America at his own charge , he was ready enough to admit associates , who were able and willing to bear a part of the expence .
Unfortunately for our new adventurer , all the advantage he derived from this project was only in the knowledge he obtained of sea affairs , and of the temper and genius of the people with whom he had to deal  for the profits that accrued from the voyage by no means answered the sums employed in pursuing it .
He observed , that , by means of their great riches , the Spaniards could command intelligence of all that was in agitation against  them on this side the globe  but that , if they were to be taken off their guard , the southern hemisphere must be the place of action .
He had already an example , in Sir Francis Drake , of the immense wealth that was to be acquired on the coast of Peru , if secrecy could be preserved , and he determined to be upon his guard , and to keep his design solely within his own breast .


With this view he sold a part of the remains of his estate , and set about building two ships proper for his enterprize at Harwich , at that time an obscure port , namely , one called the Desire , of 120 tons  and another of 60 , called the Content  to these he added the Hugh Gallant , a bark of 40 tons .
In the equipment of this little squadron , he purchased many articles of commerce to cover his design , and then privately laid in guns , ammunition and stores , with a moderate quantity of provisions , intending to purchase the rest at some other convenient port , when he was just ready to depart .


He likewise enlisted but half his complement of men  and when he arrived at Plymouth he supplied the rest .
In the whole conduct of what has been already related , he was his own sole director , and none of those who sailed with him knew whither he was bound , till after their embarkation at Plymouth .
It is even uncertain whether Lord Hounsdon , who procured his commission , knew the place of his destination .


 An enterprize so well concerted can not fail to excite curiosity  and as it was excellently written by Mr. Pretty , brother to Sir William , who accompanied Cavendish throughout the voyage , it will best appear in its ancient dress .


`` We departed , says Mr. Pretty , out of Plymouth on Thursday the 21st of July , 1586 , with three sails ( to wit , the Desire , a ship of 120 tons , the Content of 60 tons , and the Hugh Gallant , a bark of 40 tons )  in which small fleet were 123 persons of all sorts , with all kind of furniture , and victuals sufficient for the space of two years .
On Tuesday the 26th of the same month , we were forty-five leagues from Cape Finis Terrae , where we met with five sails of Biscayers , coming from the Grand Bay in Newfoundland , as we supposed , which our Admiral shot at , and fought with them three hours  but we took none of them , by reason the night grew on .


The 1st of August we came in sight of Fort Ventura , one of the isles of the Canaries , about ten o'clock in the morning .


On Sunday , being the 7th of August , we were gotten as high as Rio del Oro , on the coast of Barbary .


On Monday the 19th , we fell in with Cape Blanco , but the wind blew so much at the North , that we could not get up where the Canters do use to ride and fish  therefore we lay off six hours west-south-west , because of the  sand which lieth off the Cape south-west and by south .


The 15th day of the same month we were in the height of Cape Verd , by estimation fifty leagues off the same .
The 18th , Sierra Leona did bear east of us , being forty leagues from us  and the same day the wind shifted to the north-west  so that , by the 20th day of the said month , we were in six degrees thirty minutes to the northward of the Equinoctial Line .


The 23d , we set sail for Sierra Leona , and on the 25th day we fell in with the point on the south side of Sierra Leona , which Mr. Brewer knew very well , and went in before with the Content , which was Vice-admiral : and we had no less than five fathoms water when we had least , and had , for fourteen leagues in south-west , all the way running into the harbour of Sierra Leona , sixteen , fourteen , twelve , ten , and eight fathoms of water .


The 26th of the said month , we put into the harbour  and , in going in , we had by the southmost point at least five fathoms water by the rock , which lieth at the said point : and after we came within two or three cables length of the said rock , we never had less than ten fathoms water until we came up to the road , which is about a league from the point , bordering always on the south-side until you come up to the watering-place , in which bay is the best road : but you must ride far into the bay ,  because there runs prodigious great tides in the offing , and it commonly floweth into the road at a south-east and by east moon .


It is from England to this place 930 leagues  which we ran from the 21st of July to the 26th of this month of August .
On Saturday , being the 27th day , there came two negroes from the shore aboard our Admiral , and made signs unto our General that there was a Portuguese ship within the harbour  so the Hugh Gallant , being the Rear-admiral , went up three or four leagues , but , for want of a pilot , they went no farther , for the harbour runneth up three or four leagues more , and is of a prodigious breadth , and very dangerous , as we were afterwards informed by a Portuguese .


On Sunday the 28th , the General sent some of his company on shore , and there , as they played and danced all the forenoon among the negroes , to the end that they might hear some good news of the Portuguese ship , and as they were returning to go on board , they spied a Portuguese , which lay hid among the bushes , whom we took and brought away with us the same night : and he told us it was very dangerous going up with our boats in search of the ship that was at the town .
Wherupon we went not to seek her , because we knew he told us the truth  for we bound him and made him fast , and so examined him .
He told us also , that his ship was there cast away , and that there were two more of his company among the negroes .
 The Portuguese 's name was Emmanuel , and was by his occupation a chalker , belonging to the port of Portugal .


On Monday morning , being the 29th day , our General landed with 70 men , or thereabouts , and went up to their town , where we burnt two or three houses , and took what spoil we could , which was but little  but all the people fled : and , in our retiring on board , in a very little plain , at their town 's end , they shot their arrows at us out of the woods , and hurt three or four of our men .
Their arrows were poisoned  but yet none of our men miscarried at that time .
Their town is very artificially built with mud walls  their houses built round , with their yards paled in , and kept very clean , as are their streets .
These negroes used great obedience to their king , as one of our men said , which was an hostage for the negroes which came first .
There were in their town , by estimation , about one hundred houses .


The first of September , there went many of our men on shore at the watering-place , and did wash shirts very quietly all the day .
And the second day they went again , and the negroes were in ambush round about the place  and the carpenter of the Admiral going into the wood , to do some special business , espied them by good fortune .
But the negroes rushed out upon our men so suddenly , that , in retiring to our boats , many of them were hurt  among whom Wm. Pickman , a soldier , was shot in the thigh  who , plucking the arrow out , broke it ,  and left the head behind  and he told the chirurgeons that he plucked out all the arrow , because he would not have them lance his thigh : whereupon the poison wrought so that night , that he was prodigiously swolen , and the next morning he died  the piece of the arrow with the poison being afterwards plucked out of his thigh .


The 3d day of the said month , divers of our fleet went up four miles within the harbour with our boat , and caught great store of fish , and went on shore , and took lemons from the trees  and , coming on board again , saw two buffaloes .


The 6th day we departed from Sierra Leona , and went out of the harbour , and staid one tide three leagues from the point of the mouth of the harbour , in six fathoms , and it flowed south-south-west .


On Wednesday , being the 7th of the same month , we departed for one of the isles of Cape Verd , which is ten leagues distant from the point of Sierra Leona  and about five o'clock the same night we anchored about two miles off the island , in six fathoms water , and landed the same night , and found plantains only upon the island .


The 8th day , one of our boats went out , and sounded about the island , and they passed through a Sound at the west end of the island , where they found five fathoms water round about the island , until they came to the very gut of the Sound , and then for a cast or two they had but two fathoms water , and presently after six fathoms , and so deeper and deeper .
 And , at the east end of the island , there was a town where negroes resorted at some times , as we perceived by their provision .


There is no fresh water on all the south-side that we could perceive  but , on the north-side , three or four very good places of fresh water : and all the whole island is a wood , save certain little places where the houses stand , which are environed round about with plantain trees , whereof the fruit is excellent meat .
This place is subject very much to thunder , rain , and lightning , in this month : I think the reason is , because the sun is near the Line Equinoctial .
On Saturday the 10th , we departed from the said island about three o'clock in the afternoon , the wind being at the south-west .


The last of October , running west-south-west , about twenty-four leagues from Cape Frio in Brazil , we fell in with a great mountain , which had an high round knob on the top of it , standing like a tower .


The first of November , we went in between the island of St. Sebastian and the main land , carried several things on shore , set up a forge , and had our casks on shore  our cooper made hoops  and so we remained there until the 23d day of the same month  in which time we fitted our things , built our pinnace , and filled our fresh water .
And while our pinnace was building , there came a canoe from the river of Janeiro , meaning to go to St. Vincent , wherein were six naked slaves of the country , which did row the canoe , and one Portuguese  and the  Portuguese knew Christopher Hare , Master of the Admiral  for that Mr. Hare had been at St. Vincent , in the Minion of London , in the year 1581 : and , thinking to have John Whithal , the Englishman , which dwelleth at St. Vincent , come unto us , which is twenty leagues from this harbour , with some others , thereby to have had some fresh victuals , we suffered the Portuguese to go with a letter unto him , who promised to return , or send some answer within ten days , for that we told him we were merchants , and would traffic with them  but we never received any answer from him  and seeing that he came not according to appointment , our business being dispatched , we weighed anchor , and set sail from St. Sebastian on the 23d of November .


The 16th day of December we fell in with the coast of America , in 47 deg .
and 20 min .
the land bearing west from us about six leagues off  from which place we ran along the shore until we came into 48 deg .
It is a steep beach all along .


The 17th of December , in the afternoon , we entered into an harbour , where our Admiral went in first  wherefore our General named the said harbour Port Desire  in which harbour is an island or two , where there is a wonderful great store of seals , and another island of birds , called grey gulls .
These seals are of a wonderful bigness , huge and monstrous of shape  and , for the fore part of their bodies , can not be compared to any thing better than to a lion : their head , neck ,  and fore-part of their bodies , are full of rough hair  their feet are in the manner of a fin , and in form like unto a man 's hand  they breed and cast every month , giving their young milk , yet continually get they their living in the sea , and live altogether upon fish : their young are extraordinary good meat  and being boiled or roasted , are hardly to be known from lamb or mutton .
The old ones are of such bigness and force , that it is as much as four men are able to do to kill one of them with great staves  and he must be beaten down with striking on the head of him  for his body is of that bigness , that four men could never kill him , but only on the head  for being shot through the body with an harquebuss , or a musket , yet he will go his way into the sea , and never care for it at the present .
Also the fowls that were there were very good meat , and great plenty of them  they have burrows in the ground like conies , for they can not fly  they have nothing but down upon their pinions  they also fish and feed in the sea for their living , and breed on shore .


This harbour is a very good place to trim ships in , and to bring them on ground and grave them in , for there ebbeth and floweth much water  therefore we graved and trimmed all our ships there .


The 24th of December , being Christmas-eve , a man and a boy of the Rear-admiral went some forty scores from our ships , unto a very fair green valley at the foot of a mountain ,  where was a little pit or well which our men had digged and made some two or three days before , to get fresh water  for there was none in all the harbour  and this was but brackish  therefore this man and boy went thither to wash their linen  and being in washing at the said well , there were great numbers of Indians which were come down , and found the said man and boy in washing .
These Indians being divided on each side of the rocks , shot at them with their arrows , and hurt them both  but they fled presently , being about fifty or threescore , though our General followed them but with sixteen or twenty men .
The man was shot quite through the knee , the boy into the shoulder  either of them having very sore wounds .
Their arrows are made of little canes , and their heads are of a flint stone , set into the cane very artificially .
They are as wild as ever was a buck , or any other wild beast  for we followed them , and they ran from us as we had been the wildest things in the world .
We took the measure of one of their feet , and it was eighteen inches long .
Their custom is , when any of them die , to bring him or them to the cliffs by the sea-side , and upon the top of them they bury them  and in their graves are buried with them their bows and arrows , and all their jewels which they had in their life-time , which are fine shells that they find by the sea-side , which they cut and square after an artificial manner  and all are laid under their heads .
The grave is made  with large stones of great length and bigness , being set all along full of the dead man 's darts , which he used when he was living .
And they colour both their darts and their graves of a red colour , which they use in colouring themselves .


The 28th of December , we departed out of the port of Desire , and went to an island which lieth three leagues to the southward of it  where we trimmed our saved penguins with salt , for victuals , all that and the next day , and departed along the coast south-west and by-south .


The 31st we fell in with a rock , which lieth about five leagues from the land , much like unto Edistone , which lieth off the sound of Plymouth  and we sounded , and had eight fathoms rocky ground , within a mile thereof  the rock bearing west-south-west .
We went coasting along south-south-west , and found great store of seals .
This rock standeth in 48 deg .
30 min .
to the southward of the Line .


The 2d day of January , we fell in with a very fair white cape , which standeth in 51 degrees , and had seven fathoms water a league off the land .


The 3d , we fell in with another great white cape , which standeth in 52 deg .
45 min .
from which cape there runneth a low beach about a league to the southward  and this beach reacheth to the opening of the dangerous strait of Magellan , which is in divers places five or six  leagues wide , and in two several places more narrow .
Under this cape we anchored , and lost an anchor  for it was a great storm , and lasted three days very dangerous .


The 6th day we put in for the straits .


The 7th day , between the mouth of the straits and the narrowest place thereof we took a Spaniard , whose name was Hernando , who was there with 23 Spaniards more , which were all that remained of four hundred left there three years before , all the rest being dead with famine .
And the same day we passed through the narrowest of the straits , where the aforesaid Spaniard shewed us the hull of a small bark , which we judged to be a bark called the John Thomas , one of Drake 's fleet .
It is from the mouth of the straits unto the narrowest of the straits fourteen leagues , and the course lieth west and by-north .
The mouth of the straits lieth in 52 degrees .


From the narrowest of the straits unto Penguin island is ten leagues , and lieth west-south-west , somewhat to the southward , where we anchored the 8th day , and killed and salted plenty of penguins for victuals .


The 9th day we departed from Penguin island , and ran south-south-west to King Philip 's city , which the Spaniards had built  which town or city had four forts , and every fort had in it one cast piece , which pieces were buried in the ground  the carriages were standing in their places unburied  we digged for  them and had them all .
They had contrived their city very well , and seated it in the best place of the straits for wood and water : they had built up their churches by themselves : they had laws very severe among them , for they had erected a gibbet , whereon they had done execution on some of their company .
It seemed unto us , that their whole living for a great space was altogether upon muscles and limpets  for there was not any thing else to be had , except some deer which came out of the mountains down to the fresh rivers to drink .
These Spaniards came to fortify the straits , to the end that no nation should have passage through into the South Sea , saving their own only : but , as it appeared , it was not God 's will so to have it  for during the time that they were there , which was two years at the least , they could never have any thing to grow , or in any ways prosper  and , on the other side , the Indians often preyed upon them , until their victuals grew so short , ( their store being spent which they had brought with them out of Spain , and having no means to renew the same ) that they died like dogs in their houses , and in their clothes , wherein we found some of them still at our coming , until that in the end the town being wonderfully tainted with the smell and favour of the dead people , the rest which remained alive were driven to bury such things as they had there in their town , and so to forsake the town , and to go along the sea-side to seek their victuals to  preserve them from starving , taking nothing with them , but every man his harquebuss , and his furniture , that was able to do it ( for some of them were not able to carry them for weakness ) , and so lived , for the space of a year and more , on roots , leaves , and sometimes a fowl which they might kill with their piece .
To conclude , they set forwards , determined to travel towards the river of Plate , there being only twenty-three persons left alive , whereof two were women , which were the remainder of four hundred .
In this place we watered and wooded well and quietly .
Our General named this town Port Famine : it standeth in 53 degrees by observation to the southward .


The 14th day we departed from this place , and ran south south-west , and from thence south-west : unto Cape Froward , five leagues west-south-west , which cape is the southermost part of all the straits , and standeth in the latitude of 54 degrees .
From which cape we ran west and by north five leagues , and put into a bay or cove on the south-side , which we called Muscle-cove , because there was great plenty of them : we rode therein six days , the wind being still westerly .


The 21st day of January we departed from Muscle-cove , and went north-west and by-west ten leagues , to a very fair sandy bay on the north-side , which our General called Elizabeth-bay : and , as we rode there that night , one of our men died which went in the Hugh Gallant ,  whose name was Grey , a carpenter by his occupation , and was buried there in that bay .


The 22d we departed from Elizabeth-bay in the afternoon , and went about two leagues from that place , where there was a fresh water river , up which our General went with the ship 's boat about three miles  which river hath very good and pleasant ground about it .
It is low and champaign soil , and we saw no other ground in all the straits , but what was craggy rocks , and monstrous high hills and mountains .
In this river are a great many savages , which we saw , and had conference with them .
They were men-eaters , and fed altogether upon raw flesh , and other filthy food : which people had lately preyed upon some of the Spaniards before spoken of  for they had gotten knives , and some pieces of rapiers to make darts of .
They used all the means they could possibly to have enticed us farther up the river , on purpose to have betrayed us  which being perceived by our General , he caused us to shoot at them with our harquebusses , whereby we killed many of them .
So we sailed from this river , to the channel of St. Jerome , which is two leagues off .


From the river of St. Jerome , about three or four leagues , we ran west into a cape which is on the north-side  and from that cape unto the mouth of the straits the course lieth north-west and by-west , and north-west  between which place and the mouth of the straits , to the southward ,  we lay in harbour until the 23d of February , by reason of contrary winds  and most vile and foul weather , with such rain and violent stormy winds which came down from the mountains and high hills , that they hazarded the best cables and anchors that we had for to hold  which , if they had failed , we had been in great danger to have been cast away , or at least to have been famished : for , during this time , which was a full month , we fed almost altogether on muscles , limpets , and birds , or such as we could get on shore , seeking every day for them , as the fowls of the air do where they can find food in continual rainy weather .


There is , at every one or two miles end , an harbour on both sides of the land .
And there are , between the river of St. Jerome and the mouth of the straits , going into the South Sea , about 34 leagues , by estimation  so that the whole length of the straits is about 90 leagues : and the mouth of the said straits standeth nearly in the same height that the entrance standeth in when we pass out of the North Sea , which is about 52 deg .
and 40 min .
to the southward of the Line .


The 24th day of February , we entered into the South Sea  and on the south side in going out of the straits is a fair high cape , with a low point adjoining to it  and on the north-side are four or five islands which lie six leagues off the main , and much broken and sunken ground about them .
By noon , the same day , we had brought  these islands east of us five leagues off  the wind being southerly .


The first of March , a storm took us at north , which night the ships lost the company of the Hugh Gallant , being in 49 degrees 30 min .
and 45 leagues from land .
This storm continued three or four days  and for that time we in the Hugh Gallant , being separated from the other two ships , looked every hour to sink , our bark was so leaky , and ourselves so fatigued and weakened with freeing it of water , that we slept not during three days and three nights .


The 15th of March , in the morning , the Hugh Gallant came in between the island of St. Mary and the Main , where she met with the Admiral and the Content , who had rid at the island of La Mocha two days , which island standeth in south latitude 38 deg .
at which place some of our men went on shore with the Vice-Admiral 's boat , where the Indians fought with them with their bows and arrows , and were very wary of their calivers .
These Indians were enemies to the Spaniards , and belonged to a great place called Arauco , and took us for Spaniards , as we afterwards learned .


The above-mentioned place , Arauco , is very rich , and full of gold mines  and yet could it not be subdued at any time by the Spaniards  but they always returned with the greatest loss of men : for these Indians are quite desperate , and careless of their lives , living at their own liberty and freedom .


 The 15th day aforesaid , in the afternoon , we weighed anchor , and ran under the west side of St. Mary 's Island , where we rid very well in six fathoms water , and very fair ground , all that night .


The 16th day , our General went on shore himself , with 70 or 80 men , every one with his furniture .
There came down to us certain Indians , with two which were the Chiefs of the island , to welcome us on shore , thinking we had been Spaniards , for it is subdued by them  who brought us up to a place where the Spaniards had erected a church , with crosses and altars in it  and there were about this church two or three store-houses , which were full of wheat and barley ready threshed , and made up in cades of straw , to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every cade .
The wheat and barley was as fair , as clear , and every way as good as any we have in England .
There were also the like cades full of potatoe-roots , which were very good to eat , ready made up in the store-houses , for the Spaniards when they should come for their tribute This island also yielded many sorts of fruits , hogs and hens .
These Indians are held in such slavery by their masters , that they dare not eat a hen or hog themselves : but the Spaniards have made them all in that island christians .
Thus we filled ourselves here with corn as much as we would have , and as many hogs as we had salt to sal [ ... ] them with , and great plenty of hens , with [ ... ] number of bags of potatoe-roots , and about 50 [ ... ]  dried dog-fishes , and Guinea wheat , which is called maiz .
And having taken as much as we would , yet we left a prodigious great store behind us .
Our General had the two Chiefs of the island on board our ship , and provided great cheer for them , and made them merry with wine : and they , in the end , perceiving that we were not Spaniards , made signs , as near as our General could perceive , that , if we would go over unto the main land to Arauco , there was much gold  making us signs , that we should have great store of riches .
But , because we could not understand them , our General made haste , and within two or three days we furnished ourselves , and departed .


The 18th day , in the morning , we departed from this place  and ran all that day north-north-east about ten leagues , and at night lay with a short sail off and on the coast .


The 19th , we ran in east-north-east with the land , and bore in with a place called the Conception , where we anchored under an island , and departed the next morning without going on land .


The 20th , we departed from the Conception , and went into a little bay , which was sandy , where we saw fresh water and cattle  but we staid not there .


The 30th day , we came into the bay of Quintero , which standeth in 33 deg .
and 50 min .


The said day , presently after we were come to an anchor in the bay , there was a herdsman ,  that kept cattle , lying upon the point of the hill asleep  who , when he awaked , and had espied three ships which were come into the bay , before we could get on shore , he had mounted a horse which was feeding by , and rode his way as fast as ever he was able  and our General , with thirty shot with him , went on shore .
He had not been on land an hour when there came three horsemen with bright swords towards us , so hard as they could ride , till within a quarter of a mile of us , and then stopt , and would come no nearer unto us : so our General sent unto them a couple of our men with their shot , and Hernando , who was the Spaniard that we had taken up at the mouth of the straits .
But the Spaniards would not suffer our men to come near with their shot , but made signs that one of our men should come alone unto them : so the said Hernando , the Spaniard , went unto them , and our two men stood not far from them .
They had some conference  and , in the end , Hernando came back from them , and told our General that he had parlied with them for some victuals , and they had promised as much as we would have .
Our General sent him back again with another message , and another shot with him  and being come near unto them , they would not suffer any more than one to approach them : whereupon our men let the Spaniard go unto them alone  who being at some good distance from them , they staid but a small time together , before the said Hernando leaped  up behind one of them , and rode away with them , notwithstanding the damnable oaths which he had made continually to our General , never to forsake him , but to die on his side before he would be false .
Our General , seeing how he was dealt with , filled water all that day with good watch , and carried it on board : and night being come , he determined next day to send into the country to find their town , and to have taken the spoil of it , and to have fired it , if they could have found it .


The last of March , Captain Havers went up into the country , with 50 or 60 men , with their shot and furniture with them , and we travelled seven or eight miles into the land : and , as we were marching along , we espied a number of herds of cattle , of kine and bullocks , which were wonderfully wild : we saw also great plenty of horses , mares , and colts , which were very wild and unhandled : there is also great store of hares and conies , and plenty of partridges , and other wild fowls .
The country is very fruitful , with fair fresh rivers all along , full of wild-fowl of all sorts .
Having travelled so far , that we could go no farther for the monstrous high mountains , we rested ourselves at a very fair fresh river , running in and along fair low meadows , at the foot of the mountains , where every man drank of the river , and refreshed himself .
Having so done , we returned to our ships , the likeliest way we thought their town would be  so we travelled all the day long , not seeing any man , but we  met with many wild dogs  yet there were two hundred horsemen abroad that same day , by means of the Spaniard which they had taken from us the day before , who had told them that our force was but small , and that we were wonderfully weak  and , though they did espy us that day , yet durst they not give the onset upon us  for we marched along in array , and observed good order , whereby we seemed a greater number than we were , until we came unto our ships that night again .


The next day , being the first of April , 1587 , our men went on shore to fill water at a pit which was a quarter of a mile from the waterside  and , being early hard at their business , were in no readiness : mean while , there came pouring down from the hills almost two hundred horsemen , and before our people could return to the rocks from the watering-place , twelve of them were cut off , part killed , and part taken prisoners  the rest were rescued by our soldiers who came from the rocks to meet with them  for though only fifteen of us had any weapons on shore , yet we made the enemy retire in the end , with the loss of twenty-four of their men , after we had skirmished with them an hour .


After the loss of these men , we rode at anchor , and watered in despite of them , with good watch and ward , until the 5th of the said month .


The 5th day , we departed out of this bay of Quintero  and off from the bay there lieth a little island , about a league distant , whereon there  are great store of penguins , and other fowls , whereof we took to serve our turns , and sailed away north , and north-by-west  for so lieth the coast along this place .


The 15th , we came thwart of a place , which is called Morro-Moreno , which standeth in twenty-three degrees thirty minutes , and is an excellent good harbour : and there is an island which maketh it an harbour  for a ship may go in at either end of the island .
Here we went with our General on shore , to the number of thirty men  and as soon as we had effected our landing , the Indians of the place came down from the rocks to meet us , with fresh-water and wood on their backs .
They are in great awe of the Spaniards , and very simple people , living most savagely : for they brought us to their dwellings , about two miles from the harbour , where we saw their women and bedding , which is nothing but the skin of some beast laid upon the ground  and over them , instead of houses , is nothing but five or six sticks laid across , which stand upon forked sticks stuck in the ground , and a few boughs laid over them .
Their diet is raw fish , which stinketh most vilely : and when any of them die , they bury their bows and arrows with them , and all that they have  for we opened one of their graves , and saw the order of them .
Their canoes or boats are very artificially made of two skins resembling bladders , and are blown full at one end with quills : they have two of these bladders blown full , which are  sewed together , and made fast with a sinew of some wild beast  which , when they are in the water , swell , so that they are as tight as may be .
They go to sea in these boats , and catch plenty of fish , but they use it in a beastly manner .


On the 23d , in the morning , we took a small bark , which came out of Arica road , which we kept and called the George .
The men forsook it , and went hastily away with their boat .
Our Admiral 's pinnace followed the boat , and the Hugh Gallant 's boat took the bark : our Admiral 's pinnace could not recover the boat before it got on shore , but went along into the road of Arica , and laid aboard a great ship of one hundred tons , riding in the road right before the town , but all the men and goods were gone out of her , only the bare ship was left alone .
They made three or four very fair shots at the pinnace as she was coming in , but missed her very narrowly with a minion-shot which they had in the fort .
Whereupon we came into the road with the Admiral and the Hugh Gallant : but the Content , which was the Vice-Admiral , was behind out of sight  by means whereof , and for want of her boat to land men withal , we landed not : otherwise , if we had been together , our General with the company would resolutely have landed to take the town , whatsoever should have come of it .
The cause why the Content staid behind , was , that she had found , about fourteen  leagues to the southward of Arica , in a place where the Spaniards had landed a whole ship 's lading of botigas of wine of Castile , whereof the said Content took into her as many as she could conveniently carry , and came after us into the road of Arica the same day .
By this time we perceived that the town had gathered all their power together , and also conveyed all their treasure away , and buried it , for they had heard of us .
Now , because it was very populous with the aid of one or two neighbouring places , our General saw there was no landing without loss of many men  wherefore he gave over that enterprize .
While we rode at anchor they shot at us , and our ships shot at them again for every shot two .
Moreover , our pinnace went in close almost to the shore , and fetched out another bark which rode there , in despite of all their forts , though they shot still at the pinnace , which they could never hit .
After these things our General sent a boat on shore with a flag of truce , to know if they would redeem their great ship or no : but they would not  for they had received special commandment from the Viceroy at Lima , not to buy any ship , or ransom any man , upon pain of death .
Our General did this , in hopes to have redeemed some of our men , which were taken prisoners on shore by the horsemen at Quintero , otherwise he would have made them no offer of parley .


The 25th , riding still in the road , we spied a sail coming from the southward , and our General  sent out his pinnace to meet her , with all our boats  but the town made such signs from the hill with fires and tokens out of the watch-house , that before our pinnace could get to them , they ran the bark on shore two miles to the southward of the town  but they had little leisure to carry any thing with them , but all the men escaped , among whom there were certain friars , for we saw them in their friar 's weeds as they ran on shore .
Many horsemen came from the town to rescue them and to carry them away , otherwise we had landed and taken or killed them : so we went on board the bark as she lay sunk , and fetched out the pillage  but there was nothing in it of any value : and we came on board our ships again the same night , and the next morning we set the great ship on fire in the road , and sunk one of the barks , carrying the other along with us , and so departed from thence , and went away north-west .


The 27th , we took a small bark which came from St. Jago  near unto Quintero , where we lost our men first .
In this bark was one George , a Greek , an intelligent pilot for all the coast of Chili .
They were sent to the city of Lima with letters of advice of us , and of the loss of our men : there were also in the said bark one Fleming and three Spaniards , and they were all sworn , and received the sacrament , before they came to sea , by three or four friars , that , if we should chance to meet them they should throw those letters overboard  which as we were giving  them chace with our pinnace , before we could reach them , they had accordingly thrown away .
Yet our General wrought so with them , that they did confess their errand  but he was fain to cause them to be tormented with their thumbs in a winch , and to repeat it several times with extreme pain : also he made the old Fleming believe that he would hang him , and the rope being about his neck , he was pulled up a little from the hatches  and yet he would not confess , chusing rather to die than he would be perjured .


The 3d of May , we came into a bay where are three little towns , which are called Paracca , Chincha , and Pisca  where some of us landed , and took certain houses wherein was bread , wine , figs , and hens : but the sea went so high that we could not land at the best of the towns , without sinking of our boats , and great hazard of us all .
This place standeth in thirteen degrees and forty minutes to the southward of the Line .


The 5th of May , we departed from this harbour , leaving the Content , our Vice-Admiral , at the island of Seals , by which means at that time we lost her company .


The 9th , we gave chace to a sail , but we could not reach it .


The 10th day , the Hugh Gallant , in which bark I Francis Pretie was , lost company of our Admiral .


The 11th , we who were in the Hugh Gallant put into a bay which standeth in twelve degrees  forty minutes , in which bay we found a river of fresh water about eight o'clock at night  and though we were but of small force , no more than one bark and eighteen men in it , yet we went on shore to fill water  where , having filled one boat 's lading , while our crew were going on board , two or three of our company which were on shore , as they were going a little from the watering-place with their furniture about them , spied where there were four or five hundred bags of meal on an heap covered with a few reeds  so that night we filled water , and took as much meal as we thought good , which fell out well for us who were then lost , and stood in need of victuals : and , by break of day in the morning , we came on board , and there staid and rode until the afternoon  in which time the town , seeing us ride there still , brought down much cattle to the sea side to have enticed us to come on shore  but we saw their intent , and weighed anchor , and departed the 12th day .


The 13th day at night , we put into a bay which standeth in nine degrees twenty minutes , where we saw horsemen .
And that night we landed , namely , Mr. Bruer , captain  myself  Arthur Warford  John Way , preacher  John Newman  Andrew Wight  William Gargefield  and Henry Hilliard  and we eight only , having every man his harquebuss and his furniture about him , marched three quarters of a mile along the sea-side , where we found a boat  of five or six tons hauled up dry on the shore , about a cable 's length from the water  and with extreme labour we launched the bark .
When it was on float , Captain Bruer and I went in , while the rest were fetching their things  but suddenly it was ready to sink , and the Captain and I stood up to the knees , laving out the water with our targets  but it sunk down faster than we were able to free it , insomuch that in the end we had much ado to save ourselves from drowning .
When we were out , we stood in great fear that our own boat , wherein we came on shore , was sunk  for we could no where see it .
Howbeit , the Captain commanded them to keep it off for fear of the great surge that went by the shore , yet in the end we spied it , and went on board by two and two , and were forced to wade up to the arm-pits sixty paces into the sea , before we could get into the boat , by reason of the shoalness  and then departed the fourteenth day in the morning .


The 16th , we took with the Hugh Gallant , being but sixteen men of us in it , a large ship which came from Guaianil , which was called the Lewis , and was of the burthen of three hundred tons , having twenty-four men in it , wherein was a pilot , one Gonsalvo de Ribas , whom we carried along with us , and a negroe called Emmanuel .
The ship was laden with nothing but timber and victuals , wherefore we left her seven or eight leagues from the land very  leaky and ready to sink : we sunk her boat , and took away her foresail and some provisions .


The 17th of May , we met with our Admiral again , and all the rest of our fleet : they had taken two ships , the one laden with sugar , melasses , maize , skins , many packs of pintadoes , some marmalade , and a thousand hens .
The other ship was laden with wheat-meal , and boxes of marmalade .
One of these ships , which had the chief merchandize in it , was worth twenty thousand pounds , if it had been in England , or in any other part of Christendom , where we might have sold it .
We filled all our ships with as much as we could of these goods  the rest we burnt and the ships also , and set the men and women that were not killed on shore .


The 20th day in the morning , we came into the road of Paita  and , being at an anchor , our General landed with sixty or seventy men , skirmished with some of the town , and drove them all to flight to the top of the hill which is over the town  except a few slaves and some others who were of the meaner sort , who were commanded by the Governor to stay below in the town at a place which was building for a fort , having with them a bloody ensign , being in number about an hundred men .
Now , as we were rowing between the ships and the shore , our gunner shot off a great piece out of one of the barks , and the shot fell among them , and made them to fly from the fort , as fast as they could run  but , having got up upon the hill ,  Figure 8 .
Cavendish plunders  burns Paita .
 they , in their cum , shot among us with their small-shot .
After we were landed , and had taken the town , we ran upon them and chaced them so fiercely for the space of an hour , that we drove them in the end away by force  and , being got up the hills , we found where they had hid what they had brought out of the town .
We also found the quantity of twenty-five pounds weight of silver in pieces of eight , and abundance of houshold stuff , and storehouses full of all kinds of wares .
But our General would not suffer the men to carry much cloth or apparel away , because they should not clog themselves with burdens  for he knew not whether our enemies were provided with fire-arms according to the number of their men , for they were five men to one of us , and we had an English mile and an half to our ships .
Being come down in safety to the town , which was very well built , and kept very clean in every street , with a town-house or guildhall in the midst of it , and had to the number of two or three hundred houses at least in it  we set it on fire , and burnt it to the ground , and goods to the value of five or six thousand pounds .
There was also a bark riding at anchor in the road , which we set on fire and departed , directing our course to the island of Puna .
The 25th of May , we arrived at the island of Puna , where is a very good harbour .
There we found a great ship of 250 tons riding at anchor with all her furniture , which was ready to  be hauled on ground , for there is a special good place for that purpose .
We sunk it and went on shore , where the Lord of the island dwelt , who had a sumptuous dwelling , which was by the water side , exceedingly well contrived , with many very singular good rooms and chambers in it , and out of every chamber was framed a gallery , with a stately prospect towards the sea on one side , and into the island on the other side , with a magnificent hall below , and a very great storehouse at one end of the hall , which was filled with botigas of pitch and bast to make cables with  for the most part of the cables in the South Sea are made upon that island .
This great Casique obliged all the Indians on the island to work and trudge for him : he is an Indian born , but is married to a beautiful woman who is a Spaniard , by reason of his pleasant habitation and his great wealth .


This Spanish woman , his wife , is honoured as a Queen in the island , and never walketh upon the ground on foot , but accounteth it too base a thing for her  but when her pleasure is to take the air , or to go abroad , she is always carried in a sedan upon four men 's shoulders , with a veil or canopy over her , to shade her from the sun or the wind , having her gentlewoman still attending about her , with a great troop of the best men in the island with her .
But both she and the lord of the island , with all the Indians in the town , were nearly fled out of the island before we could get to an anchor , by reason we  were becalmed before we could get in , and were gone over unto the main land , having carried with them 100,000 crowns , which we knew by a Captain of the island , an Indian , whom we had taken at sea as we were coming into the road , being in a balsa or a canoe for a spy to see what we were .


The 27th , our General himself , with certain shot and some targetliers , went over to the main unto the place where this Indian Captain told us the Casique , who was Lord of all the island , was gone unto , and had carried all his treasure with him : but , at our coming to the place where we went to land , we found newly arrived there four or five great balsas laden with plantains , bags of meal , and many other kinds of victuals .
Our General marvelled what they were , and what they meant , asking the Indian guide , and commanding him to speak the truth upon his life .
Being then bound fast , he answered , being very much abashed , as well as our company were , that he neither knew from whence they should come , nor who they should be , for never a man was in either of the balsas  yet he had told our General before , that it was an easy matter to take the said Casique and all his treasure  and that , there were but three or four houses standing in a desart place , and no resistance  and that if he found it not so , he might hang him .
Again being demanded to speak upon his life what he thought these balsas should be ?
he answered , that he  could not say what they were , nor from whence they should come , except it was to carry sixty soldiers , who he did hear were to go to a place called Guaiaquil , which was about six leagues from the said island , where two or three of the King 's ships were on the stocks in building , and where there were continually an hundred soldiers in garrison , who had heard of us , and had sent for sixty more , for fear of burning of the ships and town .
Our General , not any whit discouraged , either at the sight of the balsas unlooked for , or at hearing of the sixty soldiers not until then spoken of , bravely animated his company to the exploit , went presently forward , being in the night in a most desart path through the woods , until he came to the place  where , as it seemed , they had kept watch either at the water-side , or at the houses , or at both , and were newly gone out of the houses , having so short warning that they left the meat both boiling and roasting at the fire , and were fled with their treasure with them , or else buried it where it could not be sound .
Our company took hens , and such things as we thought good , and came away .


The 29th , our General went in the ship 's boat unto a little island adjoining , whither the Casique , who was Lord of Rena , had caused all the hangings of his chambers , which were Cordovan leather , all gilded over , and painted very fair and rich , with all his houshold stuff , and all the ship 's tackling which were riding in the road at our coming in , with great store of nails , spikes  of iron , and very many other things , to be conveyed  all which we found , and brought away what our General thought requisite for the ships .


This island is very pleasant for all the delights of life , and fruitful  but there are no mines of gold or silver in it .
There are , at least , 200 houses in the town about the Casique 's palace , and as many in one or two towns more upon the island , which is almost as big as the Isle of Wight , in England .
There is planted , on the one side of the Casique 's house , a fair garden with all herbs growing in it , and at the lower end a well of fresh water , and round about it are trees set , whereon bombazine cotton groweth after this manner : The tops of the trees grow full of cods , out of which the cotton groweth , and in the cotton is a seed of the bigness of a pea , and in every cod there are seven or eight of these seeds  and if the cotton be not gathered when it is ripe , then these seeds fall from it and spring again .


There are also in this garden fig trees , which bear continually  also pompions , melons , cucumbers , raddishes , rosemary , and thyme , with many other herbs and roots .
At the other end of the house there is also another orchard , where grow oranges , sweet and sour lemons , pomegranates , and limes , with divers other fruits .
There is very good pasture ground in this island  and there are many horses , oxen , bullocks , sheep very fat and fair , a great many goats , which are very tame , and are used continually to be milked .
 They have also abundance of pigeons , turkies , and ducks of prodigious bigness .


There was also a very large and great church near to the Casique 's house , whither he caused all the Indians in the island to come and hear mass , for he himself was made a christian when married to the Spanish woman before spoken of  and upon his conversion he caused the rest of his subjects to be christened .
In this church was an high altar , with a crucifix , and five bells hanging in one end thereof .
We burnt the church , and brought the bells away .


By this time we had hauled on ground our Admiral , and made her clean , burnt her keel , pitched and tarred her , and had hauled her on float again  and , in the mean time , kept watch in the great house both night and day .


The 2d of June , in the morning , by day-break , every one of the watch having gone abroad to seek provisions , some one way and some another , some for hens , some for sheep , some for goats  upon a sudden there came down upon us an hundred soldiers , with musquets , and an ensign , which were landed on the other side of the island that night , and all the Indians of the island along with them , every one with weapons , and their baggage after them  which happened by means of a negroe , whose name was Emmanuel , who fled from us at our first landing there .
Thus , being taken at a disadvantage , we had the worst , for our company did not exceed sixteen or twenty , whereof they  had slain one or two before they were come to the houses  yet we skirmished with them an hour and a half .
At last , being greatly overcharged with multitudes , we were driven down from the hill to the water-side , and there we kept them in play a while , until in the end our halberdier , who had kept the way of the hill , and had slain a couple of them as he breathed himself , had an honourable death , for a shot struck him to the heart  who , feeling himself mortally wounded , cried to God for mercy , and fell down dead .
But , soon after , the enemy was driven back from the bank side to the green  and , in the end , our boat came , and carried as many of our men as could go in her without hazard of sinking  but one of our men was shot through the head with his own piece , being a snap-hand , as he was getting into the boat .
Four of us were left behind , which the boat could not carry , of whom myself was one , who had our shot ready , and retired into a cliff until the boat came again , which was presently after they had carried the rest on board .
There were forty-six of the enemy slain by us , whereof they dragged some into bushes , and some into old houses , which we found afterwards .
We lost only 12 of our men .


The same day we went on shore again with 70 men , and had a fresh skirmish with the enemy , and made them retire .
This done , we set fire to the town , and burnt it to the ground  and , shortly after , made havock of their fields ,  orchards , and gardens , and burnt four great ships more , which were building on the stocks .


The 3d of June , the Content , which was our Vice-Admiral , was hauled on ground to grave at the same place , in spite of the Spaniards  and also our pinnace was new trimmed .


The 5th , we departed out of the road of Puna , where we remained eleven days , and turned up to a place which is called Rio Dolce , where we watered  at which place also we sunk our Rear-Admiral , called the Hugh Gallant , for want of men , being a bark of 40 tons .


The 10th , we set the Indians on shore , which we had taken before as we were coming into the road of Puna .


The 11th , we departed from Rio Dolce .


The 12th , we doubled the Equinoctial Line , and continued our course northwards all that month .


The 1st of July , we had sight of the coast of Nueva Espanna , being four leagues distant from land , in the latitude of 10 degrees to the northward of the Line .


The 9th , we took a new ship of 120 tons burthen , wherein was one Michael Sancius , whom our General took to serve his turn to water along the coast  for he was one of the best coasters in the South Sea .
This Michael Sancius was a provincial born in Marseilles , and was the first man that told us news of the great ship called the Santa Anna , which we afterwards took coming from the Philippines .


 There were six men more in this new ship .
We took her sails , ropes , and fire-wood , to serve our turns , set her on fire , and kept the men .


The 10th , we took another bark , which was going with advice of us and our ships all along the coast , as Michael Sancius told us  but all company that were in the bark were fled on shore .
Neither of these ships had any goods in them  for they came both from Sonsonate , in the province of Guatimala  the new ship , for fear we should have taken her in the road  and the bark , to carry news along the coast , which bark we also set on fire .


The 26th , we came to anchor in ten fathoms , in the river of Copalita , where we intended to water  and that same night we departed with thirty-two men in the pinnace , and rowed to Aguatulco , which is but two leagues from the aforesaid river , and standeth in 15 deg .
40 min .
to the northward of the Equinoctial Line .


The 27th day , in the morning , by break of day , we came into the road of Aguatulco , where we found a bark of 50 tons , which was come from Sonsonate , laden with cocoas and anil , which they had there landed  and the men were all sled on shore .
We landed there , and burnt the town , with the church and custom-house , which was very fair and large , in which house were 600 bags of anil to dye cloth , every bag whereof was worth 40 crowns  and 400 bags of cocoas , every bag whereof is worth 10 crowns .
These cocoas go among them for meat and  money  for 150 of them are in value one rial of plate in ready payment .
They are very like an almond , but are not so pleasant in taste .
They eat them , and make drink of them : this the owner of the ship told us .
I found in this town , before we burnt it , a flasket full of boxes of balm .
After we had spoiled and burned the town , wherein there were some hundred houses , the owner of the ship came down out of the hills with a flag of truce unto us , who before with all the rest of the townsmen run away , and at length came on board our pinnace upon Captain Havers ' word of safe return .
We carried him to the river of Copalita , where out ships rode .
When we came to our General , he caused him to be set on shore in safety the same night , because he came upon the Captain 's word .


The 28th , we set sail from Copalita , because the sea was so great that we could not fill water , and ran the same night into the road of Aguatulco .


The 29th , our General landed , and took with him thirty men two miles into the woods , where we took a Mestizo , whose name was Michael de Truxillo , who was customer of that town , and we found with him two chambers full of his stuff  we brought him and his stuff on board : and whereas I say he was a Mestizo , it is to be understood , that a Mestizo is one who hath a Spaniard to his father , and an Indian to his mother .


 The 2d day of August , having watered , and examined the said Mestizo and set him on shore again , we departed from the port of Aguatulco the same night  which standeth , as I said before , in 15 deg .
and 40 min .
to the northward of the Line .
Here we overslipped the haven of Acapulco , from whence the ships are fitted out for the Philippines .


The 24th , our General with thirty of us went with the pinnace to an haven called Puerto de Natividad , where we had intelligence by Michael Sancius that there should be a pinnace  but , before we could get thither , the said pinnace was gone to fish for pearls twelve leaves farther , as we were informed by certain Indians whom we found there .
We took a mullatto in this place in his bed , who was sent with letters of advice concerning us along the coast of Nueva Galicia , whose horse we killed .
We took his letters , left him behind , set fire to the houses , and burnt two new ships of 200 tons each which were building there on the stocks , and came on board of our ships again .


The 26th , we came into the bay of St. Jago , where we watered at a fresh river , along which river many plantains were growing .
Here is abundance of fresh fish  here also some of our company dragged for pearls , and caught some quantity .


The 2d of September , we departed from St. Jago , at four o'clock in the evening .
The bay of St. Jago standeth in nineteen degrees  and eighteen minutes to the northward of the Line .


The 3d , we arrived in a little bay a league to the westward of Port de Natividad , called Malacca , which is a very good place to ride in  and this day , about twelve o'clock , our General landed with thirty men , and went up to a town of Indians which was two leagues from the road , which town is called Acatlan : there were in it about 20 or 30 houses , and a church which we defaced , and came on board the same night .
All the people fled out of the town at the sight of us .


The 4th , we departed from the road of Malacca , and sailed along the coast .
The 8th we came to the road of Chacalla , in which bay there are two little houses by the water-side .
This bay is 18 leagues from the Cape de los Corientes .


The 9th , in the morning , our General sent up Captain Havers with forty men of us before day , and , Michael Sancius being our guide , we went unto a place about two leagues up into the country , in a most obscure desart path , through the woods and wilderness , and in the end we came to a place where we took three housholders with their wives and children , and some Indians , one carpenter ( who was a Spaniard ) , and a Portuguese .
We bound them all , and made them come to the sea-side with us : our General made their wives fetch us plantains , lemons , oranges , pine-apples , and other fruits , whereof they had  abundance , and so let their husbands depart , except Sembrano , the Spanish carpenter , and Diego , the Portuguese , and the tenth day we departed from the road .


The 12th , we arrived at a little island called the isle of St. Andrew , on which there is great store of fowl and wood  where we dried and salted as many of the fowls as we thought good .
We also killed there abundance of seals and oguanos , which are a kind of serpents with four feet , and a long sharp tail , strange to them who have not seen them , but they are very good meat .
We rode here until the 17th , at which time we departed .


The 24th , we arrived in the road of Massatlan , in twenty-three degrees thirty minutes , just under the Tropic of Cancer .
It is a very great river within , but is barred at the mouth  and upon the north side of the bar without is good fresh water , but there is much difficulty in filling it , because at low water it is shoal half a mile off the shore .
There is great store of fresh fish in this bay , and good fruits up in the country , whereof we had some , though not without danger .


The 27th , we departed from the road of Massatlan , and ran to an island which is a league to the northward of the said Massatlan , where we trimmed our ships , and new-built our pinnace .
There is a little island a quarter of a league from it , on which are seals  where a Spanish prisoner , whose name was Domingo , being sent to  wash shirts , with one of our men to keep him , made his escape and swam to the main , which was an English mile distant  at which place we had seen thirty or forty Spaniards and Indians , who were horsemen and kept watch there , and came from a town called Chiametla , which was eleven leagues up into the country , as Michael Sancius told us .
We found upon the island where we trimmed our pinnace , fresh water , by digging two or three feet deep into the sand , where no water nor sign of water was before to be perceived  otherwise we must have gone back 20 or 30 leagues to water , which might have occasioned our missing the prey we had long waited for : but one Flores , a Spaniard , who was also a prisoner with us , made a motion to dig in the sands .
Now , our General , having had experience before of the like , commanded to put his motion in practice , and , digging three feet deep , we found very good and fresh water : so we watered our ships , and might have filled a thousand tons more if we had pleased .


We staid in this island until the ninth day of October , and then departed at night for the Cape of St. Lucar , which is on the west side of the point of California .


The 14th , we fell in with the Cape of St. Lucar , which cape is very like the Needles at the Isle of Wight , and within the said cape is a great bay , called by the Spaniards Aguada Segura , into which bay falleth a fair fresh river , about which many Indians use to keep .
We  watered in the river , and lay off and on with the said cape of St. Lucar , until the 4th of November , and had the winds hanging still westerly .


The 4th of November , beating up and down upon the head-land of California , in 23 degrees 40 minutes to the northward , between seven and eight o'clock in the morning , one of the company of our Admiral , who was the trumpeter of the ship , going up unto the top , espied a sail bearing in from the sea with the cape  whereupon he cried , with no small joy to himself and all the company , A sail !
a sail !
With which chearful word , the Master of the ship , and divers others of the company , went also up to the main-top , who , perceiving his speech to be very true , gave information unto our General of this happy news , who was no less glad than the cause required : whereupon he gave in charge presently unto the whole company , to put all things in readiness  which being performed , he gave them chace for three or four hours , standing with our best advantage , and working for the wind .
In the afternoon we got up to them , giving them a broadside with our great ordnance , and a volley of small shot , and presently laid the ship aboard , whereof the King of Spain was owner , which was Admiral of the South Sea , called St. Anna , and thought to be seven hundred tons in burthen .
Now , as we were ready on the ship 's side to enter her , there not being above fifty or sixty men at most in  our ship , we perceived that the Captain of the Santa Anna had made sights fore and aft , and laid their sails close on their poop , their midship , with their forecastle , and not one man to be seen , they standing so close under their sights , with lances , javelins , rapiers , targets , and an innumerable quantity of large stones , which they threw overboard upon our heads , and into our ships so fast , and being so many of them , that they put us off the ship again , with the loss of two of our men , who were slain , and four or five wounded .
But for all this , we new trimmed our sails , and fitted every man his furniture , and gave them a fresh encounter with our great ordnance , and also with our small shot , raking them through and through , to the killing and wounding of many of their men .
Their Captain , still like a valiant man , with his company , stood very stoutly unto his close fights , not yielding as yet .
Our General encouraging his men afresh , with the whole noise of trumpets , gave them the other encounter with our great ordnance , and all our small shot , to the great discouragement of our enemies , raking them through in divers places , killing and wounding many of their men .
They being thus discouraged and spoiled , and their ship being in hazard of sinking , by reason of the great shot which were made , whereof some were under water , after five or six hours fight , set out a flag of truce , and parlied for mercy , desiring our General to save their lives , and to take their  goods , and that they would presently yield .
Our General promised them mercy , and willed them to strike their sails , and to hoist out their boat , and to come on board : which news they were full glad to hear , and presently struck their sails , hoisted out their boat , and one of their chief merchants came on board unto our General , and , falling down upon his knees , offered to have kissed our General 's feet , and craved mercy .
Our General pardoned both him and the rest , upon promise of their true dealing with him and his company , concerning such riches as were in the ship  and sent for their Captain and pilot , who , at their coming , used the like duty and reverence as the former did .
Our General promised their lives , and good usage .
The said Captain and pilot presently certified the General what goods they had on board , viz .
122,000 pezoes of gold  and the rest of the riches that the ship was laden with , were silks , sattins , damasks , with musk , and divers other merchandize , and great plenty of all manner of provisions , with the choice of many conserves , and several sorts of very good wines .
These things being made known to the General by the aforesaid Captain and pilot , they were commanded to stay on board the Desire  and on the 6th day of November following we went into an harbour , which is called by the Spaniards Aguada Segura , or Puerto Seguro .


Here the whole company of Spaniards , both men and women , to the number of 190 persons , were set on shore  where they had a fair river  of fresh water , with great plenty of fresh fish , fowl , and wood , and also many hares and conies upon the main land .
Our General also gave them plenty of provisions , garvances , peason , and some wine .
Also they had all the sails of their ship to make them tents on shore , with licence to take such store of planks as should be sufficient to make them a bark .
Then we fell to heaving in of our goods , sharing of the treasure , and allotting to every man his portion  in division whereof , the 8th of this month , many of the company fell into a mutiny against our General , especially those who were in the Content , which were nevertheless pacified for the time .


On the 17th day of November , which is the day of the happy coronation of her Majesty , our General commanded all his ordnance to be shot off , with the small shot , both in his own ship , and in the Content , which was our Vice-Admiral .
This being done , the same night we had many fire-works , and more ordnance discharged , to the great admiration of all the Spaniards who were there , for the most of them had never seen the like before .


This ended , our General discharged the Captain , and gave him a royal reward , with provision for his own and company 's defence against the Indians , both of swords , targets , pieces , shot , and powder , to his great contentment .
But before his departure , he took out of this great ship two young lads born in Japan , who could both read  and write their own language  the eldest , being about twenty years old , was named Christopher  the other was called Cosmus , about seventeen years of age  both of very good capacity .
He took also with him , out of their ship , three boys born in the isles of Manilla  the one about fifteen , the other about thirteen , the youngest about nine years of age : the name of the eldest was Alphonso , the second Anthony de Dasi , the third remaineth with the Right Honourable the Countess of Essex .
He also took from them one Nicholas Roderigo , a Portuguese , who had not only been in Canton , and other parts of China , but had also been in the islands of Japan , being a country most rich in silver mines , and had also been in the Philippines .
He took also from them a Spaniard , whose name was Thomas de Ersola , who was a very good pilot from Acapulco , and the coast of Nueva Espanna , unto the islands of Ladrones , where the Spaniards put in to water , sailing between Acapulco , and the Philippines  in which isles of Ladrones they found fresh-water plantains , and potatoe roots : howbeit , the people are very rude , and heathens .


The 19th day of November aforesaid , about three o'clok in the afternoon , our General caused the King 's ship to be set on fire , which , having to the quantity of 500 tons of goods in her , we saw burnt unto the water , and then gave them a piece of ordnance , and set sail joyfully homewards towards England , with a fair wind ,  which by this time was come about to east-north-east  and , night growing near , we left the Content a stern of us , which was not as yet come out of the road : and here , thinking she would have overtaken us , we lost her company , and never saw her after .


We were sailing from this haven of Aguada Segura , in California , unto the isles of Ladrones , the rest of November , and all December , and so forth until the 3d of January , 1588 , with a fair wind , for the space of forty-five days  and we esteemed it to be between seventeen and eighteen hundred leagues .


The 3d of January , by six o'clock in the morning , we had sight of one of the islands of Ladrones , called the island of Guarsa , standing in 13 deg .
40 min .
towards the north  and , sailing with a gentle gale before the wind , by one or two o'clock in the afternoon we were come within two leagues of the island , where we met with sixty or seventy sail of canoes , full of savages , who came off to sea unto us , and brought with them in their canoes , plantains , cocoas , potatoe-roots , and fresh fish , which they had caught at sea , and held them up unto us for to truck , or exchange with us  which , when we perceived , we made fast little pieces of old iron upon small cords and fishing lines , and so veered the iron into their canoes  and they caught hold of them , and took off the iron , and in exchange of it they would make fast unto the line , either a potatoe-root , or a bundle of plantains , which  we hauled in : and thus our company exchanged with them , until they had satisfied themselves with as much as did content them  yet we could not be rid of them  for , afterwards , they were so thick about the ship , that it stemmed and broke one or two of their canoes  but the men saved themselves , being in every canoe four , six , or eight persons , all naked , and excellent swimmers and divers .
They are of a tawny colour , marvellously fat , and ordinarily bigger of stature than the most of our men in England , wearing their hair very long , yet some of them have it made up and tied with a knot on the crown , and some with two knots , much like unto their images , which we saw them have carved in wood , and standing in the head of their boats , like unto the images of the devil .
Their canoes were as artificially made as any that ever we had seen , considering they were made and contrived without any edged tool : they are not above half a fathom in breadth , and in length some seven or eight fathoms , and their heads and sterns are both alike : they are made out with rafts of canes and reeds on the starboard-side , with mast and sail : their sail is made of mats of sedges square or triangle ways  and they sail as well right against the wind as before it .
These savages followed us so long that we could not be rid of them  until in the end our General commanded our harquebusses to be made ready , and he himself fired one of them , and the rest shot at them  but they were so nimble , that we could  not discern whether they were killed or not , because they could fall backward into the sea and prevent us by diving .


The 14th , by break of day , we fell in with an head-land of the Philippines , which is called Cabo del Spirito Santo , which is of very great bigness and length  high land in the midst of it , and very low land , as the cape lieth east and west , trending far into the sea to the westward .
This cape or island is distant from the isle of Guana 310 leagues .
We were in sailing of this course eleven days , with scant winds and foul weather , bearing no sail two or three nights .
This island standeth in thirteen degrees , and is inhabited for the most part by heathens , and very woody through the whole island .
It is short of the chiefest island of the Philippines , called Manilla , about sixty leagues .
Manilla is well planted , and inhabited by Spaniards to the number of six or seven hundred persons , who dwell in a town unwalled , which hath three or four small blockhouses , part made of wood and part of stone , being indeed of no great strength .
They have one or two small gallies belonging to the town .
It is a very rich place in gold and many other commodities  and they have yearly traffic from Acapulco , in Nueva Espanna , and also twenty or thirty ships from China , and from the Sanguelos , which bringeth them many sorts of merchandize .
The merchants of China , and the Sanguelos are part Moors and part heathens  they bring great quantities of gold with them ,  which they traffic and exchange for silver , and give weight for weight .
These Sanguelos are men of great genius for inventing and making all manner of things , especially in all handicrafts and sciences  and every one is so expert , perfect , and skilful in his faculty , that few or no Christians are able to go beyond them in that which they take in hand .
For drawing and embroidering upon sattin , silk , or lawn , either beast , fowl , fish , or worm , for liveliness and perfectness both in silk , silver , gold , and pearl , they excel .


The 14th , at night , we entered the straits between the island of Lucon and the island of Camlaia .


The 15th day , we fell in with an island called Capul , and had , betwixt that and another island , a very narrow passage , occasioned by a ledge of rocks , lying off the point of the island of Capul , and no danger , but water enough a good way off .
Within the point there is a fine bay , and a very good harbour in four fathoms water , within a cable 's length of the shore .
Our ship was no sooner come to an anchor , than presently there came a canoe rowing on board us , in which was one of the chief Casiques of the island , whereof there are seven , who , supposing that we were Spaniards , brought us potatoe-roots , which they call camotas , and green cocoas , in exchange for which we gave his company linnen to the quantity of a yard for four cocoas , and as much linnen for a basket of potatoe-roots ,  of a quart in quantity , which roots are very good eating , and very sweet either roasted or boiled .


This Casique 's skin was carved and cut with various coloured strakes and devices all over his body  we kept him still on board , and caused him to send those men who brought him on board back to the island , to invite the rest of the principal men to come on board : who were no sooner gone on shore , than presently the people of the island came down with their cocoas and potatoe-roots , and the rest of the Casiques likewise came on board , and brought with them hens and hogs .
They used the same order with us which they do with the Spaniards  for they took for every hog , which they call balboye , eight rials of plate , and for every hen or cock one rial of plate .
Thus we rode at anchor all that day , doing nothing but buying roots , cocoas , hens , hogs , and such things as they brought , refreshing ourselves very much .


The same day , at night , Nicholas Roderigo , the Portuguese whom we had taken out of the great Santa Anna , at the Cape of California , desired to speak with our General in secret  which , when our General understood , he sent for him , and asked him what he had to say to him .
The Portuguese made him answer , That , altho ' he had offended his worship heretofore , yet now he had vowed his faith and true service to him  and , in respect whereof , he neither could nor would conceal such treason as was plotting  against him and his company  which was this , that the Spaniard who was taken out of the great Santa Anna for a pilot , whose name was Thomas de Ersola , had written a letter secretly , sealed it , and locked it up in his chest , meaning to convey it , by the inhabitants of this island , to Manilla  the contents whereof were , that there had been two English ships along the coast of Chili , Peru , Nueva Espanna , and Nueva Galicia , and that they had taken many ships and merchandize in them , and burnt divers towns , and spoiled all that ever they could come unto  and that they had taken the king 's ship which came from Manilla , and all his treasure , and all the merchandize that was therein , and had set all the people on shore , taking himself away by force  therefore he willed them that they should make strong their bulwarks , with their two galleys , and all such provision as they could possibly make .
He further signified , that we were riding at an island called Capul , which was at the end of the island of Manilla  being but one ship with small force in it  and that the other ship , as he supposed , was gone for the north-west passage , standing in fifty-five degrees  and that , if they could use any means to surprize us , being there at anchor , they should dispatch it , for our force was but small , and our men but weak  and that the place where we rode was but fifty leagues from them : otherwise , if they let us escape , within a few years they must make account to have their  town besieged and sacked by an army of English .
This information being given , our General called for him , and charged him with these things , which , at the first , he utterly denied  but , in the end , the matter being made manifest and known of certainty by special trial and proofs , the next morning , our General gave orders that he should be hanged , which was accordingly performed the 16th of January .


We rode for the space of nine days about this island of Capul , where we had divers kinds of fresh victuals , with excellent fresh water in every bay , and great plenty of wood .
The people of this island go almost naked , and are of a tawny colour .
The men wear only a girdle about their waists , of a kind of linnen of their own weaving , which is made of plantain leaves , and an apron , which , coming from their back and covering their nakedness , is made fast to their girdles at their navels .


These people use a strange kind of order among them , which is this : every man and man-child among them hath a little peg-nail thrust through the head of his privy parts , being split in the lower end , and rivetted , and on the head of the nail is as it were a crown  which they take out and in as they have occasion : and for the truth thereof we ourselves have taken one of these nails from a son of one or their kings , who was of the age of ten years .


 On the 23d of January , our General , Mr. Thomas Cavendish , caused all the chiefs of this island and of an hundred islands more , whom he had made to pay tribute to him , which tribute was in hogs , hens , potatoes and cocoas , to appear before him , and made himself and his company known unto them , that they were Englishmen , and enemies to the Spaniards  and thereupon spread his ensign , sounded his trumpets , and beat his drums  which they much wondered at .
To conclude , they promised both themselves and all the islands thereabout , to aid him whensoever he should come again to overcome the Spaniards .
Also our General gave them , in token that we were enemies to the Spaniards , money back again for all their tribute which they had paid , which they took very friendly , and rowed about our ship to give us pleasure .
At last our General ordered a sacre to be shot off , whereat they wondered , and , with great contentment , took their leave of us .


The next day , being the 26th of January , we set sail , about six o'clock in the morning , and ran along the coast of the island of Manilla , shaping our course north west , between Manilla and the isle of Masbat .


The 28th in the morning , about seven o'clock , riding at an anchor between two islands , we spied a frigate under her courses , coming out between two other islands , which , as we imagined , came from Manilla , sailing close by the shore along the main island of Panama .
We chaced this frigate along the shore , and gained fast upon her ,  until in the end we came so near that she stood in for the shore , close by a wind , and being becalmed , banked up with her oars  whereupon we came to an anchor with our ship a league and a half from the place where the frigate rowed in , and manned our boat with half a dozen shot , and as many men with swords , who did row the boat .
Thus we made after the frigate , which had run into a river where we could not reach her  but as we rowed along the shore , our boat came into very shallow water , where many marks were set up in divers places in the sea , from whence two or three canoes came forth , whereof one made somewhat near unto us with three or four Indians in it .
We called unto them , but they would not come nearer unto us , but rowed from us , whom we durst not follow too far , for fear of bringing ourselves too much to the leeward of our ship .
Here , as we looked about us , we spied another balsa or canoe of a great bigness , which they who were in her did set along , as we usually set a barge , with long staves or poles , which was builded up with great canes , and below near the water made to row with oars , wherein were about five or six Indians and one Spaniard .
Now , as we were come almost at the balsa , we ran a-ground with our boat , but one or two of our men leapt overboard and freed it again presently , and keeping thwart her head , we laid her aboard , and took into us the Spaniard , but the Indians leaped into the sea , and dived and rose again far off from us .
Presently , upon the taking of this canoe , [ ... ] e  appeared upon the sands a band of soldiers , marching with an ensign having a red cross like the flag of England , who were about fifty or sixty Spaniards , lately come from Manilla to that town , which is called Reguan , in a bark to fetch a new ship of the king 's , which was building in a river within the bay , and staid there only for certain irons to serve for the rudder of the said ship , which they looked for every day .


This band of men shot at us from the shore with their musquets , but hit none of us , and we shot at them again .
They also manned a frigate , and sent it out after our boat to have taken us , but we with our oars went from them  and whether they perceived they could not overtake us , but that they must come within danger of the ordnance of our ship , they stood in with the shore again , and landed their men  and presently sent their frigate about the point , but whither we knew not : so we came on board with this one Spaniard , who was neither soldier nor sailor , but one who was come among the rest from Manilla , and had been in the hospital there a long time before , and was a very simple fellow , and such a one as could answer to very little that was enquired of him concerning the state of the country .
Here we rode at anchor all that night , and perceived that the Spaniards had dispersed their band into two or three parties , and kept great watch in several places with fires and shooting off of their pieces .


 This island hath much plain ground in it in many places , and many fair and straight trees grow upon it , fit to make excellent masts for all sorts of ships .
There are also mines of very fine gold in it , which are in the custody of the Indians .
And , to the southward of this place , there is another very great island , which is not subdued by the Spaniards , nor any other nation .
The people who inhabit it are all negroes  and the island is called the Island of Negroes .
It is almost as big as England , standing in nine degrees .
The most part of it seemeth to be very low land , and , by all likelihood , is very fruitful .


The 29th day of January , about six o'clock in the morning , we set sail , sending our boat before , until it was two o'clock in the afternoon , passing all this time as it were through a strait , betwixt the said two islands of Panama and the island of Negroes  and , about 16 leagues off , we espied a fair opening , trending south-west and by south  at which time our boat came on board , and our General sent commendations to the Spanish Captain , whom we came from the evening before , by the Spaniard we had taken , and desired him to provide good store of gold , for he intended to see him with his company at Manilla within a few years , and that he did but want a bigger boat to have landed his men , or else he would have seen him then  and so caused him to be set on shore .


The 8th day of February , by eight o'clock in the morning , we espied an island near Gilolo ,  called Batochina , which standeth in one degree from the Equinoctial Line , northward .


The 14th day of February , we fell in with eleven or twelve very small islands , lying very low and flat , full of trees  and passed by some islands which are sunk , and have the dry sands lying in the main sea .
These islands , near the Moluccas , stand in three degrees ten minutes to the southward of the Line .


On the 17th day , one John Gameford , a cooper , died , who had been sick of an old disease a long time .


The 20th day , we fell in with certain other islands , which had many small islands among them , standing four degrees to the southward of the Line .


On the 21st day of February , being Ash-Wednesday , Captain Havers died of a most violent and pestilent ague , which held him furiously for seven or eight days , to the no small grief of our General , and of all the rest of the company , who caused two falcons and one sacre to be shot off , with all the small shot in the ship  who , after he was shrouded in a sheet , was thrown over-board , with great lamentation of us all .
Moreover , presently after his death , myself , with divers others in the ship , fell very sick , and so continued in very great pain for the space of three weeks , or a month , by reason of the extreme heat and intemperateness of the climate .


The 1st day of March , having passed through the straits of Java Minor and Java Major , we  came to an anchor , under the south-west parts of Java Major  where we espied certain of the inhabitants , who were fishing by the sea-side in a bay which was under the island .
Then our General taking into the ship-boat certain of his company , and a negroe who could speak the Morisco tongue , whom he had , taken out of the Santa Anna , made towards those fishers  who , having espied our boat , ran on shore into the woods , for fear of our men .
But our General caused his negroe to call unto them  who had no sooner heard him call , than presently one of them came to the shore side , and made answer .
Our General , by the negroe , enquired of him for fresh water  which they found  and caused the fisher to go to the King , and to acquaint him of a ship that was come to have traffic for victuals , and for diamonds , pearls , or any other rich jewels that he had  for which , he should have either gold , or other merchandize in exchange .
The fisher answered , that we should have all manner of victuals that we would request .
Thus our boat came on board again .
Within a while after , we went about to furnish our ship thoroughly with wood and water .


About the 8th of March , two or three canoes came from the town unto us , with eggs , hens , fresh fish , oranges , and limes , and brought word we should have had victuals more plentifully , but that they were so far to be brought to us where we rode .
Which when our General heard , he weighed anchor , and stood in nearer  for the town  and , as we were under sail , we met with one of the King 's canoes coming towards us : whereupon we dropt some of our sails , and staid for the canoe until it came aboard us , then stood into the bay , which was hard by , and came to an anchor .
In this canoe was the King 's Secretary , who had on his head a piece of died linen , folded up like unto a Turkish turban .
He was all naked , except about his waist  his breast was carved with the broad arrow upon it  he went bare-footed .
He had an interpreter with him , who was a Mestizo , that is , half an Indian and half a Portuguese , who could speak very good Portuguese .
This Secretary signified unto our General , that he had brought him an hog , hens , eggs , fresh fish , sugar-canes , and wine , which wine was as strong as aqua-vitae , and as clear as any rock-water .
He told him farther , that he would bring victuals so sufficiently for him as he and his company would request , and that within the space of four days .
Our General used him singularly well , banquetted him most royally with the choice of many and sundry conserves , wines both sweet and otherwise  and caused his musicians to make him music .
This done , our General told him , that he and his company were Englishmen  that we had been at China , and had trafficked in that country  that we were come thither to make enquiries , and purposed to go to Molucca .
The people told our General , that there were certain Portuguese in the island , who staid there as factors  continually , to traffic with them , to buy negroes , cloves , pepper , sugar , and many other commodities .
This Secretary of the King , with his interpreter , lay one night on board our ship .
The same night , because they lay on board , in the evening at the setting of the watch , our General commanded every man in the ship to provide his harquebuss , and his shot  and so with shooting off forty or fifty small shot , and a sacre , himself set the watch .
This was no small wonder to these heathen people , who had not commonly seen any ship so furnished with men and ordnance .
The next morning we dismissed the Secretary and his interpreter , with all humanity .


The fourth day after , which was the 12th of March , according to their appointment , came the King 's canoes : but the wind being somewhat scant , they could not get on board that night , but put into a bay under the island until the next day  and , presently after the break of day , there came to the number of nine or ten of the King 's canoes , so deeply laden with provisions as they could swim , with two live oxen , half a score of large fat hogs , a number of live hens , ducks , and geese , with eggs , plantains , sugar-canes , sugar in plates , cocoas , sweet oranges , and bitter limes , great store of wine and aqua-vitae , salt to season meat with , and almost all manner of provisions besides , accompanied with divers of the King 's officers who were there .
Among all the rest of the people , in one of these canoes , came two Portuguese , who were men of  middle stature , and very proper personage : they were each of them in a loose jerkin and hose , which came down from the waist to the ancle , according to the fashion of the country , and partly because it was Lent , and a time for doing of their penance .
They account it as a thing of great dishonour among these heathens , to wear either hose or shoes on their feet .
The Portuguese had on each of them a very fair and a white lawn shirt , with falling bands on the same , very decent , their bare legs excepted .
These Portuguese were no small joy unto our General , and all the rest of our company  for we had not seen any Christian that was our friend for a year and an half before .
Our General used and treated them singularly well with banquets and music .
They told us , that they were no less glad to see us than we were to see them , and enquired into the estate of their country , and what was become of Don Antonio , their King , and whether he were living or not  for that they had not been in Portugal for a long time , and that the Spaniards had always brought them word that he was dead ?
Then our General satisfied them in every demand , assuring them that their King was alive and in England , and had honourable allowance from our Queen  and that there was war betwixt Spain and England , and that we were come under the King of Portugal into the South Sea , and had warred upon the Spaniards there , and had fired , spoiled , and sunk all the ships along the coast that we could meet with ,  to the number of eighteen or twenty sail .
With this report they were abundantly satisfied .


On the other side , they declared unto us the state of the island of Java : First , the plentifulness , great choice , and store of provisions of all sorts , and of all manner of fruits , as before set down  then the great and rich merchanchizes which are there to be had .
Then they described the nature and properties of the people , as followeth : The name of the King of that part of the island was Raya Bolamboam , who was a man had in great majesty and fear among them .
The common people may not bargain , sell , or exchange any thing with any other nation , without special licence from their King  and , if any so do , it is present death for him .
The King himself is a man of great years , and hath an hundred wives  his son hath fifty .
The custom of the country is , that , whensoever the King doth die , they take the dead body and burn it , and preserve the ashes of him  and , within five days next after , the wives of the said King so dead , according to the custom and use of their country , every one of them go together to a place appointed  and , the chief of the women , who was nearest to him in account , hath a ball in her hand , and throweth it from her  and to the place where the ball resteth , thither they go all , and turn their faces to the eastward , and every one , with a dagger in her hand ( which dagger they call a crise , and is as sharp as a razor , ) stab themselves to the heart , and , with their own hands ,  Figure 9 .
The KING of JAVA 's Wives destroying themselves at his Death .
 bathe themselves in their blood , and falling flat on their faces , so end their days .
This thing is as true as it may seem to any hearer to be strange .
The men of themselves are very politic and subtle , and singularly valiant ( being naked men ) in any action they undertake , and very submissive and obedient to their king : for example , if their king command them to undertake any exploit , be it ever so dangerous or desperate , they dare not nor will not refuse , though they should die every man of them in executing the same  for he will cut off the heads of every one of them who return alive , without bringing their purpose to pass  which is such a thing amongst them , as maketh them the most valiant people in all the south-east parts of the world  for they never fear any death  for being in fight with any nation , if any of them feeleth himself hurt with lance or sword , he will willingly run himself upon the weapon quite through the body to procure his death the more speedily , and in this desperate manner end his days , or overcome his enemy .
Moreover , although the men be tawny of colour , and go continually naked , yet their women are fair of complexion , and go more apparelled .


After they had thus described the state of the island , and the order and fashion of the people , they told us further , that , if their king , Don Antonio , would come unto them , they would warrant him to have all the Moluccas at command ,  besides China-Sanglos and the isles of the Philippines  and that he might be assured to have all the Indians on his side that were in the country .
After we had fully contented these Portuguese , and the people of Java who had brought us provisions in their canoes , they took their leave of us with promise of all good entertainment at our return  and our General gave them three great pieces of ordnance at their departing .


Thus , the next day , being the 16th of March , we set sail towards the Cape of Good Hope , called by the Portuguese Cabo de Buena Esperanca , on the most southern coast of Africa .


The rest of March , and all the month of April , we spent in traversing that mighty and vast sea , between the island of Java and the main of Africa , observing the heavens , the Crosiers , or the South-pole , the other stars , the fowls which are marks unto seamen of fair weather and foul weather , approaching of lands or islands , the winds , the tempests , the rains and thunder , with the alterations of tides and currents .


The 10th day of May , we had a storm from the west , and it blew so hard , that it was as much as the ship could steer close by under the wind  and the storm continued all that day and all that night .


The next day , being the 11th of May , in the morning , one of the company went up to the  top , and espied land bearing north and north-by-west of us  and about noon we espied land to bear west of us , which we imagined to be the Cape of Buena Esperanca , whereof indeed we were short about forty , or fifty leagues  and , by reason of the scantness of the wind , we stood along to the south-east until midnight , at which time the wind came fair , and we hauled along westward .


The 12th and 13th days we were becalmed , and the sky was very hazy and thick until the 14th day at three o'clock in the afternoon , at which time the sky cleared , and we spied land again , which was that called Cabo Falso , which is short of Cabo de Buena Esperanca forty or fifty leagues .


This cape is very easy to be known , for there are right over it three very high hills , standing but a small way one off another , and the highest standeth in the midst , and the ground is much lower by the sea-side .
The Cape of Good Hope beareth west and by-south from the said Cabo Falso .


The 16th day of May , about four o'clock in the afternoon , the wind came up at east a very brisk gale , which continued till Saturday , with as much wind as ever the ship could go before .
At which time , by six o'clock in the morning , we espied the promontory or headland called the Cabo de Buena Esperanca , which is a pretty high-land  and at the westernmost point , a little off the main , appear two hummocks ,  the one upon the other , and three other hummocks , lying further off into the sea , yet low-land between and adjoining unto the sea .


This Cape of Buena Esperanca is set down and accounted 2000 leagues from the island of Java in the Portuguese sea charts , but it is not so much by almost 150 leagues , as we found by the running of our ship .
We were in running of these 1850 leagues just nine weeks .


The 8th day of June , by break of day , we fell in sight of the island of St. Helena , seven or eight leagues short of it , having but a small gale of wind , or almost none at all , insomuch as we could not get into it that day , but stood off and on all that night .


The next day , being the ninth of June , having a pretty easy gale of wind , we stood in with the shore , our boat being sent away before to make the harbour  and , about one o'clock in the afternoon , we came to an anchor in twelve fathoms water , two or three cables length from the shore , in a very fair and smooth bay under the north-west side of the island .


This island is very high land , and lieth in the main sea  standing , as it were , in the midst of the sea , between the main land of Africa , the main of Brazilia , and the coast of Guinea  and is in fifteen degrees forty-eight minutes to the southward of the Equinoctial Line , and is distant from the Cape of Buena Esperanca between five and six hundred leagues .


 The same day , about two or three o'clock in the afternoon , we went on shore , where we found an exceeding fair and pleasant valley , wherein divers handsome buildings and houses were set up  and one particularly , which was a church , was tiled and whitened on the outside very fair , and made with a porch  and within the church , at the upper end , was set an altar , whereon stood a very large table , set in a frame , having in it the picture of our Saviour Christ upon the cross , and the image of our Lady praying , with divers other histories curiously painted in the same .
The sides of the church were hung round with stained cloths , having many devices drawn on them .


There are two houses adjoining to the church , on each side one , which serve for kitchens to dress meat in , with necessary rooms and houses of office .
The coverings of the said houses are made flat , where is planted a very fair vine , and through both the said houses runneth a very good and wholesome stream of fresh water .


There is also over against the church a very fair causeway , made up with stones reaching unto a valley by the sea-side , in which valley is planted a garden , wherein grow great store of pompions and melons  and upon the said causeway is a frame erected , whereon hang two bells , wherewith they ring to mass  and near to it a cross is set up , which is squared , framed , and made very artificially of free-stone , whereon is  carved in cyphers what time it was built , which was in the year of our Lord 1571 .


This valley is the fairest and largest low plot in all the island , and is exceeding sweet and pleasant , and planted in every place , either with fruit or with herbs .


There are fig-trees which bear fruit continually and very plentifully  for on every tree you may see blossoms , green figs , and ripe figs all at once , and it is so all the year long .
The reason is , that the island standeth so near the sun .
There is also great store of lemon-trees , orange-trees , pomegranate trees , pomecitron-trees , and date-trees , which bear fruit as the fig-trees do , and are planted carefully and very artificially , with pleasant walks under and between them  and the said walks are overshadowed with the leaves of the trees  and in every void place is planted parsley , sorrel , basil , fennel , anniseed , mustard-seed , radishes , and many very good herbs .
The fresh-water brook runneth through divers places in this orchard , and may , with very small pains , be made to water any one tree in the valley .


This fresh water stream cometh from the tops of the mountains , and falleth from the cliff into the valley the height of a cable  and hath many arms issuing out of it , that refresh the whole island , and almost every tree in it .
The island is altogether high mountains and steep vallies , except it be on the tops of some hills , and down below in some of the vallies , where great plenty  of all those fruits before spoken of do grow .
There are much more growing on the tops of the mountains than below in the vallies  but it is very toilsome and dangerous travelling up unto them and down again , by reason of the height and steepness of the hills .


There are also upon this island great store of partridges , which are very tame , not making any great haste to fly away , though one come very near them , but only to run away and get up into the steep cliffs  we killed some of them with a fowling-piece  they differ very much from our partridges which are in England both in bigness and also in colour , for they are almost as big as hens , and are of an ash colour , and live in covies , twelve , sixteen , and twenty together  you can not go ten or twelve score paces but you shall see or spring one or two covies at the least .


There are likewise no less plenty of pheasants in the island , which are also very big and fat , surpassing those which are in our country in bigness and in numbers in a company  they differ not very much in colour from the partridges before spoken of .
We found , moreover , on this island , plenty of Guinea-cocks , which we call turkies , of colour black and white , with red heads  they are much the same in bigness with ours in England  their eggs are white , and as big as a turkey 's egg .


There are in this island thousands of goats , which the Spaniards call cabritos , which are very  wild  you shall see one or two hundred of them together , and sometimes you may see them go in a flock almost a mile long  some of them ( whether it be the nature of the breed of them or of the country I know not ) are as big as an ass , with a mane like a horse , and a beard hanging down to the very ground  they will climb up the cliffs , which are so steep that a man would think it a thing impossible that any living creature could go there .
We took and killed many of them for all their swiftness , for there are thousands of them upon the mountains .


Here are in like manner great store of swine , which are very wild and fat , and of great bigness  they keep altogether upon the mountains , and will very seldom abide any man to come near them , except it be by mere chance , when they are found asleep , or otherwise , according to their kind , are taken lying in the mire .


We found in the houses , at our coming , three slaves who were negroes , and one who was born in the island of Java , who told us , that the East-Indian fleet , which were in number five sail , the least whereof was in burden eight or nine hundred tons , all laden with spices and Calicut cloth , with store of treasure , and very rich stones and pearls were gone from the said island , St. Helena , but twenty days before we came thither .


This island hath been found long ago by the Portuguese , and hath been altogether planted by them for their refreshment , as they come  from the East-Indies  and , when they come , they have all things in plenty for their relief , by reason that they suffer none to inhabit there , that might eat up the produce of the island , except some very few sick persons of their company , whom they suspect will not live until they come home  these they leave there to refresh themselves , and take them away the year following , with the other fleet , if they live so long .
They touch here rather in their coming home from the East Indies , than at their going thither , because they are thoroughly furnished with corn when they set out of Portugal  but are meanly victualled at their coming from the Indies , where there groweth but little corn .


The 20th day of June , having taken in wood and water , and refreshed ourselves with such things as we found there , and made clean our ship , we set sail about eight o'clock at night towards England .
At our setting sail we had the wind at south east , and we hauled north-west and by-west .
The wind is commonly off the shore at this island of St. Helena .


On Wednesday the 3d day of July , we went away north-west , the wind being still at south-east  at which time we were in one degree and forty-eight minutes to the southward of the Equinoctial Line .


The 12th day of the said month of July there was very little wind  and , towards night , it was calm , and blew no wind at all , and so continued till Monday , being the 15th day of July .


 On Wednesday the 17th day of the said month , we had a small gale at west-north-west .
We found the wind continually to blow at east and north-east , and east-north-east , after we were in three or four degrees to the northward  and it altered not until we came between thirty and forty degrees to the northward of the Equinoctial Line .


On Wednesday the 21st day of August , the wind came up at south-west a fair gale  by which day at noon we were in thirty-eight degrees of north latitude .


On Friday , in the morning , being the 23d of August , at four o'clock we hauled east and east-by-south , for the most northern islands of the Azores .


On Saturday the 24th day of the said month , by five o'clock in the morning , we fell in sight of the two islands of Flores and Cervo , standing thirty nine degrees thirty minutes  and sailed away north-east .


The 3d of September , we met with a Flemish hulk that came from Lisbon , and declared unto us the overthrowing of the Spanish fleet , to the singular rejoicing and comfort of us all .


The 9th of September , after a terrible tempest , which carried away most part of our sails , by the merciful favour of the Almighty , we recovered our long-wished-for port of Plymouth , in England , from whence we set forth at the beginning of our voyage . ''


 [ The wealth acquired in this voyage , though very considerable , was soon dissipated  and , in less than three years , Cavendish again found himself under the necessity of preparing for a second , in which , however , he was very unfortunate .
He had , indeed , increased his preparations  and , it is not to be doubted , but that the certainty he had conceived of acquiring a more ample fortune by a second enterprize , made him the more careless in the management of the treasure he had acquired by the first .


The ships fitted out on this occasion were the Leicester , commanded by himself as Admiral  the Roebuck , Captain Cocke , Vice-Admiral  the Desire , Captain Davis , Rear-Admiral  the Dainty , Captain Coffen  and the Black Pinnace , whose Commander 's name is not mentioned .
The Commanders in this expedition were some of the ablest navigators the nation produced , and the highest expectations were formed from their fortitude and approved experience .


Of the accounts that have been given of this expedition , that published by John Jane , a gentleman who accompanied Captain Davis in the Desire , is the most complete  for which reason , we shall give it in the writer 's own words , as it is but in few hands , and full of interesting events :


`` The 26th of Aug. 1591 , we departed from Plymouth , says Mr. Jane , with three large ships and two barks .


 The 29th of November , we fell in with the bay of Salvador , upon the coast of Brasil , twelve leagues on this side Cape Frio , where we were becalmed until the 2d of December : at which time we took a small bark bound for the river of Plate , with sugar , haberdash-wares , and negroes .
The master of this bark brought us to an isle called Placentia , thirty leagues west from Cape Frio , where we arrived the 5th of December , and rifled six or seven houses inhabited by the Portuguese .
The 11th , we departed from this place , and , the 14th , arrived at the island of St. Sebastian  from whence Mr. Cocke and Captain Davis presently departed with the Desire and Black Pinnace , for taking the town of Santos .
The 16th , at evening , we anchored at the bar of Santos , from whence we departed , with our boats , to the town  by which expedition , we took all the people at mass , both men and women , whom we kept all that day in the church a prisoners .
The cause why Mr Cavendish desired to take this town , was to supply his great wants  and , having it now in quiet possession , we stood in assurance of having provisions in great abundance .
But such was the negligence of Captain Cocke , that the Indians were suffered to carry out whatsoever they would in open view , and no man did controul them : and the next day , after we had won the town , our prisoners were all set at liberty  only four poor old men were kept as pledges to supply our wants .
Thus , in three days , the town , which  was able to furnish such another fleet with all kinds of necessaries , was left unto us nakedly bare , without people and provisions .


Eight or ten days after , Mr. Cavendish himself came hither , where he remained until the 22d of January , seeking by entreaty to have that whereof we were once possessed .
But , in conclusion , we departed worse furnished from the town , than when we came unto it .
The 22d , we burnt St. Vincent 's to the ground .
The 24th , we set sail , shaping our course for the straits of Magellan .


The 7th of February , we had a very great storm  and , the 8th , our fleet was separated by the fury of the tempest .
Then our Captain called unto him the master of our ship , a very honest and sufficient man  and , conferring with him , he concluded to go for Port Desire , hoping that the General would come thither , because that in his first voyage he had found great relief there  for our Captain could never get any direction what course to take in any such extremities , though many times he had entreated for it , as often I have heard him with grief report .
In sailing to this port , by good chance , we met with the Roebuck , wherein Mr. Cocke had endured great extremities , and lost his boat , and therefore desired our Captain to keep him company , for he was in a very desperate situation .
Our Captain hoisted out his boat , and went on board him to know his estate , and , returning , told us the hardness thereof , and desired the  Master and all the company to be careful in all their watches not to lose the Roebuck , and so we both arrived at Port Desire the sixth of March .


The 16th of March , the Black Pinnace came to us  but the Dainty came not , but returned back to England , leaving their Captain on board the Roebuck , without any provision more than the apparel that he wore .
The 18th the Leicester came into the road , and Mr. Cavendish came into the harbour in a boat which he had made at sea  for his long boat and pinnace were lost at sea : and being on board the Desire , he told our Captain of all his extremities , and spoke most hardly of his company , and of divers gentlemen that were with him , purposing no more to go on board his own ship , but to stay in the Desire .
We all sorrowed to hear such hard speeches of our good friends  but having spoken with the gentlemen of the Leicester , we found them faithful , honest , and resolute in proceeding , although it pleased our General otherwise to conceive of them .


The 20th of March , we departed from Port Desire , Mr. Cavendish being in the Desire with us .
The 8th of April , we fell in with the straits of Magellan , enduring many furious storms between Port Desire and the strait .
The 14th , we passed through the first strait .
The 16th , we passed the second strait , being ten leagues distant from the first .
The 18th , we doubled Cape Froward , which cape lieth in 53 degrees 30 minutes .
 The 21st we were forced , through the fury of the weather , to put into a small cove with our ships , four leagues from the said cape , upon the south shore , where we remained until the 15th of May , in the which time we endured extreme storms , with perpetual snow , where many of our men died with cursed famine , and miserable cold , not having wherewith to cover their bodies , nor to fill their bellies , but living by muscles , water , and weeds of the sea , with a small relief , from the ship 's store , in meal , sometimes .
And all the sick men in the Leicester were most uncharitably put on shore into the woods , in the snow , rain , and cold , when men of good health could scarcely endure it , where they ended their lives in the highest degree of misery .
Mr. Cavendish all the while being on board the Desire .
In these great extremities of snow and cold , doubting what the end would be , he asked our captain 's opinion , because he was a man that had good experience of the north-west parts , in his three several discoveries that way , employed by the merchants of London .
Our captain told him , that this snow was a matter of no long continuance , and gave him sufficient reason for it , and that thereby he could not much be prejudiced or hindered in his proceeding .
Notwithstanding , he called together all the company , and told them , that he purposed not to stay in the straits , but to depart upon some other voyage , or else to return again for Brazil : but his resolution was to go  for the Cape of Good Hope .
The company answered , that , if it pleased him , they did desire to stay God 's favour for a wind , and to endure all hardness whatsoever , rather than to give over the voyage , considering they had been here but a small time , and because they were within forty leagues of the South Sea , it grieved them now to return : notwithstanding , whatever he ordered , that they would perform .
So he concluded to go for the Cape of Good Hope , and to give over this voyage .
Then our captain , after Mr. Cavendish was come on board the Desire from talking with the company , told him , that , if it pleased him to consider the great extremity of his situation , the slenderness of his provisions , with the weakness of his men , it was no course for him to proceed in that new enterprize : for if the rest of your ships ( said he ) be furnished answerable to this , it is impossible to perform your determination  for we have no more sails than masts , no victuals , no ground-tackling , no cordage more than is over-head , and , among seventy-five persons , there is but the master alone that can order the ship , and but fourteen sailors : the rest are gentlemen , serving-men , and artificers .
Therefore it will be a desperate case to take so hard an enterprize in hand .
These persuasions did our captain not only use to Mr. Cavendish , but also to Mr. Cocke .
In fine , upon a petition delivered in writing by the chief of the whole company , the General determined to depart out of the straits of Magellan ,  and to return again for Santos in Brazil .


So the 15th of May , we set sail , our General being then in the Leicester .
The 18th , we were free of the straits , but at Cape Froward it was our hard hap to have our boat sunk at our stern in the night , and to lose all our oars .


On the 20th , being thwart of Port Desire , in the night the General altered his course , as we suppose , by which occasion we lost him  for , in the evening , he stood close by a wind to seaward , having the wind at north-north-east , and we standing the same way , the wind not altering , could not the next day see him : so that we then persuaded ourselves , that he was gone for Port Desire to relieve himself , or that he had sustained some mischance at sea , and was gone thither to remedy it .
Whereupon our captain called the General 's men unto him , with the rest , and asked their opinion what was to be done .
Every one conjectured that the General was gone for Port Desire .
Then the Master , being the General 's man , and careful of his master 's service , as also of good judgment in sea-matters , told the company how dangerous it was to go for Port Desire , if we should there miss the General : for ( said he ) we have no boat to land ourselves , nor any anchors or cables that I dare trust in so quick streams as are there : yet , in all likelihood , concluding that the General was gone thither , we steered our course for Port Desire , and by chance met with the Black Pinnace ,  which had likewise lost the fleet , being in a very miserable case : so we both concluded to seek the General at Port Desire .


The 26th day of May , we came to Port Desire , where not finding our General as we hoped , being most slenderly victualled , without sails , boat , oars , nails , cordage , and all other necessaries for our relief , we were struck into a deadly sorrow .
But , referring all to Providence , we entered the harbour , and found a place of quiet road , which before we knew not .
Having moored our ship with the Pinnace 's boat , we landed upon the south shore , where we found a standing pool of fresh water , which by estimation might hold about ten tons , whereby we were greatly comforted .
From this pool we fetched more than forty tons of water , and yet we left the pool as full as we found it .
And , because at our first being at this harbour we were at this place and found no water , we persuaded ourselves that God had sent it for our relief Also there were such extraordinary low ebbs as we had never seen , whereby we got muscles in plenty and great abundance of smelts , so that , with hooks made of pins , every man caught as many as he could eat : by which means we preserved our ships victuals , and spent not any during the time of our abode here .


Our Captain and Master , considering our ability to go to the General , found our wants so great , as that in a month we could not fit our ship to set sail  for we must needs set up a  smith 's forge to make bolts , spikes , and nails , besides the repairing of our other wants .
Whereupon they concluded it to be their best course , to take the pinnace , and to furnish her , and to go to the General with all expedition , leaving the ship and the rest of the company until the General 's return  for he had vowed to our Captain , that he would return again to the straits , as he had told us .
The Captain and Master of the pinnace , being the General 's men , were well contented with the motion .


But the General having in our ship two most pestilent fellows , when they heard of this determination , they utterly misliked it , and , in secret , dealt with the company of both ships , vehemently persuaded them that our Captain and Master would leave them in the country to be devoured by the cannibals , and that they were merciless and without charity : whereupon the whole company joined in secret with them , in a night , to murder our Captain and Master , with myself and all those they thought were their friends .
There were marks taken in his cabin , how to kill him with musquets through the ship 's side , and bullets made of silver for the execution , if their other purposes should fail .
All agreed hereunto except the boatswain of our ship , who , when he knew the matter , revealed it to the Master , and so to the Captain .
Then the matter being called in question , those two murderous fellows were found out , whose names were Charles Parker and Edward Smith .


 The Captain , being thus hardly beset , in peril of famine , and in danger of being murdered , was constrained to use lenity , and by courteous means to pacify this fury : shewing , that , to do the General service , unto whom he had vowed faith in this action , was the cause why he purposed to go unto him in the pinnace , considering that the pinnace was so necessary a thing for him , as that he could not be without her , because he was fearful of the shore in so great ships .
Whereupon all cried , with cursing and swearing , that the pinnace should not go unless the ship went .
Then the Captain desired them to shew themselves christians , and not so blasphemously to behave themselves , without regard and thanksgiving to God for their great deliverance .
By which gentle speeches , the matter was pacified , and the Captain and Master , at the request of the company , were content to forgive this great treachery of Parker and Smith , who , after many admonitions , concluded in these words : ' `` The Lord judge between you and me : '' ' which after came to a most sharp revenge , even by the punishment of the Almighty .
Thus , by a general consent , it was concluded not to depart , but to stay there for the General 's return .
Then our Captain and Master , seeing that they could not do the General that service which they desired , made a motion to the company , that they would lay down under their hands the losing of the General , with the extremities wherein we then stood : whereunto  they consented , and wrote under their hands what followeth : '


The Testimonial of the Company of the Desire , touching the losing of their General , which appeareth to have been utterly against their meanings .


`` THE 26th of August 1591 , we whose names are here underwritten , with divers others , departed from Plymouth , under Mr. Thomas Cavendish our General , with four ships of his , viz .
the Leicester , the Roebuck , the Desire , and the Black Pinnace , for the performance of a voyage into the South Sea .
The 19th of November , we fell in with the bay of Salvador , in Brazil .
The 16th of December we took the town of Santos , hoping there to revictual ourselves , but it fell not out to our contentment .
The 24th of January we set sail from Santos , shaping our course for the straits of Magellan .
The 8th of February , by violent storms , the said fleet being parted , the Roebuck and the Desire arrived at Port Desire the sixth of March .
The sixteenth of March , the Black Pinnace arrived there also : and the 18th of the same , our Admiral came into the road , with whom we departed the 20th of March in poor and weak estate .
The 8th of April 1592 , we entered the straits of Magellan .
The 21st of April we anchored beyond Cape Froward , within 40 leagues of the South Sea , where we rode until the 15th of May .
In  which time we had great store of snow , with some gusty weather , the wind continuing still west-north-west against us .
In this time we were inforced , for the preserving of our victuals , to live the most part upon muscles , our provision was so slender  so that many of our men died in this hard extremity .
Then our General returned for Brazil , there to winter , and to procure victuals for this voyage against the next year .
So we departed the straits , the 15th of May .
The 21st , being thwart of Port Desire , 36 leagues off the shore , the wind then at north-east and by-north , at five of the clock at night , lying north-east , we suddenly cast about , lying south east and by-south , and sometimes south-east : the whole fleet following the Admiral , our ship coming under his lee , shot a-head of him , and so framed sail fit to keep company .
This night we were severed , by what occasion we protest we know not , whether we lost them or they us .
In the morning we only saw the Black Pinnace , then supposing the Admiral had overshot us .
All this day we stood to the eastwards , hoping to find him  because it was not likely that he would stand to the shore again so suddenly .
But missing him towards night , we stood to the shoreward , hoping by that course to find him .
The 22d of May , at night , we had a violent storm , with the wind at north-west , and we were inforced to hull , not being able to bear sail  and this night we perished our main tressle-trees , so that we could no more use our main-top-sail , lying  most dangerously in the sea .
The pinnace likewise received a great leak , so that we were inforced to seek the next shore for our relief .
And , because famine was like to be the best end , we desired to go for Port Desire , hoping , with seals and penguins , to relieve ourselves , and so to make shift to follow the General , or there to stay his coming from Brasil .
The 24th of May we had much wind at north .
The 25th was calm , and the sea very lofty , so that our ship had dangerous foul weather .
The 26th , our fore-shrouds broke , so that , if we had not been near the shore , it had been impossible for us to get out of the sea .
And now , being here moored in Port Desire , our shrouds are all rotten , not having a running rope whereto we may trust , and being provided of only one shift of sails , all worn , our top-sails not able to abide any stress of weather  neither have we any pitch , tar , or nails , nor any store for the supplying of these wants  and we live only upon seals and muscles , having but five hogsheads of pork within board , and meal three ounces for a man a day , with water for to drink .
And for as much as it hath pleased God to separate our fleet , and to bring us into such hard extremities , that only now by his mere mercy we expect relief , though otherwise we are hopeless of comfort  yet , because the wonderful works of God , in his exceeding great favour towards us his creatures , are far beyond the scope of man 's capacity , therefore by him we hope to have deliverance in this our deep distress .
Also ,  for as much as those upon whom God will bestow the favour of life , with return home to their country , may not only remain blameless , but also manifest the truth of our actions , we have thought good , in christian charity , to lay down under our hands the truth of all our proceedings , even till the time of this our distress .


Given in Port Desire , the 2d of June , 1592 , '' c..


' After they had delivered this under their hands , then we began to labour to preserve our lives  and we built up a smith 's forge , and made nails , bolts , and spikes  others made ropes of a piece of our cable  and the rest gathered muscles , and took smelts , for the whole company .
Three leagues from this harbour there is an isle with four small isles about it , where there are abundance of seals  and , at that time of the year , the penguins came thither , in great plenty , to breed .
We concluded with the pinnace , that she should sometimes go thither to catch seals for us  upon which condition we would share victuals with her man for man  whereunto the whole company agreed .
So we parted our poor store , and she laboured to fetch us seals to eat , wherewith we lived when smelts and muscles failed  for in the nep-tides we could get no muscles .
Thus , in the most miserable calamity , we remained until the 6th of August , still keeping watch upon the hills to look for our General  and so great was our vexation and anguish of soul , as I think never flesh and blood endured more .
Our misery daily increasing , time passing ,  Figure 1 .
Cavendishes Crew in Great distress at Port desire , Setup a Forge  repair their shatterd Vessels .
 and our hope of the General being very cold , our Captain and Master were fully persuaded that the General might , perhaps , go directly for the straits , and not come to this harbour : whereupon , they thought no course more convenient , than to go presently for the straits , and there to stay his coming  for , in that place he could not pass , but of course we must see him : Whereunto the company most willingly consented , as also the Captain and Master of the pinnace , so that upon this determination we made all possible speed to depart .
The 6th of August , we set sail , and went to Penguin Isle  and , the next day , we salted 20 hogsheads of seals , which was as much as our salt could do .
The 7th , towards night , we departed from Penguin Isle .
The 9th , we had a sore storm , so that we were constrained to hull , for our sails were not fit to endure any force .
The 14th , we were driven in among certain isles never before discovered by any known relation , lying fifty leagues , or better , off the shore , east and northerly from the straits  in which place , had not the wind ceased , we must of necessity have perished .
But , the wind shifting , we directed our course for the straits  and , the 18th of August , we fell in with the Cape in a very thick fog  and , the same night , we anchored ten leagues within the Cape .
The 19th , we passed the first and second straits .
The 21st , we doubled Cape Froward .
The 22d , we anchored in Salvage Cove , so called because we saw many savages  there .
Notwithstanding the extreme cold of this place , yet do all these people go naked , and live in the woods like satyrs , painted and disguised , and flee from you like wild deer .
They are very strong , and threw stones at us of three or four pounds weight , an incredible distance .
The 24th , in the morning , we departed from this cove , and the same day we came into the north-west reach , which is the last reach of the straits .
The 25th , we anchored in a good cove , within 14 leagues of the South Sea : in this place we purposed to stay for the General  for the strait at this place , is scarce three miles broad , so that he could not pass but we must see him .
After we had staid here a fortnight in the depth of winter , our victuals consuming ( for our seals stunk most vilely , and our men died pitifully through cold and famine , for the greatest part of them had not cloaths to defend them from the extremity of the winter 's cold )  being in this heavy distress , our Captain and Master thought it the best course to depart from the straits into the South Sea , and to go for the isle of Santa Maria , which is to the northward of Baldivia , in 37 deg .
15 min .
where we might have relief , and be in a temperate clime , and there stay for the General , for of necessity he must come by that isle .
So we departed the 13th of September , and came in sight of the South Sea .
On the 14th , we were forced back again , and recovered a cove , three leagues within the straits from the South Sea .
Again we put forth , and being eight or ten leagues free  of the land , the wind rising furiously at west-north-west , we were forced back again into the straits for want of sails  for we never durst bear sail in any stress of weather , they were so weak : so again we recovered the cove three leagues within the straits , where we endured most furious weather  so that one of our two cables brake , whereby we were hopeless of life : yet it pleased God to calm the storm , and we unreev'd our sheets , tacks , halliards , and other ropes , and moored our ship to the trees , close by the rocks .
We laboured to recover our anchor again , but could not , it lay so deep in the water , and , as we think , covered with oaze .
Now had we but one anchor , which had but one whole fluke , a cable spliced in two places , and a piece of an old one .
In the midst of these our troubles , the wind came fair the first of October  whereupon , with all expedition , we loosed our moorings , and weighed our anchor , and so towed off into the channel  for we had mended our boat in Port Desire , and had five oars of the pinnace .
When we had weighed our anchor , we found our cable broken  only one strand held .
Being in the channel , we reeved our ropes , and again rigged our ship  no man 's hand was idle , but all laboured even for the last gasp of life .
Here our company was divided  some desired to go again for Port Desire , and there to be set on shore , where they might travel for their lives  and some stood with the Captain and Master to proceed .
Whereupon the Captain said to the Master , ' `` Master , you  see the wonderful extremity of our estate , and the great doubts among our company of the truth of your reports , as touching relief to be had in the South Sea .
Now , good Master , for as much as you have been in this voyage once before with your Master the General , satisfy the company of such truths as are to you best known  and , you the rest of the General 's men , who likewise have been with him in his first voyage , if you hear any thing contrary to the truth , spare not to reprove it , I pray you . '' '
Then the Master said , ' `` If you think good to return , I will not gainsay it : but this I think , if life may be preserved by any means , it is in proceeding  for at the isle of Santa Maria I do assure you of wheat , pork , and roots enough .
Also , I will bring you to an isle where pelicans be in great abundance , and we shall have meal in great plenty , besides a possibility of intercepting some ships upon the coast of Chili and Peru .
But , if we return , there is nothing but death to be hoped for : therefore , do as you like , I am ready  but my desire is to proceed . '' '
These his speeches , being confirmed by others that were in the former voyage , there was a general consent for proceeding  and so , the 2d of October , we put into the South Sea , and were free of all land .
This night the wind began to blow very much at west-north-west , and still increased in fury , so that we were in great doubt what course to take .
To put into the straits we durst not , for lack of ground-tackle : to bear sail we doubted , the  tempest was so furious , and our sails so bad .
The pinnace came round with us , and told us that she had received many grievous seas , and that her ropes did every hour fail her , so as they could not tell what shift to make .
We , being unable in any sort to help her , stood under our courses in view of the lee-shore , still expecting our ruinous end .


The 4th of October , the storm growing beyond measure furious , the pinnace , being in the wind of us , struck suddenly a hull , so that we thought she had received some grievous sea , or sprung a leak , or that her sails failed her , because she came not with us  but we durst not hull in that unmerciful storm , but sometimes tried under our main course , sometimes with a haddock of our sail , for our ship was very leeward , and most laboursome in the sea .
This night we lost the pinnace , and never saw her again .


The 5th , our fore-sail was split and all torn : then our Master took the mizzen , and brought it to the fore-mast , to make our ship work , and with our sprit-sail we mended our fore-sail , the storm continuing beyond all description in fury , with hail , snow , rain , and wind , such and so mighty , as that in nature it could not possibly be more , the sea such and so lofty , with continual breach , that many times we were doubtful whether our ship did sink or swim .


The 10th of October , being , by the account of our Captain and Master , very near the shore , the weather dark , the storm furious , and most of our  men having given over to labour , we yielded ourselves to death without further hope of succour .
Our Captain sitting in the gallery very pensive , I came and brought him some rosa solis , to comfort him  for he was so cold , that he was scarce able to move a joint .
After he had drank , and was comforted in heart , he began , for the ease of his conscience , to make a large repetition of his forepassed time , and with many grievous sighs , he concluded with a short prayer for our preservation .
Having ended , he desired me not to make known to any of the company his intolerable grief and anguish of mind , because they should not thereby be dismayed .
And so suddenly , before I went from him , the sun shined clear  so that he and the Master both observed the true elevation of the Pole , whereby they knew by what course to recover the straits .
Wherewithal our Captain and Master were so revived , and gave such comfortable speeches to the company , that every man rejoiced , as though we had received a present deliverance .
The next day , being the 11th of October , we saw Cape Deseado , being the cape on the south shore ( the north shore being nothing but a company of dangerous rocks , isles , and shoals ) .
This cape being within two leagues to the leeward of us , our Master greatly doubted that we could not double the same : nevertheless , being a man of good spirit , he resolutely made quick dispatch , and set sail .
Our sails had not been half an hour on board , but the foot-rope of our fore-sail  brake , so that nothing held but the oylet-holes .
The seas continually brake over the ship 's poop , and flew into the sails with such violence , that we still expected the tearing of our sails , or oversetting of the ship  and , besides , to our utter discomfort , we perceived that we fell still more and more to lee-ward , so that we could not double the cape .
We were now come within half a mile of the cape , and so near the shore , that the counter surf of the sea would rebound against the ship 's side , so that we were much dismayed with the horror of our present end .
Being thus at the very point of our death , the wind and the seas raging beyond measure , our Master veered some of the main sheet  and whether it was by that occasion , or by some current , or by the wonderful power of God , as we verily think it was , the ship quickened her way , and shot past that rock , where we thought we should have shored .
Then between the cape and the point there was a little bay  so that we were somewhat farther from the shore : and , when we came so far as the cape , we yielded to death  yet the Father of all mercies delivered us , and we doubled the cape about the length of our ship , or very little more .
Being shot past the cape , we presently took in our sails , which only God had preserved unto us  and when we were shot in between the high lands , the wind blowing trade , without an inch of sail , we spooned before the sea , three men being not able to guide the helm , and in six hours we were put twenty-five  leagues within the straits , where we found a sea answerable to the ocean .


In this time we freed our ship from water , and after we had rested a little , our men were not able to move  their sinews were stiff , and their flesh dead , and many of them ( which is most lamentable to be reported ) were so eaten with lice , as that in their flesh did lie clusters of them , as big as pease , yea and some as big as beans .
Being in this misery , we were constrained to put into a cove , for the refreshing of our men .
Our Master knowing the shore , and every cove very perfectly , put in with the shore , and moored to the trees , as before time we had done , laying our anchor to the sea-ward .
Here we continued until the 20th of October  but not being able any longer to stay , through extremity of famine , the 21st we put off into the channel , the weather being reasonably calm : but before night it blew most extremely at west-north-west .
The storm growing outrageous , our men could scarcely stand by their labour  and , the straits being full of turning reaches , we were constrained by the discretion of the Captain and Master in their accounts , to guide the ship in the hell-dark night , when we could not see any shore , the channel being in some places scarce three miles broad .
But our Captain , as we first passed through the straits , drew such an exquisite plan of the same , as I am assured it can not in any sort be bettered : which plan he and the Master so often perused , and so carefully regarded , as that in memory they had  every turn and creek , and in the deep-dark night , without any doubting , they conveyed the ship through that crooked channel  so that I conclude , the world hath not any so skilful pilots for that place , as they are  for otherwise we could never have passed in such sort as we did .


The 25th , we came to an island in the straits , named Penguin Isle , whither we sent our boat to seek relief , for there were great abundance of birds , and the weather was very calm  so we came to an anchor by the island in seven fathoms .
While our boat was on shore , and we had great store of penguins , there arose a sudden storm , so that our ship did drive over a breach , and our boat sunk at the shore .
Captain Cotton and the Lieutenant , being on shore , leapt into the boat and freed the same , and threw away all the birds , and with great difficulty recovered the ship : myself also was in the boat at the same time , where for my life I laboured to the best of my power .
The ship , all this while driving upon the lee-shore , when we came on board we helped to set sail , and weighed the anchor  for before our coming they could scarce hoist up their yards , yet with much ado they set their fore-course .
Thus in a mighty fret of weather , the 27th day of October we were free of the straits , and the 30th of October we came to Penguin Isle , being three leagues from Port Desire , the place where we purposed to seek for our relief .


When we were come to this isle we sent our boat on shore , which returned laden with birds  and eggs  and our men said the penguins were so thick upon the isle , that ships might be laden with them  for they could not go without trampling upon the birds , whereat we greatly rejoiced .
Then the captain appointed Charles Parker and Edward Smith , with twenty others , to go on shore , and to stay upon the isle , for the killing and drying of these penguins , and promised , after the ship was in harbour , to send the rest , not only for expedition , but also to save the small store of victuals in the ship .
But Parker , Smith , and the rest of their faction , suspected that this was a device of the captain 's to leave his men on shore , that , by these means , there might be victuals for the rest to recover their country : and when they remembered that this was the place where they would have slain their captain and master , surely ( thought they ) for revenge hereof will they leave us on shore .
Which , when our captain understood , he called God to witness , that revenge was no part of his thoughts  they gave him thanks , desiring to go into the harbour with the ship , which he granted .
So there were only ten left upon the isle , and the last of October we entered the harbour .
Our master , at our last being here , having taken careful notice of every creek in the river , in a very convenient place , upon sandy oaze , ran the ship a-ground , laying our anchor to seaward , and with our running ropes moored her to stakes upon the shore , which he had fastened for that purpose  where the ship remained till our departure .


 The 3d of November , our boat with water , wood , and as many as she could carry , went for the isle of Penguins  but being deep she durst not proceed , but returned again the same night .
Then Parker , Smith , Townshend , Purpet , with five others , desired that they might go by land , and that the boat might fetch them when they were against the isle , it being scarce a mile from the shore .
The captain bade them do what they thought best , advising them to take weapons with them : ' `` For , ( saith he ) although we have not at any time seen people in this place , yet in the country there may be savages . '' '
They answered : ' `` That here were great store of deer , and ostriches : but if there were savages , they would devour them . '' '
Notwithstanding , the captain caused them to take weapons with them , carlivers , swords , and targets : so the 6th of November , they departed by land , and the boat by sea  but from that day to this day we never heard of our men .
The 11th , while most of our men were at the isle , only the captain and master , with six others , being left in the ship , there came a great multitude of savages to the ship , throwing dust in the air , leaping and running like brute beasts , having vizards on their faces like dogs faces , or else their faces are dogs faces indeed .
We greatly feared lest they would set our ship on fire , for they would suddenly make fire , whereat we much marvelled : they came to windward of our ship , and set the bushes on fire , so that we were  in a very stinking smoak  but as soon as they came within our shot , we shot at them , and striking one of them in the thigh , they all presently fled  so that we never saw more of them .
Hereby we judged , that these cannibals had slain our nine men .
When we considered who they were that were thus murdered , and found that they were the principal men who would have murdered the captain and master , with their friends , we saw the just judgment of God , and made supplication to his Divine Majesty to be merciful unto us .
While we were in this harbour , our captain and master went with the boat to discover how far this river did run , that if need should enforce us to leave our ship , we might know how far we might go by water : so they found , that , farther than twenty miles , they could not go with the boat .
At their return they sent the boat to the isle of penguins : whereby we understood that the penguins dried to our hearts content , and that the multitude of them was infinite .
All the time that we were in this place , we fared passing well with eggs , penguins , young seals , young gulls , and other birds , such as I know not , of all which we had abundance .
In this place we found an herb called Scurvy-grass , which we fried with eggs , using train-oil instead of butter .
This herb did so purge the blood , that it took away all kinds of swellings , of which many had died , and restored us to perfect health of body  so that we were in as good case as when we came first out  of England .
We staid in this harbour until the 22d of December , in which time we had dried 20,000 penguins  and the captain , the master , and myself , had made some salt , by laying salt-water upon the rocks in holes , which , in six days would be kerned .
Thus God did feed us , even as it were with manna from heaven .


The 22d of December , we departed with our ship for the isle , where , with great difficulty , by the skilful industry of our master , we got 14,000 of our birds , and had almost lost our captain in labouring to bring the birds on board : and , had not our master been very expert in the set of those tides , which run after many fashions , we had also lost our ship in the same place .
The 22d at night we departed with 14,000 dried penguins , not being able to fetch the rest , and shaped our course for Brazil .
Now , our captain rated our victuals , and brought us to such allowance , as that our victuals might last six months  for our hope was , that within six months we might recover our country , though our sails were very bad .
So our allowance was two ounces and an half of meal for a man a-day , and to have so twice a-week  so that five ounces did serve for a week .
Three days a week we had oil , three spoonfuls for a man a-day  and two days in a week pease , a pint among four men a-day , and every day five penguins for four men , and six quarts of water for four men a-day .
This was our allowance   wherewith we lived , though weakly , and very feeble .
The 30th of January , we arrived at the isle of Placentia in Brazil , the first place that , outward-bound , we were at : and having made the shoal , our ship lying off at sea , the captain , with twenty-four of the company , went with the boat on shore , being a whole night before they could recover it .
The last of January , at sunrising , they suddenly landed , hoping to take the Portuguese in their houses , and by that means to recover some Casavi meal , or other victuals for our relief  but when they looked for the houses , they were all razed and burnt to the ground , so that we thought no man had remained on the island .
Then the captain went to the gardens , and brought from thence fruits and roots for the company , and came on board the ship , and brought her into a fine creek which we had found out , where we might moor her by the trees , and where there was water , and hoops to trim our casks .
Our case being very desperate , we presently laboured for dispatch away  some cut hoops , which the coopers made , others laboured upon the sails and ship , every man travailing for his life  and still a guard was kept on shore to defend those that laboured , every man having likewise his weapon by him .
The 3d of February , our men , with twenty-three shot , went again to the gardens , being three miles from us upon the north shore , and fetched Casavi-roots out of the ground , to relieve our company , instead of bread  for we spent not of  our meal while we staid here .
The 5th of February , being Monday , our captain and master hastened the company to their labour  so some went with the coopers to gather hoops , and the rest laboured on board .
This night many of our men in the ship dreamed of murder and slaughter : in the morning they reported their dreams : one saying to another , ' `` This night I dreamed that thou wert slain . '' '
Another answered , ' `` And I dreamed that thou wert slain . '' '
And this was general through the ship .
The Captain hearing this , who likewise had dreamed very strangely himself , gave very strict charge , that those who went on shore should take weapons with them , and saw them himself delivered into the boat , and sent some on purpose to guard the labourers .
All the forenoon they laboured in quietness , and when it was ten o'clock , the heat being extreme , they came to a rock near the wood 's side ( for all this country is nothing but thick woods ) , and there they boiled Casavi-roots , and dined .
After dinner some slept , others washed themselves in the sea , all being stripped to their shirts , and no man keeping watch , no match lighted , and not a piece charged .
Suddenly , as they were thus sleeping and sporting , having got themselves into a corner , out of sight of the ship , there came a multitude of Indians and Portuguese upon them , and slew them sleeping : only two escaped , one very sore hurt , the other not touched , by whom we understood of this miserable massacre .
 With all speed we manned our boat , and landed to succour our men  but we found them slain , and laid naked in rank one by another , with their faces upward , and a cross set by them : and withal we saw two very great pinnaces come from the river of Janeiro very full of men  who we suspected came from thence to take us  because there came from Janeiro soldiers to Santos , when the General had taken the town , and was strong in it .
Of seventy-six persons who departed in our ship out of England , we were now left but twenty-seven , having lost thirteen in this place , with their chief furniture , as muskets , calivers , powder , and shot .
Our casks were all in decay , so that we could not take in more water than was in our ship , for want of casks , and that which we had was marvellous ill-conditioned .
And being there moored by trees , for want of cables and anchors , we still expected the cutting of our moorings , to be beaten from our decks with our own furniture , and to be assailed by them of Janeiro .
What distress we were now driven into , I am not able to express .
To depart with eight tons of water in such bad casks , was to starve at sea , and in staying our case was ruinous .
These were hard choices  but , being thus perplexed , we made choice rather to fall into the hands of the Lord than into the hands of men .
So , concluding to depart , the 6th of February we were off in the channel , with our ordnance , and small shot , in readiness for any assault that should come  and , having a small  gale of wind , we recovered the sea in most deep distress .
Then bemoaning our estate one to another , and recounting over all our extremities , nothing grieved us more than the loss of our men twice , first being slaughtered by the cannibals at Port Desire , and at this isle of Placentia by the Indians and Portuguese .
And considering what they were who were lost , we found that all those who conspired the murdering of our Captain and Master were now slain by savages , the gunner only excepted .
Being thus at sea , when we came to Cape Frio the wind was contrary  so that three weeks we were grievously vexed with cross winds  and , our water consuming , our hope of life was very small .
Some desired to go to Baya , and to submit themselves to the Portuguese , rather than to die for thirst : but the Captain , with fair persuasions altered their purpose of yielding to the Portuguse .
In this distress it pleased God to send us rain in such plenty , as that we were well watered , and in good comfort to return .
But after we came near unto the sun , our dried penguins began to corrupt , and there bred in them a most loathsome and ugly worm , of an inch long .
This worm did so mightily increase , and devour our victuals , that there was in reason no hope how we should avoid famine , but he devoured of these wicked creatures  there was nothing that they did not devour , iron only excepted  our cloaths , hats , boots , shoes , shirts , and stockings : and for the ship , they did so eat the timbers , as that we  greatly feared they would undo us , by gnawing through the ship 's side .
Great was the care of our Captain , Master , and company , to consume these vermin , but the more we laboured to kill them , the more they increased  so that at the last we could not sleep for them , but they would eat our flesh , and bite like musquetos .
In this woeful case , after we had passed the Equinoctial Line towards the north , our men began to [ ... ] sick of such a monstrous disease , as I think the like was never heard of : for in their ancles it began to swell  from thence in two days it would be in their breasts , so that they could not draw their breath  and then fell into their lower parts , and there did swell most grievously , and most dreadful to behold , so that they could neither stand , [ ... ] , nor go  whereupon our men grew big with grief .
Our Captain , with extreme anguish of his soul , was in such woeful distress , that he desired only a speedy end  for divers grew raging mad , and some died in most loathsome and furious pain .
It were incredible to write our misery as it was .
There was no man in perfect h [ ... ] alth , but the Captain and one boy  the Master being a man of good spirit , with extreme labour , bore out his grief , so that it grew not upon him .
To be short , all our men died , except sixteen , of which there were but five able to move .
The Captain was in good health , the Master indifferent , Captain Cotton and myself swolen and short-winded , yet better than the rest who were sick , and one  boy in health : upon us five only the labour of the ship did stand : The Captain and Master as occasion served , would take in and heave out the top-sails  the Master only attended on the sprit-sail  and all of us at the capstan without sheets and tacks .
In fine , our misery and weakness was so great , that we could not take in or heave out a sail : so our top-sail and sprit-sail were torn all in pieces by the weather .
The Master and Captain taking their turns at the helm , were mightily distressed , and monstrously grieved with the woeful lamentation of our sick men .
Thus , as lost wanderers upon the sea , the 11th of June 1593 , it pleased God that we arrived at Bear Haven in Ireland , and there ran the ship on shore  where the Irishmen helped us to take in our sails , and to moor our ship for floating  which slender pains of theirs cost our Captain ten pounds , before he could have the ship in safety .
Thus , without victuals , sails , men , or any furniture , God only guided us into Ireland , where the Captain left the Master and three or four of the company to keep the ship  and , within five days after , he and certain others had passage in an English fisher-boat to Padstow , in Cornwall .
In this manner our small remnant , by God 's mercy only , were preserved and restored to our country , to whom be all honour and glory world within end . ''


We have already observed , that the above relation is the only complete account of this voyage  which has hitherto appeared  by which we would be understood to mean , that it is the only complete account of the proceedings of any one of the ships engaged in this second expedition of Cavendish , from her first setting out till her return home .
There are other accounts of the distresses attending this voyage , but they refer to parts only , and do not contain a regular series of events from beginning to end , as we shall endeavour to shew , in pursuance of our plan of tracing the great out-lines of the lives of our celebrated circum-navigators , from their first entering upon action till the period of their retreat .


When the impartial reader revolves in his mind the effects of distresses like those already described in the foregoing account , upon a company of ungovernable sailors , not under that subordination , which regular discipline always establishes to officers properly commissioned , he will then be prepared to determine , whether Cavendish complains with reason against Davis , as being the death of him , and to use his own words , ' `` the decay of the whole action : '' ' or , whether the miscarriage did not arise partly from unavoidable accidents , and partly from the impetuosity of his own temper , and his own misconduct .


The misfortunes that attended the progress of this most distressful voyage , appear to us to have taken their rise from the accident of being becalmed for seven-and-twenty days under the Line  during which time they not only consumed  a considerable proportion of their provisions , but the men became sick  and the scurvy , which seldom makes its approaches on this side the Equator , had already infected near half the crews .


This reduced them to the necessity , not only of seeking land , where fresh provisions might be procured , but of wasting more time with a view to the recovery of the sick , than was consistent with the navigation of those boisterous seas through which they were to pass .


` We have already seen that when they were masters of Santos , they were in the utmost distress for want of provisions , and yet the opportunity was suffered to pass without obtaining any effectual relief  and that this distress is not aggravated by the writer of the above voyage , appears from the testimony of Knivet , in Purchas 's Pilgrams , who says , ' ' `` that here they had such disorders among themselves , that if the Portuguese had been of any courage , they might have destroyed the whole fleet  for our men , says he , would fight for their victuals , as if they had been no Christians but Jews '' ( which by the way shews the strange notions which the multitude in those days entertained of the uncharitable disposition of the Jews to one another  a characteristic not at all applicable to that people )  `` and they that got the best would get them into some hole , or into the wilderness under some tree , and there they would remain as long as they had meat . '' '


 From this early beginning of distress , very little hope could be reasonably entertained of the issue .
The season was advancing fast , when the severity of the weather would render their proceeding into the South Seas by the straits of Magellan very dangerous  and , being already in want of provisions , they could have no means of an effectual supply till they could reach the fertile countries on the opposite side of those straits  the General 's prolonging his stay therefore on the eastermost coasts of Brazil till the 22d of January , was not only an imprudent but a fatal delay  and , as it was foreseen , proved the actual ruin of the voyage .


At the time when they should have passed the straits of Magellan , they were in consultation , if not worse employed , at Santos  and after they set sail they were attacked by a storm , of which Cavendish himself says , ' `` a worser might not be endured .
Such was the fury of the west-south-west winds , as we were driven from the shore four hundred leagues , and constrained to beat from 50 deg .
to the southward into 40 degrees to the northward again , before we could come near the shore  in which time we had a new shift of sails clean blown away , and our ship in danger to sink in the sea three times  which with extremity of men 's labour we recovered . '' '
Here the reason that prevented Cavendish 's arrival at Port Desire till the 18th of March , 12 days after the Desire and Roebuck , is fully explained .
And  And after he had refitted his ship and refreshed his men , and was ready to sail , he goes on in the same letter , which is directed to Sir Tristriam Gorges , ' `` And now , '' says he , `` we were almost four months beating between the coast of Brazil and the straits , being in distance not above 600 leagues , which is commonly run in twenty or thirty days  but such was the adverseness of our fortune , that in coming thither we spent the summer , and found in the straits the beginning of a most extreme winter , not durable for Christians . '' '


After this concession , compared with what the writer of Davis 's voyage has related of the sufferings of his people , let the reader determine with what justice Cavendish arraigns Davis , when he attributes to the villainy of that officer his own death , and the ruin of the voyage .


But to pursue the narrative of the General 's proceedings from the time of his parting with the Desire and Black Pinnace in the night of the 20th of May , as already related in the preceding voyage .
It appears indeed , that he continued his course to the coast of Brazil accompanied by the Roebuck , which , however , was parted from him in lat .
36 [ ... ] S. in one of the most grievous storms , as he himself confesses , that any Christians ever endured upon the seas to live , in which the Roebuck sprung her masts , and was otherwise so much damaged , as to arrive in the bay of St. Vincent in the greatest distress , being little better than a mere wreck .


 The General himself suffered considerably , and was forced to take shelter likewise in the same bay , though the little town of St. Vincent they had burnt on their leaving Santos the summer before .
Here twenty-five of his men , getting drunk on shore , were suddenly set upon by the Portuguese , in revenge for their former treatment , and every man of them slaughtered .
To revenge this treachery , as it is called , Cavendish determined to attack Santos , and to level it with the ground  and now , being joined by the crew of the Roebuck , he landed above the town , but was most shamefully repulsed , after having plundered a few farm-houses , and , as it should seem the custom was , set them on fire .


Here being disappointed of his revenge , he departed with a view to attack a small inhabited island about twenty leagues to the westward  from whence , when he had provided himself with such necessaries as the island could afford , he intended , according to his promise , and agreeable to the expectations of Davis , to have returned to the straits of Magellan , and to have proceeded to the South Seas , in prosecution of his first design .
But there seemed a fatality attending every measure he devised .


He was diverted from the prosecution of this enterprize by the persuasions of a Portuguese pilot on board , who advised the attack of Spirito Santo , as the only place that could supply his wants , and enable him to refit his ships .
In this undertaking he lost fourscore of his men  killed , and forty wounded .
And now , having no alternative , but either to return home , or to burn one of his ships for want of hands , and proceed with the other to the straits  the crew of the Roebuck , fearing , as they well might , that theirs was the ship destined for the flames , watched their opportunity when their Captain was sick on board the General , to make their escape in the night , taking with them both the surgeons , and , as Cavendish says , double the proportion of provisions for their number of men , ' `` having with them at their departure but six and forty men , and carrying away with them the proportion for six months victual of 120 men at large . '' '
Yet it is not easy to reconcile the truth of this assertion with the distresses for want of provisions , which are all along complained of from their first arrival on the coast of Brazil in the summer to the present time .
In the straits of Magellan , it is asserted , that , to save their victuals , they were forced in a great measure to live upon sea-weeds , muscles , periwincles , and the fruits of the country  for , says Knivet , the allowance from the ship was but little .
- But to proceed :


Cavendish , finding himself thus forsaken , every where disappointed , betrayed , as he complains , and distressed to the last extremity , his ship full of sick and wounded , and himself with a wounded spirit , directed his course to the island of St. Sebastian , 200 leagues to the westward of Spirito Santo , where he arrived when he had  but just one cask of water left .
Here he set 20 of his sick men ashore  and , having refitted his ship , and refreshed his people , he wanted very much to have sailed back to the straits : ' `` But , says his biographer , his mutinous crew obliged him to sail for England  '' ' and he died before his return .


In his letter to Sir Tristriam Gorges , which appears to have been written a little before his death , he discovers the utmost  perturbation of mind . '
`` And now , says he , what with grief for the loss of my most dear cousin [ John Lock ] , and the continual trouble I endured among such hell-hounds [ his ship 's crew ] , wishing myself upon any desart place in the world , there to die , rather than thus basely to return home again  which course I had put in execution , had I found an island which the charts make to be in eight degrees to the southward of the Line .
I swear to you I sought it with all diligence , meaning ( if I had found it ) there to have ended my unfortunate life .
But God suffered not such happiness to light upon me  for I could by no means find it  so was forced to come towards England '' '


The bitterness which he expresses against his crew might , and did , probably , arise from their determined resolution not to expose themselves to the like hardships they had already undergone , and in which the major part of their companions were suffered to perish without pity ,  and to languish without relief : for , if we may believe Jane , the sick men on board the General were most uncharitably put on shore into the woods in the straits of Magellan  where , according to Cavendish 's own account , ' `` there was nothing but such flights of snow , and extremities of frosts , as in his life he had never beheld or felt the like .
The men , adds he , were well in the morning , and by night frozen to death . '' '
In this miserable manner , in seven or eight days , 40 of his crew actually perished , and 70 more sickened .


Of the ships that sailed in this expedition , consisting of five sail , we can trace only three that returned to England , namely , the Galleon , otherwise named the Leicester , of which the General was Commander  the Dainty , commanded by Captain Cotton , who went a volunteer , and whose ship , having parted company on her first arrival on the coast of Brazil , instead of pursuing her voyage to the South Seas , returned back to England with very little damage .


The Roebuck , in which sailed from Plymouth 170 brave seamen , after stealing away from the General in the night , as already related , was never more heard of  the Black Pinnace foundered in a violent storm in the South Sea , and in her about 70 men .
Of the crews of the Desire , only 26 out of 150 lived to see their native country  and , of the General 's ship , though the number that perished can not be exactly ascertained , yet there could not more than 50 at most survive their General .


 Now , if the gallant actions and glorious exploits that entitle men to fame and immortality , involve in their atchievement so many of their fellow-creatures in misery , let the benevolent and humane unite with us in depreciating such murderous practices  and , instead of holding forth a Drake , or a Cavendish , as examples worthy of imitation , let us hold in detestation all those false worthies , whose actions have their rise in ' `` a ravenous appetite for robbery , and in an insatiable desire of acquiring wealth without industry , and greatness without virtue . '' '


4 .
THE VOYAGES OF CAPT. WILLIAM DAMPIER .


 AMONG the Navigators who first surrounded the globe , Captain William Dampier , considered as a Mariner and Naturalist , will ever be held in the foremost rank .
From his Voyages the world received the earliest and best information of remote countries , and their genuine productions  and it is on his plan that future navigators have thought fit to proceed in giving an account of new discoveries .
His history will afford a notable instance of the power of genius and application unassisted by learning , when the mind is wholly bent upon the pursuit and improvement of one art .


He was the son of parents who lived in the parish of East Coker , in Somersetshire , reputable , but not rich .
While they lived they gave him an education very ill suited to a sea-faring life  but they both dying when he was yet young , those to whose care he was entrusted removed him from the grammar-school , and put him to an English school to learn writing and accompts .
Here he did not remain long before  an opportunity offered of placing him with the master of a ship at Weymouth , agreeable to the inclinations which he had very early discovered of going to sea  a lesson to parents and guardians to consult the genius of children , if they would wish them to rise to eminence in the profession to which they are bred .


With this master he made a short voyage to France , and was highly gratified : but , his next voyage being to Newfoundland , where he was employed a whole summer in the fishery , the rigour of the climate and the nature of the servi [ ... ] so cooled his ardour for sea-adventures , that he [ ... ] termined to relinquish the employment , and return to his friends .


He was now eighteen years of age  and , after leading for some time an idle life , finding his friends begin to look cool upon him , he formed a resolution to leave the country , and to try his fortune in town .
His course of life , and the natural bent of his inclination , led him to seek the company of sea-faring companions , who , being pleased with his jovial humour , encouraged him to resume his old employment , to which , having an opportunity to enter on board an Indiaman , he was easily persuaded .


In this ship , the John and Martha , Captain Earning , he sailed to Bantam , in quality of a foremastman  and in little more than a year returned to England , perfectly reconciled to the business of a mariner , which , by the severity of  the service he was first employed in , he had determined never to follow .


In this voyage , by favour of the master of the ship , he learned the rudiments of the art of navigation , in which he afterwards became a great proficient  but he had not yet learned to keep a journal .
It should seem that he employed the following year , after his Indian voyage , in improving those hints which he received from the master , and in qualifying himself for an easier and more advantageous birth , than that of going before the mast for the future .
With this view he retired again into the country , and spent the summer with his brother .
But , tired of a studious life , he embraced the occasion of the Dutch war , to enter on board the Royal Prince , commanded by Sir Edward Sprague , but in what station does not appear .
He tells us , indeed , that he was in two engagements  but that , falling sick , he was put on board the hospital ship , and saw the third only at a distance , in which his Commander was unfortunately killed  so that he does not seem to have risen higher at this period than the ordinary rank of an able seaman .


Being soon after removed to Harwich among the rest of the sick and wounded , he there languished till the conclusion of the Dutch war , when he received his discharge  and then returned again to Somersetshire for the recovery of his health  which was no sooner restored man he prepared again to go to sea .


 But Colonel Hellier , a neighbouring Gentleman , having a large plantation in Jamaica , being acquainted with his resolution , made him an offer of going there as a superintendant , with a handsome appointment  which he very readily accepted  and , about the beginning of the year 1674 , embarked for Jamaica .
But he soon grew tired of land service  his roving disposition still inclining him to seek the sea .
The road , he says , to take possession of his new office , when he arrived at Jamaica , was formerly a great way round : but Mr. Hellier , the Colonel 's brother , being desirous of shortening the way , coasted along the river with some companions , till they found it run between rocks that rose perpendicular on both sides : they endeavoured to climb that which intercepted the way to the plantation : but , while they with the utmost danger and difficulty were surmounting the rock , a dog they had with them found a more convenient passage through a hole .
This suggested to Mr. Hellier a new track : so by blowing up some fragments of the rock in one part , and levelling some hollows in others , a passage was obtained wide enough for a loaded horse .
By this accidental discovery the road was shortened near one half .


He was now in his 22d year .
In six months after his arrival at Jamaica he was tired of his superintendency , and quitted it  and soon after engaged in a trade with the logwood-cutters in Campeachy bay  which trade he followed near three years , and then commenced logwood-cutter  himself .
Unsettled in his mind , and still eager in pursuit of new adventures , in less than a year he quitted the logwood-cutters  and about the beginning of 1678 , returned to England .


In 1679 , we find him again returned to Jamaica , with a cargo of merchandize , which being sold at Port Royal , he furnished himself with other goods , such as he knew he could carry to a good market at Campeachy  and by this advantageous traffic , he so inriched himself , as to be able to purchase an estate in his own country , of one whom he knew had a good title to it .
And now , sufficiently happy , he was preparing to return home  when one Mr. Hobby invited him to make a short trading voyage to the Moskito-shore , a part of the world he had not yet seen .
This invitation to embark in a new adventure he could not resist  and , therefore , sent home the writings of his late purchase to his brother , with the same friends whom he purposed to have accompanied to England himself , and then went on board with Mr. Hobby .


The Moskitos , he says , are Indians that inhabit the main , between the Honduras and Nicaragua .
They are tall , well-made , raw-boned , lusty , strong , and nimble of foot , long visaged , have lank black hair , look stern , are hard favoured , and of a dark copper-coloured complexion .
They are but a small nation  the same , perhaps , that Drake calls Symerons .
They are very dexterous at throwing the lance , fisgig , harpoon , or any manner of dart , being bred to it  from their infancy  for the children , imitating their parents , never go abroad without a lance , which they throw indifferently at almost every object that falls in their way , till by constant practice they become masters of the art .
They next learn to parry a lance , arrow , or dart  and the training of them to this exercise is in this manner : Two boys place themselves at a small distance , and throw light blunt lances at each other  one throws the lance , and the other parries , alternately .
He that parries holds a small stick in his right hand , with which he turns aside the lance that is darted at him : and , by constantly practising in this manner , they at last become so dexterous , that they will shoot arrows at each other , and parry them as fast as they are shot .
This they will do with a small stick no bigger than the rammer of an ordinary fowling-piece .


Before they arrive at manhood , they become so dexterous , that they disregard the arrows of their enemies  and , unless they are poured thick upon them , and come more than one at a time , they will suffer not one in a thousand to hit them .


They are no less expert at strinking of fish : and two or three of them will in those seas maintain a ship 's company of 100 men .
Turtle and manatee are their principal pursuit : the former will commonly weigh 600 weight  and two Moskito men will strike two of them a-day , while the season lasts , for many days together .
 The manatee is known also by the name of the sea-cow , and is struck with a harpoon , so contrived by the Moskito-men as to be thrown with a long stick  but they are very cautious of discovering their art even to the English - the Spaniards they hate mortally .
The turtle they strike with a different instrument , of which our author has given a cut .


About this time the aera of buccaneering commences .
The buccaneers were a set of low men , who , in humble imitation of their betters , first began with fitting out small vessels in some of the islands in the West Indies , and then cruising in them till they were able to make themselves masters of better ships .
This being accomplished , they went in formidable companies as occasion offered , and declared open war against all the Spanish settlements .
These free-booters had generally two or three Moskito-men on board each of their vessels , whom they found serviceable in many other respects besides supplying them with fish .
By their situation they had opportunities of being well acquainted with the strength and riches of the Spanish settlements , and by their inclination they were their avowed enemies .
They therefore served the buccaneers for guides , and at the same time assisted in their most hazardous attacks .


This being premised , let us now return to Dampier , who , as has just been said , had agreed to make a voyage with Captain Hobby  and having set sail from Port Royal , either by  accident or design , they fell in with Coxen , Sawkings , Sharp , and other buccaneers , who were riding at anchor on the west side of the island of Jamaica , and were then meditating an enterprize over the isthmus of Darien , in order to fall suddenly upon the Spaniards in the South Seas .
This expedition , it was given out , would enrich the undertakers  and as all who engaged in it , according to the law of buccaneers , were to be proportionable sharers , all Captain Hobby 's men deserted him to join the buccaneers , Dampier only excepted , who , after three or four days consideration , was easily persuaded to make one among the rest .


Shortly after Christmas , 1680 , they all set sail , and steering to Porto Bello , on the 5th of April , they landed near Golden Island , to the number of between three and four hundred men , and began their march guided by chiefs of the Muskito Indians , and headed by Captain Sawkings , who , by general consent , was chosen their leader .


After a fatiguing journey of nine days , in which many of them suffered great hardships , they arrived at Santa Martha , a Spanish settlement on a river of that name that empties itself into the Southern ocean  which after some opposition they took .
They were made to believe , before they approached it , that it was a place of considerable strength , abounding in riches , and inhabited by merchants of considerable property  but upon entering it , they were  greatly disappointed , and therefore , as might be expected from such a lawless crew , they were as ready to fall upon those who had projected the enterprize , as upon those whom they accounted the enemy .


They now , much discontented with one another , parted company .
One party , continuing their march to the Southern ocean , and there embarking , some in canoes , some in periagos , and some in small barks which they found in the river , continued their course to the bay of Panama , and in their way attempted the little town of Puebla Novo , before which their commander in chief Captain Sawkings was killed , and his followers defeated .
In what manner this undisplined crew procured ships , guns , and ammunition , we are not told  yet ships , guns , and ammunition to pursue their ravages they did procure , as appears by the sequel .


Captain Coxen , with his company , foreseeing many difficulties in this Southern project , after the taking of Santa Martha , returned to the North Seas , where he continued his piracies with various success .


Dampier , however , followed the views of those who persevered in their first resolution of prosecuting their fortune in the South Seas  and he continued to accompany them during the year 1680  but , after the death of Sawkings , Captain Sharpe being chosen commander in chief in his room , Dampier with many of his companions , suspecting both the courage  and honesty of their new leader , entered into a confederacy to displace him , and to choose Capt. Watling in his room , which they soon found means to accomplish by general consent .
Under Captain Sharpe , the only enterprize of consequence was the taking of Ylo , a small island on the Peruvian coast , from whence they sailed to Juan Fernandez , where , as has been said , Captain Sharpe was displaced .


It happened , however , that Captain Watling , soon after his advancement , having planned an attack upon Arica , sell a victim to his own project  for he was killed in the first onset , and his party defeated .
The confederates , after this misfortune , remaining some time without a leader , fell again into party divisions  one party declaring themselves in favour of their former Commander , the other opposing his re-election .
To put an end to these dissentions , it was at last agreed to part companies , and to cast lots which company should keep possession of the ship .
It happened that the party in opposition to Dampier proved the fortunate party  so that Dampier and his companions were reduced to the necessity of returning either to the N. Sea over the same isthmus by which they came into the South , or submitting themselves to the mercy of the Spaniards .
Nor does it appear that any of them carried more riches back than they brought with them , notwithstanding the vast promises with which they had been flattered at their first setting out : for it has been generally observed ,  that the confederacies of the wicked are defeated by their own deceit  and that they themselves are , for the most part , the instruments of their own misfortunes .


The company with which Dampier chose to associate , consisted of 44 men who bore arms , a Spanish Indian who bore arms also , two Moskito Indians , already described , with five slaves taken in the South Seas , whom they kept to carry their luggage .
The vessels they had to carry this company were , the long-boat belonging to the ship , and two canoes , one of which had been sawn asunder , and joined again  and these were furnished for their defence with two patararoes , the companies small arms , and , a very scanty proportion of provisions and ammunition : and , thus equipped , they had to sail more than 200 leagues before they reached the river of Santa Martha , from whence they were to set out on their march by land for the North Sea .
Such an enterprize , one would imagine , could hardly have been undertaken with any hope of succeeding by reasonable men .


On April the 17th , 1681 , they parted with Captain Sharpe , 12 leagues to the north-west of the island of Plate  and , on May the 1st , they landed , after many strange adventures , in the bay of Panama , in order to pursue their journey .
Here they found the river Santa Martha , of which they meant to avail themselves , blocked up by a ship of considerable force , that had been stationed there for more than six months to intercept  their passage .
This obliged them to seek a new tract , through which , however , the greatest part of the company , with incredible difficulty , passed safe to the opposite shore , among whom was Dampier , whose hardiness enabled him to undergo the severest trials , and whose well-judged precautions exempted him from many unnecessary sufferings , to which others by their imprudence frequently exposed themselves .


On the 1st of May , about three in the afternoon , they began their march  and , on the 23d , they completed their journey  in which time they travelled 110 miles , crossing some lofty mountains , but chiefly keeping along the vallies among deep and dangerous rivers , some of which they forded , some they passed by felling large trees upon the banks , and some they were obliged to swim over in their cloaths and accoutrements .
Those who could not swim were dragged through by means of ropes .
Their first landing-place upon the south coast was very disadvantageous to them , and forced them to a circuit of 50 miles more than was necessary .
Could they have landed in the bay of Santa Martha , or navigated the river Chepoa , by either of which the Indians pass from one shore to the other , in three days , they might have shortened their journey more than one half .


Those , however , who arrived on the north coast first , among whom was Dampier , embarked immediately on board a French buccaneer , Captain Tristrian , Commander , who , in two days  after they arrived , joined eight sail of buccaneers more , who were planning another expedition over-land to Panama : but , when they were told of the ill success of the first , the fatigues they must undergo , the risks they must run , and at length the uncertainty of the event , they unanimously concurred in relinquishing that design , and held a consultation what other enterprize was fit for such a formidable body of them to undertake .
At length , they concluded to attack a Spanish town up Carpenter 's river , and for that purpose set sail one after another , in order to preserve secresy , having previously appointed a place of rendezvous .
When the ship in which our navigator sailed arrived at the place appointed , they found Captain Wright there before them , who had taken a Spanish Tartan with 30 men , well furnished with small arms , and four patararoes , who with 12 armadillos had been fitted out to seek the buccaneers , and to sink them .
This , they that came over-land , who were heartily tired with living among the French , thought a good opportunity to set up for themselves  they therefore applied to Captain Wright , requesting him to fit up the Tartan for them  to which , after some hesitation , he consented , on condition that they should be under his command as one and the same ship  to which they made no objection .


The rest of th [ ... ] fleet not arriving at the general rendezvous , according to agreement , it was soon discovered , that the Spanish armadillos [ or  small men of war ] had fallen in with and dispersed them .
Every one , therefore , was at liberty to pursue his own enterprize  and Captain Wright with his new associates chose the coast of Carthagena to try their fortune .
Here they were joined by Captain Yankey  and , falling in with a stout ship , they fought and took her .
She proved to be a prize of 14 guns and 40 men , laden with sugar and tobacco , and had eight or ten tons of marmalet on board .
The Captains differed about the right to the ship .
Yankey , however , took possession by vote of the crews  and Captain Wright took Yankey 's ship , which was better than his own .
The cargo , after a great deal of difficulty , they disposed of at a Dutch settlement for less than one-fourth of its value .


However , the goods being now converted into ready money , the produce was shared , and the Captains parted .
Captain Wright stood for the Caracca coast , with his men drunk , and quarrelling every day  and Captain Yankey pursued a quite different course .
On the coast of the Caraccas , Captain Wright took three barks , one laden with hides , one with European commodities , and a third with earthen-wares and brandy .
With these barks he went to the island Rocu  and , having divided the cargoes into three equal parts , he gave to every 20 men ( for they were 60 in all ) one part and a bark , and so dismissed them .
That in which our navigator had an interest was brought to Virginia on July 16 ,  1682 , where we shall leave both him and the ship , to give some account of Captain Yankey .


On board of Yankey sailed one Mr. Cook , as quarter-master , the second in command , according to buccaneer law  and , they having taken a prize from the Spaniards , the command of the prize was claimed by Mr. Cook , on board of which all who chose to sail under the new Captain had liberty so to do : among others there were several who came over-land with him from the South Seas ( for he too had left Captain Sharpe , and had followed the example of Dampier ) .
All these chose to follow the fortune of their old acquaintance : but the Frenchmen grudging the English the possession of so fine a vessel , together with their share of the goods on board her , combined together  and , after plundering them of ship , goods , arms , and money , turned them all a-drift on the island of Vacca .
In this destitute condition , Captain Tristrian , of whom mention has already been made , shewed some compassion , by taking on board about eight or nine of them , among whom were Capt. Cook and Captain Davis , formerly masters of buccaneers , who , being carried into Petit Guavres , found means , when the French crews were carousing on shore , to make themselves masters of their benefactor 's ship , to slip her cable , and to steer with all the sail they could spread to Vacca to the relief of their starving countrymen , who , overjoyed to be released , instantly came on board  and , soon after they set sail , had the  good fortune to make prize of a ship laden with wine , which was newly come from France .
They afterwards fell in with a ship of good force , of which they likewise made prize  and in her they came to the resolution of sailing into the South Seas , and ranging the coasts of Chili and Peru .
But , first , it was necessary for them to sail to Virginia to dispose of their spare ships and cargoes , and to fit their capital prize for war .
This they did by mounting her with 28 guns , and furnishing her with stores , provisions , and other necessaries for the prosecution of so long a voyage .
When these ships arrived at Virginia , Dampier , and all those who came over-land with him , happened to be there  and , being made acquainted with Captain Cook 's intention , they very readily agreed to join in his adventure .


And now , having followed Dampier through all the busy scenes of action in which he was engaged , till his 30th year , we come at length to that period , at which the more notable adventures of his life commence .


On the 18th of August , 1683 , he set sail from Achamack river , in Virginia , in the prize under the command of Captain Cook  and , on the 23d , they met with a violent tempest , which lasted without intermission till the 28th , during which time they shipt some of the heaviest seas that ever ship endured .
But as soon as the storm abated , they had fine weather , and a brisk gale , till they arrived at the islands of Cape Verd , where they staid to careen their ship , to refresh  themselves , and to take in fresh water .
This they did at the little island of Sal : but , being told that the island of Mayo abounded most with cattle , they left Sal , and went to Mayo to purchase provisions .
Here they met with a cold reception  the inhabitants absolutely refusing to have any traffic with them , or to suffer them to land : the reason was , that about a week before , an English ship pretending friendship had cast anchor , and by a shew of kindness had invited the Governor with his train on board  but , as soon as they had them in their power , they caused them to write for cattle and other provisions , by way of ransom , to regain their liberty  and , what was still more base , after they were furnished with what they required , they carried off their prisoners , who had not then been heard of .
Dampier afterwards learnt , that the Englishman who was guilty of this treachery was Captain Bond , who afterwards surrendering himself to the Spaniards , entered into their service , and taught them to fit out fire-ships , of which they were before totally ignorant in the South Seas .


From Mayo they sailed to Sherboro , on the coast of Africa , where they staid a few days , and purchased rice , palm-wines , sugar , honey , and fowls , and then made sail for the straits of Magellan .
On the 6th of February , 1684 , they came in sight of the straits mouth  but the wind being contrary , they continued their course to the south , and doubled Cape Horn .
In latitude 57 , when they thought themselves clear of the cape ,  they encountered a storm on the 14th of February , which lasted without abatement till the 3d of March , during which time the rain poured down immoderately for many days  by which , however , they were plentifully supplied with fresh water .


When the storm abated , the wind changed to the south , and proved very favourable  for at this time they found themselves in lat .
60 deg .
S. But , the gale continuing brisk , by the 17th of March they had run to the height of Baldivia , in 48 deg .
S. On the 19th , in the morning , they saw a ship to the southward coming after them with all the sail she could croud .
Supposing her to be a Spanish ship from Baldivia and Lima , they lay by for her  but , on her nearer approach , they saw she was an English ship  and , upon hailing her , was told that her Captain 's name was Eaton , that she came from London , and was bound for a cruise in the South Seas .


Rogues are always good friends till they come to share their booty  so these free-booters agreed to sail together  and accordingly kept company to the island of Juan Fernandez , where they both prepared to refresh and refit .


March 22 , 1684 , they anchored in the south bay , in 25 fathoms water , not a cable 's length from the shore  and as soon as Captain Cook 's ship was moored , Dampier was eager to go ashore to look for a Moskito-man , whom they had left in this island , when they were driven from it in the  year 1681 , by three Spanish men of war , Dampier being at that time in the ship commanded by Captain Watling , just after Captain Sharpe was displaced .
This man , when Captain Watling drew off his crew , happened to be in the woods hunting for goats  and the ship was under sail before he came back .
Dampier was curious to know whether this Moskito-man was yet alive  and , if he was , how it had fared with him  and it seemed that the Indian was no less anxious to enquire after his friends , when he saw that the ships that were approaching were English ships .
The poor fellow had observed them the day before , when first they came in sight , and , judging about what time they would come to an anchor , he had killed three goats , and gathered greens , ready to dress as soon as the company should be at liberty to come on shore .
He was already upon the beach before the ships could be well secured , and was first seen by one of his countrymen who happened to be on board , and it was no small pleasure to mark the excessive joy of these two Indians at their meeting .
The Moskito-man belonging to the ship was named Robin : he on the island Will .
Robin was the first who leapt on shore  and , running to Will , threw himself flat on his face at his feet , who , helping him up , and embracing him , fell flat in like manner with his face at Robin 's feet , and was by him taken up and embraced as before .
The surprize , the tenderness , the solemnity of the interview , which was exceedingly  affectionate on both sides , was admired even by the crews of buccaneers , who were spectators from the ships of what passed on shore .
When Dampier , who was his old friend , came up , Will was no less transported with joy to see him than to meet his countryman , but he expressed it in quite another manner : other friends too he met with among the crew who knew him , and they were all over-joyed at meeting so unexpectedly  for these men are very much beloved on board the ships wherever they sail , for their readiness to assist in whatever service they are put upon .
When the ceremonies of congratulation were over , and they had time to make enquiries , he told them , that he was several times sought after by the Spaniards , who knew that he was left upon the island  because when the ship set sail he was in sight of the shore , and was seen by them before he could secrete himself : but as he was continually upon the watch , and had discovered a safe retreat , they never had been able to find him .
He had with him , he said , his gun and his knife , a small horn of powder , and a few shot .
These being soon spent , he contrived a way , by notching his knife , to saw the barrel of his gun in small pieces , with which he made harpoons , lance-heads , hooks , and a long knife  heating the pieces first in the fire , which he lighted after the English manner , by striking his gun-flint against the back of his knife .
The iron when it was hot he hammered with stones , and formed it into the various shapes he had occasion to apply it .
By continued labour  and perseverance , he had worked himself such a complete set of instruments , for killing and catching his provisions by land and water , as surprized the people when they were brought out for their inspection .
But , says Dampier , it is no more than these Moskito-men are accustomed to do in their own country , where they make their own fishing and striking instruments , without either forge or anvil : and other Indians are still more ingenious  for they make hatchets of a very hard stone , with which they cut down trees , make canoes , and frame their houses .


Poor Will had built himself a little house about a mile and a half from the shore , which he had made warm and convenient , by lining it with goat-skins .
He had likewise raised himself a couch about two feet above the ground , which he had also made soft with the fur of the animals he caught , and with the down of the young birds ( for he could catch no other ) which he occasionally met with and pluckt .
Cloaths he had none  for he had worn them to rags among the bushes and brambles through which he was often obliged to pursue his prey .
He had been on the island about three years  and in all that time had never conversed with any human being .
He had seen Spaniards  but he always took care , after the first , that none of them should ever see him .


At this island these free booters staid sixteen days  and , on the 8th of April , the two ships set sail together , and pursued their course northwards  towards the Line , at the distance of 12 or 14 leagues from the shore , for fear of being seen .
The land from 24 deg .
to 10 deg .
S. is of a most prodigious height , with ridges of such lofty mountains from one end of Peru and Chili to the other , that their summits seem to rise above the clouds  and from the sea they appear for ever blue .
Dampier attributes to the excessive height of these mountains , the want of great rivers in all this tract  and says , there seldom falls any rain from 30 deg .
to 4 deg .
S .
He adds , that the limits of the Pacific Ocean ought to be confined within that space extended westward indefinitely  for , in all this tract of water , says he , there are no dark rainy clouds , nor any winds , but trade winds , no tempests , no tornadoes , or hurricanes , though north of the Line , they are met with in this Ocean as well as the Atlantic .
There is , however , often a thick horizon , so as to hinder an observation of the sun with the quadrant  and , sometimes , hazy mornings , and thick mists , but not such as will wet one .
The rivers in all this tract , he says , run small  sometimes they run at one season of the year , and at others are quite dry .
These observations , if just , are truly wonderful .


They coasted along the Pacific Ocean from Juan Fernandez to lat .
9 deg .
40 min .
S. without meeting with any thing worthy of note  but , on the 3d of May , they fell in with a ship laden with timber , which they instantly took without resistance .
From this ship they learnt ,  that the Spaniards were apprized of their being upon their coasts , and that the Viceroy had sent expresses to all the sea-ports to put the inhabitants upon their guard against any sudden attack .


On this intelligence they immediately altered their course , and steered for Lobos de la Mer , in lat .
6 deg .
24 min .
S .
Here they cleared their ships bottoms  and strictly questioned their prisoners concerning the state of the country , and which were the towns of greatest note .
Several towns were mentioned  but Truxillo appeared to be that which , if conquered , would yield the most profit : Truxillo was therefore the place agreed upon to make a descent .
In their passage they descried three sail : Eaton pursued two of those to seaward  and Cook presently made prize of that which was nearest the land .
They were ships laden with flour for Panama  in one of which was found a letter from the Viceroy of Lima to the President of Panama , acquainting him with enemies being upon the coast , and with the supposed strength of their forces .
They also found an image of the Blessed Virgin in wood , and a stately mule , being a present to the President , with seven or eight tons of marmalate of quinces , which is eaten as a great delicacy in that country .
From the prisoners taken in these prizes they learned , that the Spaniards were fortifying Truxillo , and that a garrison was already established .
The attack of that town was therefore judged impracticable  and it was resolved to retire to the Gallapagos  with the prizes , and there to consult what next was best to be undertaken .
The Gallapagos are a cluster of islands lying on the Equator , very little known or frequented , till the buccaneers found their way into the South Seas  the nearest of them lies 110 leagues to the westward of the main , in long .
70 deg .
W. from England .
For these islands they set sail on the 29th of May , and reached them on the 31st .
Here they found plenty of turtle , which they feasted upon fresh every day .
They staid about ten or twelve days  and laid up about 500 packs of meal from their prizes to serve as a future supply in case of necessity .


Being told by an Indian prisoner that was born at Rio Lexa , that there were great riches in his city , and that he would shew them the way to the place , they concluded to set sail , and to trust to the fidelity of their Indian guide  intending , however , to anchor by the way at the island of Cocos , in lat .
5 deg .
40 min .
S. to lodge some of their meal , as more convenient to have recourse to on ordinary occasions than the islands of Gallapagos .
With this intent their stoutest meal-ship was taken with them  but , not being able to make the island , they steered to the continent .


It happened , however , in the course of this short run , that Captain Cook , who had been taken ill at Juan Fernandez , as soon as he came within a few leagues of Cape Blanco , in latitude 9 deg .
56 min .
S. suddenly died , ' `` though in the morning , says Dampier , he was as likely  to live as he had been for a long time before  '' but , he adds , `` it is usual for sick men coming from the sea , to die off as soon as they come within sight of land . '' '
The death of Captain Cook occasioned a general consultation , when it was agreed to come to an anchor in Caldera-bay , within a league of Cape Blanco , and there to give him christian burial .
While the men were employed in digging the grave , three Indians came up to see what they were about , and entered into conversation with the diggers , at the same time appearing very shy  but , notwithstanding their caution , as soon as the corps was decently interred , they were all three seized at once by the company , and very strictly examined .
They at first pretended to know nothing of the Spaniards  but at length they acknowledged that they were sent from Nicoya , a town about 12 leagues off , to learn what they could concerning any strangers that should touch upon the coast , the people of that town having advice that enemies were in the adjoining seas , and that therefore it behoved them to be upon their guard .
They learnt likewise from these Indians , that the inhabitants in that neighbourhood were chiefly husbandmen , and bred cattle  that they traded in hides , corn , and other provisions , for which they received in return , shoes , hats , linen , and other cloth  and that , at no great distance , there were some very large cattle-pens , where they might furnish themselves with as many buffaloes as would fill their ships .
This was welcome  news to sailors , none of whom had tasted any fresh meat for many weeks  and a company of 24 of them set out immediately with an Indian for their guide , to look for the cattle-pens .


After a short march of between three and four miles , they came in sight of a savannah , where a great number of cattle were grazing  of which , some were for instantly killing as many as they could carry away , while others were for staying all night , and driving them into the pens to supply the ships at once , before the owners were apprized of their design .
This resolution prevailed  but Dampier , who was of the party , and who never chose to run unnecessary hazards , returned to the ships with about half the company , together with the Indian guide , while the rest chose to stay where they were .
In the morning , when these voluntary drovers were expected to return with their cattle , none came : it was therefore feared that some disaster had befallen them  and boats were manned , and sent out to look for them .


As the boats were rowing along , some of the company happened to spy a number of people upon a rock up to their middles in water  and , upon nearing them , they soon saw that they were the very people they were in search of  and , therefore , hastened to take them on board .
Lucky it was , that the boatmen happened to spy them just as they did , for in an hour more they had been all swallowed up by the tide .
They had been suffered to sleep all night unmolested   Figure 2 .
Captn Daviss 's Men taken off the Rock by their Comrades .
 and in the morning when they were scattered about among the cattle , and driving them into the pens , they were surprized by the sudden appearance of about 60 Spanish soldiers well armed , who placed themselves in a convenient situation to cut off their retreat .
Alarmed at this unexpected discovery , they hastened to join in a body , resolving to sell their lives dear , if they found it impossible to make their escape .
Accordingly , they looked well round them in order to discover an opening to some other part of the shore , than that against which their ships rode , marching at the same time in as good order as their situation would admit , and giving the Spaniards now-and-then a volley of shot , to keep them at a proper distance .
The Spaniards , who are not over eager to come to a close engagement , kept themselves sheltered behind the bushes , whistling some random shot at the fugitives , by way of return  which , however , did them no harm .
In this cautious manner they advanced slowly towards the beach where Captain Cook was buried  and , looking for their boat , saw her in flames by the water-side , near the spot where they had grounded her the night before .
All hope of retreat being now cut off  and the Spaniards , to make sure of their surrender , having posted themselves in such a manner as to prevent all communication with the ships , they were at length reduced to the last extremity  when , fortunately , spying a rock just above water , about 100 yards from the shore ,  they all determined to commit themselves to the mercy of the ocean , rather than fall into the hands of the Spaniards .
With this resolution they rushed together into the tide , holding fast by one another , and determining that if one perished all should perish .
In this manner they made good their landing upon the rock , where they had continued seven hours , when they happened to be discovered by their comrades , who were suffered by the Spaniards to release them without firing a gun .
After this disappointment it was thought adviseable not to hazard a second attempt  they therefore weighed anchor , and continued their course to Ria Lexa , having first chosen Mr. Edward Davis , the next in command to Captain Cook , Commander in his room .
On the 20th of July they set sail , and in three days they were a-breast of their intended port .


Ria Lexa is known by a high-peaked volcano , which smokes all the day , and in the night sometimes sends forth flames of fire .
It lies a considerable distance from the main , and before you approach the town there is a small island on which the Spaniards had placed a guard .
This guard the buccaneers surprized  but from them they learnt , that the town was strongly fortified  that the Governor was informed of their being upon the coast  and that the garrison was well provided for defence .
This news discouraged the adventurers , who did not come to fight but to plunder : they therefore instantly  withdrew from Ria Lexa , and steering for the gulph of Amapalla , they there careened their ships , and parted company .
This gulph is a large arm of the sea running ten leagues up into the country .
On the south point lies Cape Cawina , and on the N. W. St. Michael 's Mount , in lat .
12 deg .
40 min .
N .
But before they came to the gulph , it was agreed that Captain Davis should go before with two canoes well-manned , in order , by surprising some of the natives , to gain intelligence .
Accordingly , as soon as they approached the gulph , the canoes departed , and Captain Davis , the first night , arrived at a small island on which there was a town called Mangera , which , for want of a guide , he could not find .
In the morning he found it  but the Indian inhabitants had all fled , and left the place deserted  only the padre , with two boys to attend him , were left to take their fate .
As all that Captain Davis wanted was a prisoner for the sake of information , one more intelligent than the friar could not have fallen into his hands .
From him they learnt , that there were several Indian villages in the gulph  but that there were only three towns that had churches  that , he served all the three  that there was only another white man , besides himself , in the whole gulph , who was a kind of secretary to the Spanish government , and who collected the revenues and kept the accompts .


Captain Davis , upon receiving this intelligence , taking with him the friar and his two  boys , ventured to approach Amapalla , which stands upon an eminence .
As Davis with his men gained the ascent , the Secretary , attended by the Casique or Indian Chief , demanding , in Spanish , who they were , and from whence they came , was answered by Davis , that they were Biscayers , and that they were sent thither by the King of Spain to clear the seas from enemies  that their ships were foul , and were coming there to clean  and that he was come before to prepare a convenient station , and to demand assistance from his Majesty 's Indian subjects .
The Secretary bid him welcome  said he loved an Old Spain man  and gave him and his followers a kind invitation to come and take their residence in the town .
Captain Davis ascended the hill , placing the friar in the front .
They were received with every possible mark of respect both by the Secretary and the Indian inhabitants , and after the first salutations were past , they were conducted to the church , where all business of a public nature is transacted .
Accordingly , the friar entered first and was followed by Captain Davis and most of the by-standers  but one or two or the Indians loitering behind were pushed in by Davis 's men , who then , suspecting some mischief , sprung back again , and all the rest of the Indians taking the alarm , followed their example , leaving Davis and the friar , looking at one another in high consternation , ignorant as posts of the cause that had occasioned the desertion , while , at the same  time , the brutes who had caused the revolt were firing upon the poor Indians for flying , and in the skirmish the Secretary was kill'd upon the spot , the only person in all the gulph that could speak Spanish , the friar and his two boys excepted .


Davis 's design was , when they were all in the church , to have shut them in , and made his own terms with them : but , poor wretches !
there was no need to practice farther treachery with them  for , notwithstanding the brutality of these pretended Biscayers , the Indians shewed them every kind of civility , helped them to repair their ships , hewed down timber for them , and brought it to the docks  furnished them with cattle and fresh provisions from the main  and assisted them in filling water , and carrying wood aboard .
All this while the friar with his two lads were kept prisoners , and it was feared , when they were ready to sail , that they would have carried them off  for the Indians had a great veneration for their priest .
He had learned their language , and was very useful to them both by his kind offices and admonitions .


They remained here from the latter end of July till the 3d of September , when they set the friar and his youths on shore  and , the two Captains , or more properly the two crews , having quarrelled , they parted , as has already been said , and each of them pursued a different course .
Davis steered along the main of Peru , till having ranged the whole coast of South America , they came to the island of Plata , in  lat .
1 deg .
10 min .
S. so called by the Spaniards , after Drake had shared the plunder of the Cacafuego upon it .
Captain Eaton steered a contrary course , till being in want of water , he chose the island of Plate to supply his necessities .
Here the two ships came unexpectedly to the same harbour , when Captain Eaton proposed a reconciliation , which Davis , or rather his crew , rejected .
Capt. Eaton 's men reported , that they had met in their course with dreadful tornadoes , with thunder and lightning frightful to the last degree  that the air smelt of sulphur  and that they every moment expected to be involved in smoke and flame .
Captain Eaton 's terms being rejected , he staid but one night , and the day following Davis left the island , and attempted the little town of Manta , about seven or eight leagues from Plata .
They found the place deserted , and brought away an old woman , the only living creature they found in the place .
She informed them , that a great many strangers were come over-land from the north seas  that they were yet in canoes and periagoes  and that the Viceroy had commanded all the Spanish trading ships on the coast to be burnt , to prevent their falling into the enemies hands .
On this news , Davis retired again to the island of Plata , to wait the event , where soon after an English ship arrived , called the Cygnet , commanded by Captain Swan .
This ship had been fitted out by some merchants of London , with a view to trade  but all trade being effectually at a stop ,  Swan was easily persuaded to put his goods up to auction among the adventurers with whom he accidentally fell in  to man his ship with them  and to turn buccaneer himself .
The new comers were headed by a Captain Harris , who contented himself for the present to command a small bark under Captain Swan .
There was great joy at this meeting  and Captain Davis and Captain Swan were , like other rogues , very fond of each other for their own villainous purposes .
They now wished for Captain Eaton again , that having men enough they might all unite , and undertake some place of consequence .
With this view they fitted up a small bark , and dispatched her in pursuit of him , appointing a place of rendezvous , if the bark should be fortunate enough to meet with him .
In the mean time they set sail , directing their course to Payta , a small town in lat .
5 deg .
15 min .
S. built under a rock near the sea-side .
In their way they fell in with a large ship of 400 tons , laden with timber , by whom they received intelligence , that the Viceroy had ordered 10 frigates to be fitted up with all expedition , in order to drive them out of those seas . '
`` Captain Davis 's unsettled crew , says Dampier , began now heartily to repent their not accepting of Captain Eaton 's terms . '' '
However , they pursued their course , and on the 3d of November landed in the road of Payta , and next morning attempted the town , which they found deserted , and not so much as one day 's provisions left in the whole place .
 Here they got intelligence , that Captain Eaton had burnt a ship in that road the week before , and was sailed to the westward  by which they judged that he had taken his departure for the East Indies , by which course it was always his intention to return home .
They , therefore , began to prepare for their defence , in case of being attacked by the Spanish frigates .
They burnt Captain Harris 's bark , because she was a heavy sailor , and fitted up another small bark for a fire-ship  and , having examined their powder and ammunition , and overhauled their rigging , and put every thing in the best order they could , they made sail for the isles of Lobos .
At Lobos they found a letter left by the bark that was sent in quest of Captain Eaton , acquainting them that he had been there , but had sailed some days before the arrival of the bark  and that the bark was gone to Plata , the place of rendezvous .
Here it was concerted to attempt the town of Guaiaquil , before they returned to Plata .
Accordingly , on the 29th in the morning , they set sail from Lobos , steering directly for the bay of Guaiaquil .
This bay runs in between Cape Blanco on the south side , and Point Shanday on the north , 25 leagues from Cape Blanco .
In the bottom of this bay lies the island of Santa Clara , in the form of a corpse laid out in a shroud , of which the east end represents the head , and the west end the feet .
Ships that are bound to the port of Guaiaquil keep to the southward of this isle , to avoid the shoals on  the north side , where , it is reported , a very rich wreck lies sunk , and that a person , who came from the King of Spain with a patent to fish for wrecks , had taken up some of the plate , but he dying , the patent expired without much effect .
The Indians , however , have taken some by stealth , and would probably have got much more but for the swarms of cat-fish that hover round this island , the prick of whose fins is so poisonous .
that whenever they draw blood the wound proves mortal .
From Santa Clara to Puna Arona is about seven leagues , on which island the inhabitants , who are all seamen or fishermen , are obliged to keep constant watch , and to give notice to the Governor of Guiaquil of the approach of all shipping , whether friends or foes .
The houses in the town of Puna stand upon posts 10 or 12 feet high , with ladders on the outsides to ascend the rooms .
Dampier says , he never saw any such in any other part of the world , except among the Malayans in the East Indies .
They are thatched with palmeto leaves , and their chambers well boarded , in which they exceed the Malayans .
From Puna to Guiaquil is seven leagues , and at the distance of one league from the entrance of the river , which rises about two miles on the other side Guiaquil , it is divided into two streams , one stream leading to Leon , the other to Guiaquil .
Guiaquil , according to Dampier , is one of the principal sea-ports in the South Seas .
The commodities exported from that city are cocoa ,  hides , tallow , sarsaparilla and other drugs , and woollen-cloth , commonly called Quito-cloth .
This cloth , which is made at the rich inland town of Quito , is worn by all the common people throughout the kingdom of Peru .
But , besides cloth , Quito abounds with gold , wash'd down from the mountains that surround it , which the Indians make a trade of gathering in the adjacent brooks , where it is sometimes found in solid lumps , but generally in small dust mix'd with sand .


As soon as the ships entered the bay they cast anchor off Cape Blanco  and the crews manned their boats and small barks to advance with the more secresy towards the town .
In their way they made prize of a small vessel , laden with Quito-cloth , the master of which told them of the watch at Puna  and at the same time acquainted them that three ships were expected to sail from Guiaquil next tide with 1000 negro slaves .
They had not rowed far before they fell in with one of the ships laden with negroes , and took her .
They cut her main-mast down , and left her at anchor .
The next day they made prize of the other two  but in taking them they alarmed the town : and , there being no discipline observed , no Commander in Chief to lead them on in a body , one party counteracted the other party  so that none of their attacks took place .
Captain Davis advanced with a party of his men till they were quite exhausted in marching thro ' swamps and mangroves .
Captain Swan and most of his men were for retreating , seeing the  town alarmed  but , being upbraided with cowardice , agreed to proceed .
They had two Indian guides  and one of them undertook to lead the way into the town , and was followed by a Davis 's man , who was fastened to him by a rope , to prevent his making his escape .
But , a little before they came within musket-shot , Davis 's man , who had boasted of his courage , and sought the post of honour , to be next man to the guide , cut the string , and let the guide loose  who , finding himself at liberty , took to his heels , and made his escape .
The other , when he saw him out of reach , cried out , that somebody had cut the string , and that the guide was gone .
This spread a general panic  so the design was all at once defeated  for , after that , not a man would advance a step farther , but all retired to their boats and embarked without either firing a gun , or having a gun fired at them .
After looking at the town for half an hour , they departed : and , having drest a cow , and filled their bellies , they fell down the bay with the tide , rifled the negro-ships , and took about forty of the stoutest men along with them , and turned the rest adrift .
Dampier remarks upon this miscarriage , that there never was a fairer opportunity for men to enrich themselves than they had , but all their golden dreams vanished at once  and they returned as they went , directing their course to Plata , to meet the bark sent in search of Captain Eaton .


When they arrived , they found her with her crew almost famished  for having sought the  ships at Lobos , and from Lobos to Plata , and from Plata to Lobos again , without finding them , and having scarce 14 days provisions on board when they set out , they were constrained to make a descent upon the village of Santa Helena , where they succeeded , and got a small quantity of maize , with which and the turtle they happened to strike , and some boobies and penguins they killed , they had made shift to subsist , though with the utmost difficulty .
Such was the regard these plunderers bore for each other , when projects of robbery were in view .
Here the cargo of the cloth-bark , the only booty they had made , was shared by lots , and Captain Swan had the bark to serve him as a tender .
Here also , according to custom , they quarrelled  Captain Davis 's men placing the miscarriage to the cowardice of Captain Swan 's  and Captain Swan 's to the over-forwardness of Captain Davis 's .
At length the matter was compromised by the mediation of the two Commanders  and they agreed in the next place to attack Lavelia , a pretty large town in the bay of Panama , about seven leagues from the sea-side , on the banks of a river on the north-side of the bay .


On this expedition they set sail the 23d of December , 1684 .
On the 28th , they arrived at a small village called Tomaco , which they surprized and took , and in it a Spanish Knight , Don Diego de Pinas , who came in a Ship from Lima to load timber , in which ship there were only eight Spaniards , and twelve or thirteen jars of good old wine .
The wine they seized , but let the ship go .


 On the 1st of January , 1685 , in passing from Tomaco to Gallo they took a packet boat from Panama to Lima with letters .
The Spaniards threw the letters over-board  but there being a string and a small buoy to the box in which they were inclosed , the box was seen and taken up .
The contents of the public dispatches were , that the armada from Old Spain were arrived at Porto Bello , and that the President of Panama had received orders to hasten the Plate fleet from Lima .


This was joyful news for the buccaneers , who now thought of nothing but sharing the treasures of Peru .
They laid aside their pitiful project upon Lavelia , and concluded to careen their ships at the King 's Isles , near the entrance of the gulph of Panama , to which gulph no ships could sail without being seen from these isles .
There were now two ships and three barks in company , a fire-ship , and two small tenders .
They all changed their course , and steered for the isles , in their way to which they took a ship of 90 tons , laden with flour .
On the 23d of January they arrived at the place appointed  and on the 25th , they cast anchor in the harbour of Galleria , setting all hands to work to clean the barks , in order to cruise in the channel till the next spring-tide , when the large ships might be laid up to be cleaned also .


On the 27th , the barks , being finished , were sent to cruise in the entrance of the gulph  and on the 4th day after , they brought in a prize  laden with corn , salt-beef , and fowls .
The beef and fowls came in good time .
The 14th of February , they made an end of careening their large ships , took in wood and water , and , on the 15th , sailed into the channel , to cruise for the plate-fleet .
When they came a-breast of Old Panama , they sent their Knight upon his parole with a letter to the President , to treat for the exchange of prisoners  but by some accident , says Dampier , he was killed .
The next day they sent another letter to the President by a Mestiso ( a mixed breed , half Indian half Spaniard ) .
This letter produced the desired effect .
The English prisoners were released , and about 40 Spaniards were returned in their room .


Leaving Panama , they cast anchor before Tobago  and , while they lay in that road , a stratagem was played upon them that was near proving fatal to men and ships .
A pretended merchant from Panama came by stealth to trade with them for such merchandize as they might have on board ( a thing not uncommon on those coasts ) , and was well received .
It was agreed , that in the night he should send his bark out with such commodities as they wanted , and take back such as they had to return .
Accordingly , the bargain was made , and the bark came out as was expected , hailing the ships with the watch-word that was to be her security .
Being cautious , however , lest some mischief should be intended , they called to the people on board the bark to cast anchor  which they not regarding ,  were instantly fired at  upon which the crew took to their canoes , and set fire to the pretended smuggling ship , which had been prepared as a fire-ship by that Capt. Bond who carried off the officers from Mayo , as has been already related in the beginning of the voyage .
This was aimed chiefly at Captain Davis 's ship  but at the same time , Captain Swan 's people observed a small float on the water with something like a man in it , making towards their ship  the man , seeing he was discovered , dived , and the float disappeared : this , they apprehended , when they saw the fire-ship blow up , was some combustible matter intended to be struck to the rudder of Swan 's ship , as was formerly attempted upon that of Captain Sharpe 's in the harbour of Coquimbo .
Both ships , however , were glad to cut their cables , and it was with difficulty that Davis 's escaped .
The fire-ship drove burning towards Tobago , but after the first explosion she did not burn clear , only made a smother , not being properly contrived .


This Bond , who instructed the Spaniards in making her , after he left the Cape de Verd isles , as has already been related , steered for the South Seas , and in his passage meeting with Captain Eaton , Bond 's pilot , Richard Morton by name , persuaded him to join with Eaton and to make the voyage conjointly  but after they had sailed in company two days , Morton took an opportunity to slip on board Eaton , and persuaded him to drop Bond , which  he did in the night , Morton still continuing on board with Eaton .
Bond being thus deserted , and having no navigator with him who had ever been in the South Seas , and having been scouted for mal-practices in the North Seas , had no other resource but that of betraying his countrymen 's designs to ingratiate himself with the Spaniards .
With this view he steered directly for Porto Bello , surrendered himself and crew to the Governor , informing him of the buccaneer 's designs in the South Seas , and offering to remain himself as surety for the truth of what he said .
The Governor , not doubting the fact , entertained him , and sent him over to the Viceroy of Lima to be employed by him as he should think fit  and he proved a very useful instrument in defeating the enterprizes of his old companions .


But to proceed .
In the morning when it was light , the ships returned to their buoys to fish up their anchors  and while they were thus employed , they were alarmed by a multitude of canoes and periagoes that were in motion all round the island .
They seemed to make directly towards the ships , and when they came within call , the people on board learnt that they were a new company of English and French invaders , just arrived from the North Seas to try their fortune along with the old , and were headed by two captains , one Grenet , the other Lequie  that they consisted of 200 French and the rest English  and that 180 English more  were still on the isthmus , under the command of Captain Townley , and were daily expected to arrive in order to join the rest .
All the Englishmen were immediately taken on board Captain Davis and Captain Swan  and the French were accommodated with the flour prizes , of which mention has already been made , and Captain Grenet , as the eldest officer , was made choice of to command his countrymen .
In a few days , Captain Townley arrived , having already made himself master of two ships , one laden with flour , the other with wine , brandy , and oil : the prisoners they took in these ships declared , that the fleet from Lima was ready to sail .
Soon after the arrival of Capt. Townley , there came a canoe out of the river of Santa Martha , who said there were 300 men more on the isthmus of Darien in their way to these seas .
On the 15th , they fell in with a bark with five or six Englishmen in her that belonged to Captain Knight , who had been six months in the South Seas , and was now upon the coast of Mexico , where he came in sight of this bark , but not being able to come up with her in his ship , had sent the men that were found in her in a canoe to make prize of her  who , having succeeded , had lost company in the night , and could not recover their ship again .
This bark Captain Swan took under his care , on pretence that the men had run away and left their Commander , and gave her to Captain Harris , who presently manned her .


 The time approached when the Lima fleet was expected , and some letters were intercepted that contained the instructions to the commanders which course to steer .
In consequence whereof the captains of the buccaneers held a consultation in what manner to steer in order to intercept them  but , while they were yet undetermined , word was brought that the Spanish fleet was advancing , and , as it should seem , to give them battle .
This news was by no means agreeable .
Such a motley crew of common plunderers were but ill suited to stand a regular engagement .
However , there was now no alternative , either they must fight or run away  in which case , being taken singly , they probably would all be destroyed  but by fighting some might chance to escape .
The Spaniards were 14 in number  of which the Admiral carried 40 guns and 540 men  the Vice-admiral 40 guns , 400 men  the Rear-admiral 36 guns , 360 men  one ship of 24 guns , 300 men  one of 18 guns , 250 men  and one of eight guns , 200 men  two fire-ships  six ships with only small arms , some periagoes and tenders , having eight hundred men among them all .


The English , who were to engage this formidable squadron , consisted of ten sail  Captain Davis 's ship , of 36 guns , 156 men , mostly English  Captain Swan , 16 guns .
140 men , all English  these were the only ships of force  the others being furnished with none but small  arms  Captain Townley had 110 men , all English  Captain Grenet 308 men , all French  Captain Harris 100 men , most English  Captain Branley 36 men , some English , some French  Davis 's tender , eight men  Swan 's tender , eight men  Townley 's bark , eighty men  and a small bark of thirty tons made into a fire-ship , with a canoe 's crew in her  in all 960 men .
The English , notwithstanding the superiority of the enemy , resolved to begin the attack , having the advantage of the weather gage , which gave them the choice either to fight or run .
Accordingly , about three in the afternoon , they bore down right before the wind on the enemy , who kept close upon a wind to meet them  but night came on without any thing material being done on either side .


When it grew dark , the Spanish Admiral put forth a light as a signal for the fleet to cast anchor , and presently hoisted a light on his top , which after continuing there an hour was taken down , and in a little time hoisted again .
The English , being still to windward , were not aware of this stratagem  for the Spaniard , knowing of what consequence it was to gain the weather gage , hoisted the second light upon the topmast of one of his barks , and edged away silently himself , followed by his capital ships , and , as soon as it was day-light , appeared to windward of the English .
This was an unexpected stroke , and left them no other course to take but to fly .


 Captain Townley being hard pressed by the enemy , made a bold push through a narrow gut that parted the isles , and was followed by several of the smaller ships , by which they escaped .
Captain Harris was chaced to the westward , and returned no more .
And Captain Davis maintained a running fight all day round the bay of Panama , with the loss only of a single man .
At night the Spaniards gave over the pursuit , and suffered the English to rendezvous at the same islands from whence they sailed the day before to begin the attack .


The 30th , the Spaniards , without pursuing their victory , continued their course to Panama  and the English having lost Captain Harris in the engagement , as has just now been mentioned , set sail to the keys of Quibo in search of him , that being the place appointed to rendezvous in case of being dispersed .
Here they cashiered their cowardly French Captain , who never came into the engagement at all  and , having found Captain Harris , they held a consultation about their futu [ ... ] e operations .


All their hopes being now frustrated of effecting any thing considerable by sea , they turned their thoughts on making their fortunes by land  and for that purpose their prisoners were all strictly examined , with regard to the strength and riches of the principal cities along the sea-coast , and within 20 or 30 miles within land .


On the 5th of July they were joined by Captain Knight , of whom mention has already  been made .
He had been cruising more than six months , and had got nothing except a good ship .
He expected to have found the fleet at King 's Islands , enriched with the treasures of the Spanish fleet : but when he came there , he was informed by the master of a bark-log , which he took , that they were worsted , and had fled to the westward , where he had now come to join them .


In order more effectually to pursue their inland enterprizes , they set about providing canoes for navigating the rivers that led to the chief cities , against which they had formed designs , and on the 20th of July they sailed from Quibo , bending their course for Ria Lexa , the nearest port to Leon , the city they determined first to attack .
Their whole force consisted of 640 men in eight ships , commanded by the Captains Davis , Swan , Townley , and Knight , with a fire-ship and three tenders .


Being arrived within eight leagues of the shore , they quitted their ships , and embarked to the number of 520 men in 31 canoes  and after a dangerous passage , in which they met with two dreadful tornadoes , and in which the large canoes were very near sinking , they arrived at length at the creek that leads to Leon , and advancing within five miles of the city without the loss of a man , they landed to the number of 470 , leaving the remainder under the command of Dampier to guard the canoes .


 They marched from the boats in three divisions .
Captain Townley with 80 of the briskest men led the van  Captain Swan with 100 men followed next , to support him  Captain Davis headed the main body , consisting of 170 men , and Captain Knight with the remainder , composed the rear .
Captain Townley , who had advanced more than two miles a-head of the rest , met a party of Spanish horsemen , and defeated them .
Encouraged by this success , his men pushed briskly on , and entered the town , driving all before them .
When they had gained the high-street they were opposed by the main body of the Spaniards , drawn up on the parade in order of battle  but , on two or three of their principal officers being killed , they were soon dispersed  and Captain Townley had made himself master of the city before the foremost division that was to support him had entered the suburbs .
About six in the evening the rearguard came straggling in  many of the men who composed it , being tired and unable to keep pace with the rest , came dropping in all night  and one old man was killed next morning by the Spaniards , from whom he refused to accept of quarter .
He fired his piece among them , reserving his pistols to defend himself when he should come to close engagement  but they returned his fire , and shot him dead at a distance .
He was a stout grey-headed old man , aged about 84 , and had served under Oliver in the time of the Irish Rebellion  after which , he entered on  board a ship , and sailed to Jamaica , where he had followed buccaneering for many years .
He could not be prevailed on to tarry with the canoes , but said he would venture as far as the boldest man among them .
He was much regretted , being a cheerful old man , and never dispirited .


The Spaniards likewise picked up another straggler , one Mr. Smith , a merchant , who had accompanied Capt. Swan with an intent to trade , when that gentleman took in his cargo at London for the South Seas .
This gentleman was carried before the Governor of Leon , who was encamped at some distance from the town , and was examined by him concerning the number of the invaders .
Being known to a Mulatto servant that attended the Governor , he was the more easily credited  when he told him , that they were 1000 strong in the town , and that 500 were left to guard the canoes .
This information had its effect  for the Governor , who was assembling the force of the country to fall upon the assailants , sent next day a flag of truce , with an offer to ransom the city .
They demanded 300,000 pieces of eight , and provisions for 1000 men for four months .
The demand , it is probable , exceeded the Governor 's abilities  so that he was obliged to suffer the city to be set on fire , because he could not comply with their exorbitant demands .
In the mean time , Mr. Smith being exchanged for a lady that had fallen into the hands of the invaders , and a Spanish gentleman  released , upon promise of sending them 150 oxen to Ria Lexa , the next town they intended to assault , they left Leon in flames , and returned to their canoes .
It does not appear that the plunder of Leon answered the expectations of the assailants .
Be that as it may , they prowled down the river , stealing cattle , or any thing that fell in their way  and , on the 16th of June , reached Ria Lexa , in the harbour of which the ships were already arrived .
The Spaniards , for their better defence , had thrown up an intrenchment at the mouth of a narrow creek leading to the town , and had placed 110 soldiers to defend it  they had besides thrown a boom across the river , to prevent either ships or boats from advancing up the channel : so that these men might have maintained their posts against an army of 500 regulars .
But when the English came in sight of the breast-work , they fired but two guns before the Spaniards run away .
They were about half an hour in cutting the boom  and , the channel being now clear , they entered the town without farther opposition .
Here they found nothing but empty houses , except such things as the inhabitants could not , or would not carry away  these were about 500 sacks of flour , some pitch , tar , and cordage , all which , though things of little value to the Spaniards , were notwithstanding of great use to them .
They therefore conveyed them aboard the ships  and having here received the 150 beeves ( the ransom of the gentleman released  on his parole at Leon ) , some were employed in killing and salting , while others made excursions to the neighbouring farms and sugar-works , from whence they rarely returned empty handed .


They staid here from the 17th to the 24th , ' `` when some of our destructive crew ( to use Dampier 's own words ) set fire to the houses , I know not by whose order , but we marched away , and left them burning . '' '


The 25th , the Captains Davis and Swan agreed to part company .
They had hitherto been unsuccessful in concert  they therefore determined to try their fortunes separately .
Knight and Harris accompanied Davis  and Townley with his two barks followed Captain Swan .


In a few days Davis set sail for the coasts of Peru  but Capt. Swan , after staying to take in wood and water , and to recover his men , pursued his course to the westward , intending first to examine the country of Mexico towards the north , and then to steer for the East-Indies , and by that course to return home .
This was a very flattering voyage for Dampier , who was no less earnest to store his mind with the knowledge of new countries , than to enlarge his fortune by the riches they contained : he therefore quitted Davis , and entered on board with Captain Swan .


On the 3d of September they set their prisoners and pilots on shore  the latter being of no farther use , and the former only an incumbrance .
A malignant fever continued to rage on board ,  which carried off many of their men .
As the same distemper broke out in the fleet of Captain Davis , it was concluded that they had taken the infection at Ria Lexa , where , a few months before their arrival , the inhabitants had been visited by a kind of plague , which had almost depopulated the town .
They had still , however , about 340 men in tolerable health in four ships .


In their course to the north-westward , they met with most tempestuous weather , violent tornadoes from the north-east almost every day , with such flashes of lightning and claps of thunder , as no man on board had ever heard .


On the 14th they came in sight of the well-known volcano of Guatimala , which appears at first with a double peak .
Between these peaks fire and smoke with dreadful roarings frequently break forth , and spread the alarm far and wide  yet the inhabitants of Guatimala continue to reside near the foot of the mountain , and are not so much intimidated upon those occasions as those who live at a greater distance .
This city is famous for many rich commodities , the produce of the neighbouring hills and savannas among which it is situated .
It lies about eight leagues from the South Sea , and by report not above 40 or fifty leagues from the north , to which it sends annually great quantities of indico , anatta , silvester , and cochineal .
The indico plant grows wild about Guatimala , and has lately been introduced and cultivated in Georgia and Carolina .
The anatta is a red dye , and is  made from the flowers of a shrub which grows in many of the southern provinces of America .
Silvester is the seeds of a fruit not unlike the prickly pear of England  and cochineal is a collection of insects bred in fruit of the same shape and size .
Both the trees grow wild about Guatimala  and both the silvester and cochineal yield the same kind of dye , and are sometimes substituted one for the other , though the cochineal is generally accounted the most valuable .


The volcano of Guatimala is seen at 75 miles distance  and the sea , as they approached it , was full of floating pumice stones , washed by the rains from the adjacent hills , and precipitated by the floods into the main ocean , where , by a constant accumulation , they cover an immense space .
Driftwood they likewise observed in great abundance  and the trees were large and not much rotted .


When they had reached the latitude of Toguantabeque , in 14 deg .
30 min .
N. Capt. Townley , with 106 men in nine canoes , attempted to land  but found the country defended by huge sandy hills , against which the waves beat high with incredible fury .
The wind being fair , he coasted along the shore for several days , and the ships continued to follow him with an easy sail : at length , grown desperate , he rushed upon a sandy beach , but the canoes overset before they could reach the land .
In this attempt one or two men perished  some had a leg or an arm broke , and others were very much hurt .
However , the majority having made good their landing ,  dragged afterwards their boats on shore  but what gave them the greatest concern was , that all but those who had been provident enough to seal up their cartouch boxes , had wetted their powder , and rendered their fire-arms useless .
This gave a damp to their enterprize  yet they prepared to penetrate the country , and to get sight of the town of which they were in search : but either there was no such place , or their fears prevented their discovering it  for all that were alive returned on board the ships without procuring a meal 's provisions to refresh the sick .


After this fruitless expedition , they still continued coasting to the westward , with the wind at east-north-east , till they came to Tangola , a small island where there was good anchorage  from thence they sailed to Guatulco , a sea port in lat .
15 deg .
30 min .
N. the best in Mexico .
On one side of the entrance into this harbour there is a small island , and on the other a hollow rock , through which the billows as they pass produce a horrible roaring , and , being compressed against the sides , are forced through a hole at the top , and rise like the waters of an artificial fountain to an incredible height .
In this harbour there is good anchorage .
It is about three miles in depth and one in breadth , runs in north-west , and on the west-side small ships may ride land-locked secure from wind or weather .
At the bottom of this harbour , Drake found a fine rivulet of water , near a village , of which hardly any traces remained , except the ruins of  a small chapel enclosed in a fine grove of trees that gave it a very venerable appearance .
Here the sick on board the ships were brought ashore  and here a project was formed to traverse the country , and plunder the inland towns  but , after travelling 14 miles , and seizing two or three Indian guides , they could only find a little village , where some vanellos were drying , the cods of which are held in great esteem by the Spaniards .
They grow upon vines that creep like ivy about trees of greater magnitude , and flourish in the bay of Campeachy , as well as in the country of Guatalco  but the Indians keep the method of curing them a secret to themselves .
The Indians of this village could speak but little Spanish , appeared to be a poor harmless people , had neither gold nor silver among them , nor could they tell where those precious metals were to be obtained .
It was therefore to no purpose to pursue their march through a country , rich , indeed , in natural productions , but destitute of cultivation , and almost without inhabitants  they therefore returned to their ships  and , while the sick were endeavouring to regain their strength , the healthy employed themselves in providing necessaries to continue the voyage .


On the 8th , four canoes well manned set forwards to the port of Angels , with orders to wait there till the arrival of the ships .
In the mean time their instructions were to take some prisoners .


 On the 12th , the malignity of the distemper with which they had been long afflicted being abated , and the sick in a fair way of recovery , the ships set sail in order to follow the boats .
The boats , however , had mistaken the harbour , and two of them , in attempting to land at a place near which they had observed some cattle feeding , were overset in the beach , and with difficulty got out again to sea , with the loss of one man drowned , and some others hurt .
They lost likewise four of their guns , and spoiled their ammunition  and , in a very distressed condition , the next day met the ships .
The other two canoes parted from them in the night of the 9th , and had not rejoined them since .
The harbour of Port Angels lies in latitude 15 deg .
N. and is open to all winds , except those from the land .
The Spaniards had compared it to that of Guatulco  but there being no similitude , the boats had passed it without knowing it  and the two that were missing had rowed as far as Acapulco before they discovered their mistake .
When the ships arrived before the harbour , the missing boats were ready to join them  and there appearing to be plenty of cattle at no great distance from the shore , 100 men were landed to supply the ships with beef .


The country round this harbour exhibited a most delightful prospect  the hills were covered with large and lofty trees , the plains with a most beautiful verdure , and the savannas interspersed with rills and rivers , on the banks of which were  innumerable little shrubs , the beauty and variety of whose flowers surpass description .
Here they made no doubt of being furnished with whatever their wants required .
In less than four miles march , the party that were landed met with a grazing seat belonging to Don Diego de la Rosa , in which they found store of salt , and a considerable quantity of maize , but no inhabitants , the family having fled on the first appearance of a descent .
They found also poultry in abundance , and hogs or cabritos without number .
Here they feasted for two or three days , and every man brought away as much as he could carry  but the ruggedness of the road , and the weakness of the company , debilitated by sickness , prevented their improving so favourable an opportunity to the best advantage .
They relinquished with reluctance many good things which they had in possession , more than sufficient for present enjoyment , but too cumbersome to be conveyed to the ships for future use .


In the harbour of Port Angels there is good riding in 13 , 20 , and 30 fathom water .
The flood rises about five feet , sets to the north-east  and the ebb at souch-west .


The 27th in the morning they set sail from Port Angels , and in the evening came to an anchor in 16 fathom water , under a small rocky island six leagues to the westward of their former station , of which island the Spanish books give no account .
The next day they weighed and continued their course  and , being a-breast  of a small lagune whence the missing boats had a few days before taken a quantity of fish , they lay to , and sent in a boat with 12 men to bring off a more ample supply .
The Spaniards , on marking the trim of the ships , suspected their intent  and , concealing themselves behind a rock at the narrow entrance of the lagune , discharged a volley of small arms at the boat just as it passed the place of their ambuscade , by which five of the crew were dangerously wounded .
Alarmed at this sudden attack , and finding it impossible to retreat , because of the narrowness of the channel , they pushed forwards into the lagune , where they could lie out of gun-shot till the enemy dispersed , or till they should be relieved by the vigilance and valour of their own people .
In this situation , however , they continued two days and three nights  till at length Captain Townley , fearing some disaster had befallen them , manned his canoes , and , beating the Spaniards from the rocks , opened the sufferers a free passage to the sea .
Their joy was the greater , as the pains of the wounded men began to grow intolerable  and , had they not then been relieved , they must in another day , nay , some of them , perhaps , in a few hours , have died in the greatest agonies .
This lagune lies in latitude 16 deg .
40 min .
N .


On the 2d of November they passed by a remarkable rock , called by the Spaniards the Algatross  five or six miles to the westward of which are seven or eight white cliffs that serve  to direct mariners to avoid a dangerous shoal stretching about a league and a half south-by-west .
A little farther to the westward the Spaniards have erected a breast-work upon a small island at the mouth of a fair river , which at that time was defended by 200 men .
They manned their boats , and being determined to land , the Spaniards , after firing 20 or 30 shot , deserted the island , and left the channel open .
They entered on the west side , and found plenty of salt laid up in cabbins for curing the fish which they catch in the lagunes , but in what manner Dampier could not conceive , for he neither saw hook , line , net , boat , or canoe .
At the distance of three leagues from the entrance of the river they came to a house in which was a Mulatto servant , who informed them , that at Acapulco there was a stout ship from Lima  and that a little higher up the river , there was maize and cattle in abundance , to which place he offered to be their guide .


On this intelligence a contention arose between the commanders .
Captain Townley , who was in want of a better ship , proposed to sail immediately to Acapulco to make himself master of that from Lima  but Captain Swan was first for procuring provisions to enable them to subsist while they were pursuing the grand object they had in view , that of intercepting the Manilla ship which every year comes constantly from the East Indies richly laden , and arrives nearly at a certain season off the southermost point of California in her course to Acapulco .
 As questions of this kind are always decided by numbers among voluntary adventurers , Captain Townley 's proposal was not only seconded by his own crew , but also by the greatest part of Captain Swan 's .
They accordingly returned to the ships with all expedition , and set sail on the 5th , and on the 7th came in sight of the high land of Acapulco , a port easy to be distinguished from all others , by means of three hills , the middlemost of which rises like a sugar loaf , and the westermost of the other two has on its summit two hillocks which shew in appearance like two paps .
When the ships came to the distance of about 12 leagues they brought to , and Captain Townley with 140 men embarked on board canoes with a view to seize the Lima ship by surprize , before his own ships should come in sight .


They had hardly sailed four leagues before there arose so dreadful a tornado , that those on board the ships thought themselves in the utmost peril of their lives , and every one concluded that the boats must perish .
Happily , however , they weathered the storm  but were driven in great distress into Port Marquis , a tolerable harbour about a league to the eastward of Acapulco .
Here they staid to dry their cloaths , and refit their furniture , and in the night of the following day they rowed softly into Acapulco harbour  ' `` and , because they would not be heard , '' says Dampier , `` they hauled in their oars , and paddled as softly as if they had been seeking  manatee .
They paddled close to the castle  then struck over to the town , and found the ship riding between the breastwork and the fort , about 100 yards from each .
When they had well viewed her , and considered the danger of the design , they thought it impossible to accomplish it  therefore they paddled softly back again till they were out of command of the forts , and then they attempted to land , but were opposed by a company of Spanish soldiers , who fired at them , and kept them at a distance from the shore till daylight  when , taking a view of the town and castle , and not liking their appearance , they returned on board , tired , hungry , and heartily mortified at their disappointment . '' '


Acapulco lies in 17 deg .
N. on the west-side of the continent of America , famous for its trade to the East Indies , and to Lima  in which trade three ships are annually employed  two of them are so regulated , that each has the advantage of the trade-winds that blow between the Tropics , both in going and returning to their respective ports .
The third is employed in supplying the other two with Spanish goods from Lima , and in bringing to Lima the Indian merchandize and money brought from Manilla .


On the 11th , the ships sailed from Acapulco , and continued coasting along the shore to the westward .
Near the sea-side the land is low , but rises gradually till within land it appears to  touch the clouds .
Though the ground is clean and the anchorage good at a mile from land , yet it is defended by breakers that render the shore inaccessible , except at the utmost hazard of men 's lives .
In their passage , observing a cluster of little round hills a little to the westward of the promontory of Petaplan in 17 deg .
20 min .
N. they examined the coast narrowly , and discovered a small river , at the entrance of which they landed 170 men , who , after marching about 14 miles up the country , came to a wretched Indian village , in which a Mulatto woman and four children were the only living creatures left .
These they brought to the ships  and , by the intelligence they received from the old woman , they proceeded to the harbour of Chequetan , from whence she conducted them , through a pathless wood , to a farm-house , where they found a caravan of sixty mules laden with flour , chocolate , and cheese  all which , together with some oxen , they brought down to their canoes .
The cargo of the caravan they instantly conveyed on board the ships  but the oxen , with eighteen cows which they afterwards seized without opposition , they first killed and cured , and , having divided the whole into lots , every ship 's crew took their own share on board .


On the 21st they quitted this fortunate harbour , leaving the Mulatto and her four children to their fate .
On the 25th , they passed a lofty hill divided into peaks , in lat .
18 deg .
8 min .
N.  Figure 3 .
Dampier 's Comrades seizing the Oxen  Mules laden with Flour , Cheese c. at a Farm House .
 near which the Spanish maps place a town called Cupan , which however they could not find  after a short stay in search of it , they proceeded along the coast , till on the 28th they came in sight of the volcano of Colima , in lat .
18 deg .
36 min .
N. at the foot of which is situated the rich town of Colima , from whence it takes its name .
Of the valley by which this burning mountain is surrounded , the Spaniards give a most luxuriant description  but our navigators found it absolutely inaccessible from the sea  for the surf ran so high , and the breakers appeared so formidable , that the boldest of them durst not attempt it : they therefore very reluctantly quitted the neighbourhood , and proceeded in quest of Sallagua , the bay of which they discovered in lat .
18 deg .
52 min .
N .
Here they landed 200 of their best men , who were opposed by a body of Spanish foot , supported by a party of horse  but , on the first charge , the foot gave way , and the horse soon followed .
In the pursuit the English were led into a broad road , and followed it , through a woody and rocky country , to the distance of four or five leagues , without seeing house or inhabitants .
In their way back they met with two straggling Mulattoes , who told them the road led to the city of Oarrah four days journey off , and the soldiers whom they had defeated were sent from thence to escort the passengers from India that were expected to land in Sallagua bay , from on board the  Manilla ship that every year touched upon that coast .
Encouraged by this intelligence , they hastened to embark  and , setting sail on the 6th of December , steered directly for Cape Corientes , at the height of which they expected to meet their prize .
In this passage , Dampier , who had hitherto by temperance preserved his health , was seized with a fever and ague , which at length terminated in a dropsical disorder that was very near carrying him off , and which carried off many of the men .
The dropsy , Dampier says , is a general disorder on this coast , and the natives pretend that the stone of the alligator dried and powdered , and drank in water , is an infallible remedy .
The same receipt he found mentioned in a Mexican almanac  but could find no alligator to give it a trial .


On the 11th of December they came in sight of Cape Corientes .
It is of a moderate height , flat and even at top , cloathed with woods , and projecting into the sea in steep cliffs .
It is laid down in the Spanish maps in latitude 20 deg .
28 min .
N. and longitude 230 deg .
56 min .
W. from Teneriff , or in 121 deg .
41 min .
W. from the Lizard-point in England .


They were now four ships in company  Captain Swan and his tender , and Captain Townley and his tender .
These were all properly stationed to gain intelligence  but , provisions growing short , Captain Townley 's bark was dispatched with 60 men to traverse the coast to the westward  of the Cape , in search of some town or village where their wants might be supplied .
On the 17th the bark returned , being unable to weather the cape , or make any useful discovery .
She had left , however , four canoes with 46 men , who determined to double the cape , or perish in the attempt .


On the 18th , all the ships quitted their stations , and sailed for the island of Chametley , about 16 or 18 leagues to the eastward of the cape , to take in wood and water .
On these islands live the fishermen , who , as the Spaniards say , fish for the inhabitants of the city of Purification .
On the 20th , they anchored between the islands and the main in five fathom water , clear sand .
Here they caught plenty of rock-fish , but saw no inhabitants .
On the 21st Captain Townley with about 60 men went to an Indian village about seven or eight leagues to the westward , to endeavour to procure provisions  and next day Captain Swan returned to his station off the cape .
On the 24th , the four canoes who had doubled the cape , returned to the cruisers , and reported , that they had rowed to the bay of the valley of Valderas , or Val d'Iris , and had landed in the garden of the world , where they found fruits of the most delicious flavour growing wild in the plains , and where the cattle were feeding at large among the streams of water that flowed meandering in the savannas , and lost their waters among the finest groves of trees they ever beheld  but when they marched in pursuit of the  beeves that were every where straying in the vallies , they were suddenly surrounded by a body of Spaniards , who briskly attacked them , some on foot , and some on horseback .
They made a gallant defence , and suddenly retreated into an adjoining wood , where they were followed by the Spanish horse .
These were armed each with a case of pistols , and some of them , besides their pistols , had short guns .
The English , being covered by the trees , made use of their fire-arms with advantage  and , after killing about 17 of the assailants , and wounding several others , the rest being unsupported by the foot , fled with precipitation .
In this skirmish four English were shot dead , besides two desperately wounded  and , not daring again to attempt the valley , they killed a horse , and , having satisfied their hunger , they returned to their canoes .


On the 25th , being Christmas-day , they cruised close to the cape , and sent in three of their strikers to kill fish .
In the afternoon they returned with three great jew-fish , which afforded them all a Christmas-dinner .
Captain Townley on the 28th came to his station , and brought with him 40 bushels of maize , which he had seized at an Indian village four or five leagues up the country , and which his men were obliged to carry all that way on their backs .


They cruised till the 1st of January , 1686 , off Corientes , and then steered towards the valley of Valderas , in order to furnish themselves with beef  and before night they anchored in 60 fathom  water a mile from the shore .
The next day they landed , dividing themselves into two parties  one party posted themselves on the hills to watch the motions of the Spaniards , while the other party traversed the vallies to kill the cattle .
The Spaniards frequently presented themselves in companies , but did not dare to come near enough to engage .
They continued here till the 7th , in which time they had killed and salted beef enough for two months allowance for their whole company , and , had not their salt failed them they might have stored themselves with much more .


They now gave over all farther expectation of the Manilla ship , it being the general opinion that she had escaped ( as they were afterwards assured she had ) while the ships were employed in seeking provisions . '
`` So this design failed , '' says Dampier , `` through Captain Townley 's eagerness after the Lima ship , which he attempted in Acapulco harbour .
For though , '' adds he , `` we took a little flour hard by , yet the same guide who told us of the Lima ship , would have conducted us where we might have had store of beef and maize  but instead thereof we lost both our time and the opportunity of providing ourselves , and so were forced to be victualling when we should have been cruizing , to the total ruin of the enterprize . '' '


Being now provided with beef in abundance , and having taken in wood and water in proportionable quantities , the two commanders , Swan  and Townley , having separate views , though united in this one grand object of intercepting the Manilla ship , thought proper to part company , Captain Swan intending to steer westward , and Captain Townley to return eastward .
Hitherto a Moskito chief with three of his men had sailed with Captain Swan , but being now about to depart never more to return to their country , he was desirous of recommending them to the care of Captain Townley , who being bound to the coast of Peru , might there put them on shore at some convenient place , from whence they might travel over land to the North Sea .
This Captain Townley undertook to perform  and the ships being now under sail , they saluted each other , and parted .


Our navigator continued to sail with Captain Swan .
Before night they passed Point Pontique , which forms the westernmost point of the bay , distant from Cape Corientes about twenty leagues .
This point is in lat .
20 deg .
50 min .
N. a league to the westward of which are two barren islands , called the islands of Pontique .
Beyond these islands the land trends to the northward , presenting a very rugged unpleasant appearance as far as the eye can extend the prospect .
On the 14th , they came in sight of a small white rock in lat .
21 deg .
15 min .
N. which at a distance seemed like a ship under sail .
From this island the land runs still more northerly , and the sea tumbles in with such violence upon the shore , that for many leagues together  there is no landing  there is , however , every where good anchoring as far as the islands of Chametley .
These islands are six in number , and different from those of the same name on the east of Cape Corientes , being a little within the Tropic of Cancer , and not above three leagues from the main .
On these islands grows a fruit called the penguin , of which there are two sorts , the yellow and the red .
The yellow grows on a thick stem about a foot high , the leaves narrow and about half the length of the stem edged with prickles .
The fruit grows out from the top of the stem in two or three large clusters , 16 or 20 in a cluster .
It is round and in size like a small pullet 's egg  the outer coat is thick and tough , and the pulp in the inside is full of little black seeds .
The red penguin is in shape like a little nine-pin  grows up on stools from the ground in clusters of 60 or 70 on a stool , standing upright like the leaves of houseleek , and are smaller than the yellow : they are surrounded by leaves a foot and a half long , edged with prickles like the former .
They have a sharp pungent taste , are very wholesome  but those who eat of them immoderately find them heating .
They grow wild , and in the bay of Campeachy Dampier says they are so plentiful , that one can hardly range the plains for their prickly leaves .


From these islands Captain Swan embarked 100 men in canoes , and went himself in search of Coolican , a river in the province of Cullacan ,  with a town of considerable trade ( probably that marked Pastla in the Spanish maps ) upon its banks , the inhabitants whereof pass in boats to the island of California and fish for pearls .
They coasted along the shore as far as lat .
24 deg .
N. but found no river  and after three or four days absence returned without making any discovery .


A few leagues to the N.N.W. of Chametley is a narrow entrance into a lake , called by the Spaniards Rio de Sal , which runs about 12 leagues easterly , parallel with the shore , forming many low mangrove islands , and having depth of water every where for boats to row along its banks .
In this lake Captain Swan entered , accompanied by 150 of his men in 12 canoes .
In his progress he observed a grazing farm , and landing some of his men , they found the house deserted , and the cattle driven away .
On proceeding further along the lake , two Indians were seen running at some distance , whom they took for spies , and having discharged a volley of small arms , one of them was wounded in the thigh , and not being able to continue his race , was seized by a party landed for that purpose who brought him on board He informed them , that , about four leagues from the place where they then were , an Indian town was situated in a savanna , abounding with cattle .
The company were scarcely landed to go in search of this town before they were attacked by a body of Spanish horse , who not being properly armed ,  made but a faint opposition , and suddenly retired .
While the English were in pursuit , the enemy played off a stratagem that greatly annoyed them .
We have already mentioned , in the voyages of Captain Sir Francis Drake , the nature of the grass that covers the savannas on the isthmus of Darien between the North and the South Seas .
Such was the grass with which the pursuers were surrounded , when the Spaniards set it on fire , and , being dry as stubble , it burnt with astonishing fury , and spread with such rapidity , that it was with the utmost difficulty the whole party escaped being involved in the flames .
This disaster not only made them more cautious , but occasioned a delay , which gave the Spaniards time to collect their force and to make a more formidable opposition .
When the English arrived the next day at the village of which they had intelligence , they found it occupied by an armed garrison , whom it was necessary to overcome before they could enter  but as the Spaniards were , for the most part , destitute of fire-arms , and the Indians wholly unexperienced in their use , the advantage the English derived from that circumstance soon decided the contest in their favour .
The enemy fled after the loss of some of their leaders , and left the conquerors masters of the place , having only one man killed with an arrow , and their surgeon sorely wounded .


They were told by their prisoners , that , about five leagues from the town of which they were  now in possession , two rich gold mines were wrought by Indian slaves belonging to the Spaniards of Compostella , the most considerable Spanish city in that district .
It was not now a time to search for gold , when they were in want of every kind of food , except the beef they had cured at Valderas .
Their chief search was now for maize , and having plundered the village of all they could find , they conveyed it to their boats with great labour  and next day quitted the lake , and returned on board the ships .
This lake is laid down in latitude 23 deg .
30 min .
N .


On the 2d of February , Captain Swan made another excursion with 80 men in search of the river Rosario , at the entrance of which they landed , and marched to an Indian town of the same name .
Here they were told , that the gold mines were not above two leagues from the town  but , like the cock in the fable , they rejected the pearl and chose the barley-corn  about 90 bushels of maize , and the other provisions they found in the place , though insufficient for the purpose of their intended voyage , were yet of more value in their present necessity than all the gold of Compostella .


On the 3d the ships came to an anchor off the river 's mouth of Rosario , in seven fathom water , oozy ground , in lat .
22 deg .
51 min .
N .


On the 7th , the Captain with his company came on board .
The quantity of provisions which he had procured was but trifling for so  many men  he therefore sent the next day a party in search of the river Oleta , but they returned without having found it .
The river St. Jago was next attempted , and on the 11th they anchored in seven fathom water near the mouth of it , three leagues E. S. E. of the white rock of Maxentelbo , the high hill of Zelisco bearing S. E .
This is one of the principal rivers upon the coast , and lies in latitude 22 deg .
15 min .
N .


On the 11th , 70 men were sent up the river to make discoveries  they spent two days in examining the creeks and inlets , and at length came to a large field of maize which they had begun to gather , when they spied an Indian who had been sent to watch the corn , whom they seized and carried on board , in hopes of gaining from him some intelligence , by which they might obtain a more effectual and speedy supply .
He told them , there was a town called Santa Pecaque , about four leagues from the place where he was taken , in which there was great store of provisions , and to which he undertook to be their guide .
Captain Swan , overjoyed at the news , ordered 140 men to be instantly embarked on board the canoes , and to proceed with the Indian as he should direct .
After rowing five leagues up the river , they came in sight of the town , when they landed in the night , and next morning set out on their march by land .
About 10 , they had advanced within musket-shot  and , having dispatched a  party to reconnoitre , they found the town deserted , and entered it without opposition .


The town of Santa Pecaque is seated near the side of a wood in a spacious plain , neatly built , with a square in the middle , on each side of which the houses are furnished with balconies , from whence the inhabitants , in general , are spectators of the frequent processions exhibited by the Spanish priests , in order to convert the Indians , who are now almost all become christians in the Spanish settlements .
The town , though small , has two churches  and they were told , that about 70 white families constantly resided in it , besides those who occasionally came there as carriers from the mines , and as merchants from Compostella .
These carriers furnish the adjacent miners with maize , sugar , salt , and salt-fish , of all which there was great plenty in Santa Pecaque .


Captain Swan being acquainted by an express with the success of this expedition , and with the opportunity that now offered to supply his wants , hastened to the town to give the necessary orders .
When he arrived , he divided his men into two parties  one party he employed in conveying the provisions to the boats  the other in plundering and packing up .
These he relieved alternately  and when both parties were wearied out with this laborious service , they caught horses , and , having laden them with maize , dispatched them under a strong escort down to the canoes .


 On the 17th , when they arrived , they found the men who guarded the canoes in high spirits , though they had been attacked by the Spaniards , and had one man desperately wounded .
The party that escorted the horses thought it adviseable , however , to reinforce the canoe-guard , left the Spaniards should renew the attack .
Next day they returned to the town , and the party left therein were preparing to convoy more maize to the canoes  but , before they set out , Captain Swan understood by an Indian whom they had made prisoner , that 1000 men were in arms in order to attack them , and that they were already advanced within three leagues of the place .
Upon this intelligence , the Captain advised all his men to load as much maize as they could altogether bear away , and instantly to depart in a body .
With this advice they absolutely refused to comply , being determined not to leave Santa Pecaque , while a load of provisions remained within it .
It was in vain to endeavour to persuade those whom he could not punish for disobeying orders  and , therefore , on the 19th , he suffered 50 of them to depart with as many loaded horses  exhorting them , however , to march in a body , that they might be the better able to defend themselves against any sudden surprize .
They were equally deaf to advice and instruction  they pursued their old course , marching in a line , and every one leading a single horse .
The Spaniards had remarked their manner of marching , and had placed  themselves in ambush the preceding night .
They had scarce travelled half a league before they were suddenly set upon , and every man cut to pieces before they could assemble to prepare for their defence .
Captain Swan , who had heard the firing , hastened with his party to the place of action  but on his approach he was struck with horror at the sight of such a number of his followers weltering in their blood , stript of their arms , and divested of their charge .
The Spaniards , after the slaughter , having possest themselves of their musquets , c. seized also the loaded horses , and instantly fled .
Though the party commanded by Captain Swan did not exceed the number of those already slain , yet they were suffered to pass unmolested to the canoes , on board of which they embarked , and , with the provisions they had already secured , returned to the ships .
Among the slain on this occasion was Mr. Ringrose , who wrote that part of the history of the buccaneers that relates to Captain Sharpe .


The slaughter of this unfortunate party dampt the spirits of the survivors , and discouraged them from attempting any farther descents upon this coast .
Is was therefore determined to steer directly for Cape St. Lucas on the island of California , where they might lie secure from the attacks of the Spaniards , till the men were refreshed , and the ships put in a condition to undertake a new voyage .


 The lake of California ( for so it is called in the Spanish charts ) is either very little known to the Spaniards , or very carefully concealed .
Though they have mines open already more than they can work , in Mexico , Chili , and Peru , yet they are very unwilling to allow other European powers to share the treasures of those countries , though they themselves can not exhaust them  nor is it at all likely that any considerable advantages will ever be made by others , till by some lucky chance a nearer passage into those seas is discovered . '
`` Were I , '' says Dampier , `` to attempt a north-west passage , I would go first to the South Seas , bend my course from thence along by California , and that way seek a passage into the Western Seas .
If I succeeded in my attempt , I should then be without that dread which others must have had of passing from a known to an unknown region  and which , it is not improbable , obliged them to relinquish the pursuit just as they were on the point of accomplishing their designs .
In like manner , '' he adds , `` were I to be employed in search of a north-east passage , I would winter about Japan , Conca , or the north-east part of China  and taking the spring and summer before me , I would make my first trial on the coast of Tartary , wherein if I succeeded , I should come into some known part , and have a great deal of time before me to reach Archangel or some other European harbour . '' '


 On the 21st they set sail , directing their course for California  but , being opposed by contrary winds , were unable to reach their destined port , and obliged to put in at the Maria islands , in latitude 21 deg .
40 min .
N. distant about 40 leagues from Cape St. Lucas , and 20 from Cape Corientes .
These islands are three in number , and they came to an anchor at the east end of the middlemost in five fathom water , clear sand  where , as soon as they moored their ships , they instantly began to unrig them , in order to careen .


Here Captain Swan proposed to his company to return home by way of the East Indies , which was highly approved by some , and as violently opposed by others , who , being ignorant , imagined , as Dampier says , that he would carry them out of the world .
At first coming they lived upon nothing but seal  but in two or three days their strikers furnished them plentifully with turtle  and they likewise killed guanicoes , conies , and large pigeons  so that they consumed none of their ship provisions , during their stay .
While the sailors were working upon the ships , the officers employed themselves in surveying the stores and measuring the maize  which they divided into three parts , and allotted two parts to the ship , and one part to the bark , the ship carrying one hundred men , the bark only fifty .


Here Dampier , who had been long ill of the dropsy , tried a very uncommon remedy .
He  stripped himself stark naked , laid himself down upon the hot sand , and caused the surgeon to cover him all but his head  in this manner he lay near half an hour  but being unable to endure it any longer , he was carried to his tent and put to bed .
While he was in the sand he sweat immoderately , and to that operation he ascribes the recovery of his health .


They staid till the 26th , when their ships being clean , they sailed to the valley of Valderas , in order to take in fresh water .
Here they came to an anchor at the mouth of the river where they had anchored before  but , now that the dry season prevailed , they found the water brackish , and unfit for use .
They then weighed , and , coming to a fine fresh-water brook at the foot of a little round hill about four leagues from Cape Corientes , they filled on the 29th 32 tons of excellent water , a quantity sufficient to serve their voyage .


Being provided with every thing they had reason to expect in this country , they now began seriously to consider of the possibility of performing their intended voyage .
Upon a nice calculation , they found they had only 60 days provisions on board , at a little more than half a pint of maize a-day for each man  they had a great many rats on board , which they could not prevent from consuming a part of the maize  they had , according to the Spanish account , more than 7000 miles to run from Cape Corientes to Guam , the nearest land  and , that  island being subject to the Spaniards , they had no certainty of a supply when they came there .
All these discouragements staggered the most forward of them  and nothing could prevail with the majority but a promise from Captain Swan to cruise off Manilla , to intercept the register ship , as soon as they should arrive in the proper station .
To this condition Captain Swan was forced to submit , though much against his inclination  for he had no mind to commence plunderer at first  and now he was heartily tired of the trade .


On the 31st of March , 1686 , they took their departure from Cape Corientes , the Cygnet , Captain Swan , with 100 men  and the bark , Captain Teat , with 50 .
At first they steered with a small land breeze at E. N. E. which carried them three or four leagues  then the sea-wind came on at W. N. W. and changed their course S. W. By six o'clock in the evening they were nine leagues S. W. from the cape .
About 10 the next morning they had the sea-breeze at N. N. E. so that at noon they were 30 leagues from the cape .
It then blew a fresh gale , which carried them into the true trade-wind .
At first they had it at N. N. E. and then northerly .
At 250 leagues from the shore it settled at E. N. E. and there stood till they came within 40 leagues of Guam .


After the second day of their departure , having fine clear weather , and a fresh trade-wind , they crouded all the sail they could spread , and  had frequently observations of the sun , moon , and stars  so that they could calculate their longitudinal distance by way of amusement almost every day .
At their first setting out they steered into the latitude of 13 deg .
N. and it is remarkable , that in a run of more than 6700 miles in this latitude , they saw none of those small islands that are so plentifully interspersed in the same latitude on the opposite side of the Line  nor did Commodore Anson , who afterwards pursued the same track from Acapulco , see land till he arrived at the island of Tinian .
As they run at a great rate , and the wind had every appearance of continuing , after being at sea about 20 days , the men began to grow clamorous to have their allowance enlarged  with which the Captain was forced to comply , tho ' he endeavoured to persuade them to patience , and represented to them the danger of being becalmed , of missing their intended port , or of being refused a supply when they arrived .
But none of these could prevail .
The cry was for an augmentation , and an augmentation they had .
Till the 20th of April their allowance was eight spoonfuls of boiled maize a man  but after that it was enlarged to ten .
Dampier , who , as has been before noticed , had long been troubled with a dropsical disorder , gathered strength by this spare regimen  but those who were in full health it very much weakened .
He says , he constantly drank three times a-day  but there were many on board who did not drink once in  nine or ten days , and some not in twelve  one in particular did not drink in 17 days , and then said he was not a-dry , though he made water every day .
Amidst these hardships one poor fellow was found guilty of theft , and sentenced to receive three stripes with a two-inch rope on his bare back from every man in the ship .
Captain Swan , Dampier says , began first , and struck with a hearty good will , and his example was followed by all the rest  a punishment that must make every feeling mind shudder .


Though by the Spanish account the distance from Cape Corientes to Guam is said to be 2400 leagues , or 7200 English miles , yet Captain Swan had persuaded his men , that , by the English account the distance was only 1900 leagues  and that , as Drake and Cavendish had run it in less than 50 days each , they with better built ships might run it even in less than either of them : when , therefore , they had run the 1900 leagues , and the 50 days were nearly expired , they began to grow very mutinous  and those who had declared against the voyage from the beginning , exclaimed bitterly against the Captain , and against all those who had persuaded them to undertake it .
They had , during this long run of 6000 miles , seen neither fish , fowl , bird , or insect , except once when , at the distance of 4975 miles from Cape Corientes , they spied some ruabies , which they apprehended had come from islands or cliffs at no great distance , though they never came in sight of  any .
The Captain in the midst of these tumults gave them fair words  told them , that it was probable , the Spanish accounts might be the best , and encouraged them by giving them hopes , that , as the breeze continued , a few days patience would put an end to their troubles .
On the 18th of May they met with some rain , and the clouds settling in the west foretold their near approach to land .
On the 20th , the bark being near three leagues a-head , ran over a rocky shoal , on which there was only four fathom water .
On the shoal they observed abundance of fish swimming every where about  and Captain Teat imagining that land was near , clapt upon a wind with the bark 's head to the north , and lay by to speak with the ship .
When the ship came up , Captain Teat went on board , and related what he had seen  on which , being then in lat .
12 deg .
55 min .
N. and Guam being laid down in 13 deg .
N. they clapt on a wind , and steered to the northward , very doubtful , however , of being right , as no shoals near Guam are noticed in the Spanish charts .
They pursued this course , however , till four in the afternoon  when , to their unspeakable joy , they saw the island of Guam at eight leagues distance . '
`` And happy it was , says Dampier , that we got sight of it before our provisions were gone , of which we had but enough for three days more  for , as I was afterwards informed , the crew had combined first to kill Captain Swan , and eat him , when the victuals were gone   and , after him , all of us who were accessary in promoting the voyage . '' '


Nothing can exhibit a more striking indication of the ferocity of man 's nature , than the resolution formed by this abandoned crew .
After a long series of enormities , robberies , murders , burning of houses and towns , exposing their fellow-creatures to want of food and shelter , and spreading terror and devastation where-ever they set their feet , they at length , distressed and half-famished themselves , begin to murmur against their leaders , and the greater number combine to murder the lesser number , and to make food of their flesh .
Need we , after reading this , have recourse to those we call barbarous nations for instances of the savage nature of man !
The most uncultivated of those eat only the flesh of enemies killed in war  but these wretches , who call themselves christians , exceeded in their intention every horrid example we read of  they conspired to kill and eat their own Chiefs !


On the 21st of May they came to an anchor about the middle of the island of Guam on the west side .
This is one of the Ladrone islands .
Dampier places it in 13 deg .
21 min .
N. and computes the meridian distance of Guam from Cape Corientes to be about 7302 miles  and supposes the South Sea to be of greater breadth by 25 degrees than is commonly allowed by hydrographers .
It is about twelve leagues in length and four in breadth  on it the Spaniards have a small  fort of six guns , garrisoned by 20 or 30 soldiers , and commanded by a Governor , and one or two subordinate Officers .
The climate is healthy , and the natives active , docile , and ingenious , and are the best boat-builders throughout the Indian seas .
Dampier believes their boats sail the best of any in the world .
He tried one of them by the log  and , by the rate she ran in half a minute , computes her course at 24 miles within the hour .
These Indians are no less dexterous in navigating than in building their boats .
By report they will pass to other islands at 30 leagues distance , do business , and return again in 12 hours .


They had no sooner cast anchor than a Spanish friar came on board , with three Indians : Captain Swan received the priest with great civility  told him they came with no hostile intention , but as friends to purchase with their money provisions to continue their voyage .
The priest replied , that provisions were now scarce upon the island , but would engage the Governor to do his utmost to supply their wants .
They thought proper , however , to detain the padre till his promise was fulfilled .


Next day a messenger was sent with letters and a present to the Governor , and in the mean time two boats were manned , one to fish , and another to purchase cocoa-nuts  the former returned empty , but the latter came back laden .
The Governor , on the receipt of the letters and present , in token of friendship complimented  the Captain with six hogs , 12 musk-melons , and as many water-melons  and at the same time sent an order to the Indians in the nearest town to bake every day as much bread-fruit as the ships should require , and to assist the mariners in gathering cocoa-nuts and other fruits  with which order the Indians very readily complied .
During this friendly intercourse the Manilla ship came in sight  but , being first seen from the fort , the Governor found means to apprize her of her danger , and she stood off , and escaped without being discerned by the ships .
But in steering to the southward to avoid them , she was very near sharing a worse fate  for she struck upon the shoal already mentioned , and , after three days incessant labour , floated off with the loss of her rudder .
During her distress the men got intelligence of her situation  but Captain Swan , who had determined no longer to follow the infamous employment of plundering , found means to divert them from their purpose of attacking her .


On the 30th of May the Governor sent his last present to Captain Swan , consisting of some hogs , a jar of pickled mangoes , a jar of excellent pickled fish , a jar of rusk or bread made of fine flour , and six or seven packs of rice .
In return , at his own request , he was furnished with powder and shot of which he was in want  but what he coveted most was a fine English dog which they had on board , with which he was likewise gratified .
The friar 's civility was  rewarded with a brass clock , an astrolabe , and a large telescope  in return for which he sent the Captain six hogs , some bushels of potatoes , a roasting pig , and half a hundred weight of fina Manilla tobacco .
The ships were plentifully supplied , besides , with every thing the island afforded  cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit as many as the ships could stow , and upwards of 50 hogs in pickle .
Captain Swan was desirous of the Governor 's letter to the merchants of Manilla , having a private view to trade , which he concealed from his villainous crew .


On the 2d of June , they departed from Guam , directing their course to Mindanao , one of the Philippines  a range of islands extending in length from the 5th to the 19th degree of North latitude , and occupying in breadth about six degrees of longitude .
The principal island in this range is Luconia on the north , where Magellan , in his voyage round the world , was slain with a poisoned arrow , and where the Spaniards made their first settlement , and established at Manilla a mart of traffic with the richest kingdoms of the east .


On the south , Mindanao is the principal island .
It is in length about 60 leagues , and in breadth fifty .
It is diversified with hills and vallies .
The hills abound with gold , and the vallies are covered with perpetual verdure .
It is finely watered with rivers and springs  and the plains and lawns are interspersed with groves of lofty trees , some of which are  formed for shade , and some afford food for the inhabitants .


Of the pith of one they make their bread , and of the sap of others they make a pleasant drink .
The marshy grounds abound with rice , and on the dry hilly land they cultivate yams , potatoes , melons , and a variety of vegetables unknown to Europeans .
Their chief fruits are plantains , bonanoes , nutmegs , cloves , beetel-nuts , durians , jaccas , cocoa-nuts , bread-fruit , and oranges .


The plantain Dampier calls the king of fruit , and prefers it to every other .
The tree that bears it is between three and four feet in circumference , and rises about ten or twelve feet high .
When at its height , there springs from the top a stem about the size of a man 's arm , round which the fruit grows in clusters , in shape not unlike the Turkey cucumber , the coat of which is of a yellow colour when ripe .
The inclosed fruit is of a delicate flavour , and melts in the mouth like mamalet .
It is highly esteemed by all Europeans , and all their settlements are furnished with plantain walks , some families subsisting wholly upon that fruit .


The bonanoe differs but little from the plantain , except in size , being small and less luscious .


The nutmeg and clove trees are rare in this island , but those that grow are large and fine .
The natives discourage their growth for fear of exciting the jealousy of the Dutch , who have monopolized the whole trade for spices , and who keep in pay a company of armed soldiers  to cut down the spice-trees in the uninhabited islands , lest other European nations should avail themselves of their plenty .
Dampier says , that he has been assured that , in some of the eastern islands , it is usual to see , at the shedding time , cloves three or four inches deep under the trees .


Of the beetel-nut all the Eastern people are immoderately fond .
It is the fruit of a tree that grows like the cabbage-tree to the height of ten or twelve feet , without either leaf or branch , and then sends forth shoots on every side , among which the fruit is found in clusters , on tough stalks about the bigness of a man 's finger .
It is larger than a nutmeg , and rounder  they cut it , when green , in quarters , wrapping each quarter up in an arek-leaf , and chewing both together .
It tastes rough , dyes the lips red , and makes the teeth black .


The durian grows on trees like apple-trees , and are in size as large as pumpkins , covered with a thick rind , which , when ripe , opens and sends forth a strong scent , not unlike that of roasted onions .
It divides into chives , each about the size of a pullet 's egg , the inside of which is of the consistence of cream , and must be eaten in its prime , or there is no enduring its rankness .


The jacca differs very little from the durian  only the inside of the former is yellow , and that of the latter white .


The island of Mindanao abounds likewise with animals of various kinds  and , according to Dampier , is one of the most plentiful islands  in the world  and , though so near the Equator , being in 7 deg .
N. the air is temperate , enjoying gentle sea-breezes in the day , and cooling land-winds in the night .


Though they arrived on this coast about the middle of June , yet it was the middle of July before they could come to an anchor .
They were ignorant of the situation of the chief town  and , arriving first on the opposite side , had been all that time playing about the island in search of it .
At length they cast anchor near the river that bears the name of the island , and leads to the chief city .
They fired seven guns , and were answered from the shore by three .
They were presently after invited by a Raja and one of the Emperor 's sons , who demanded in Spanish , who they were , and from whence they came ?
They were answered by Mr. Smith ( the gentleman made prisoner at Leon ) , that they were English , and had been long from their country .
They were told , they were welcome  and asked if they were come to settle a factory , and to open trade ?
They said , they came only to purchase provisions .
At which the Mindaneians appeared disconcerted .
Captain Swan was some time at a loss to account for this circumstance  but he afterwards understood , that a Captain Goodluck had been there some time before , with some proposals from the East-India Company  and that , when he went away , he had given them some reason shortly to expect an Ambassador from England , to complete the treaty .


 The Raja and Prince sat in their canoes  and , after half an hour 's conversation , took their leave , having invited Captain Swan ashore , and promised to assist him in procuring provisions .


There are three small islands called Meangis , within 20 leagues of Mindanao , that abound with gold and cloves  and , while Captain Swan was beating along the coast , in his passage from Guam to the river where the ships now were at anchor , they were observed by the Princes of that country , and known to be English .
The Prince of those islands , having heard a good report of the English , and fearing a visit from the Dutch , sent secretly his nephew to Captain Swan , to invite him and his company to come and settle in his territories , offering every advantage in point of trade and security that he should require .
Nothing could have been more advantageous , both to the nation and the settlers than this offer  but Captain Swan paid no regard to it .


As the season was now approaching when the westerly monsoon was about to set in , which would necessarily oblige the ships to stay a considerable time in the port of Mindanao , Captain Swan judged it his interest to cultivate a good understanding with the reigning Sultan .
With this view he caused a magnificent present to be prepared for the Sovereign , consisting of scarlet-cloth , gold lace , a Turkish scymetar enriched with jewels , and a case of pistols , together with presents of less value to his chief Ministers  and , being in readiness , he sent them on shore by  Mr. More , who sailed with him from London as chief supercargo , when his design was to trade in the South Seas .
These presents were graciously received .
The Sultan made Mr. More sit down by him , and asked him many questions concerning England , by means of a Spanish interpreter  and , after an hour 's conversation , dismissed him with marks of the highest esteem .
Next day Captain Swan was invited on shore , and admitted to an audience in form  when the Sultan shewed him letters from the East-India Company , and desired to know if he came to settle in consequence of those letters ?
He talked with him much concerning the produce of his country , and the nature of carrying on commerce  and seemed highly entertained with the accounts he gave of it , and of the countries through which he had passed , and the novelties he had seen .
He was three hours in close conversation  and , when he was dismissed , was entertained by Raja Laut , the King 's uncle , with a sumptuous banquet , after their manner , consisting of boiled rice , fish , and fowls .


On this occasion , Captain Swan was given to understand , that , while Mr. Goodluck resided in that city , he had been robbed by a servant belonging to Raja Laut , and that the fellow absconded till Mr. Goodluck took his leave  but that he was now returned , and was ready to be delivered up to be punished , in such manner , and with such severity , as crimes of the like nature are punished by the laws of England .
But  Figure 4 .
Captain Swan Entertaind by the Raja Laut , Uncle to the King of Mandanao .
 Captain Swan told him , that in his country none but the injured party could prosecute the criminal  and , as the man had committed no offence against him , he could take no cognisance of his crime .
The Raja heard him with astonishment  and , to shew that the Princes of Mindanao were far from countenancing such practices , he caused the fellow to be stript naked , tied to a post , and exposed a whole day with his face to the burning sun  while at the same time the Moskitos continually tormented him without a possibility of being able to brush them off  a kind of torture that few have hardiness enough to survive .
This condescension , in offering to deliver up the criminal to be punished by the Captain , was followed by a like offer from the Captain , with respect to any of his men who should offend against the laws of the Mindaneians  but the Minister returned the compliment , and left the punishment to the Captain himself , who , upon the least complaint , punished his men with a severity that shewed more of revenge than of justice , and which they afterwards took occasion to resent .
Among those who felt the effects of his indignation was Captain Teat , his chief mate , who commanded the bark that accompanied him in his run across the Southern Ocean  and others , who had offended him on board , he remembered , now he had the countenance of the court on shore .
Captain Swan was highly caressed by the Chiefs of Mindanao , and pressed to stay and  secure his ships from the approaching tempests , which always attend the change of the monsoons  and , as the river before the rainy season generally runs low , finding it difficult to float his ship over the bar , fifty or sixty Mindaneian fishermen were immediately sent with their canoes , to assist him in lightening his ship , and floating her up the river .
She was no sooner moored than a free intercourse with the natives commenced .
They expressed their regard for the English by signs that were easily understood .
When the Dutch were mentioned to them , they would spread their fore-fingers half a foot apart , saying Bujeto , they are so far distant in friendship : when speaking of the Spaniards , they would spread their fingers still wider  but when the English were spoken of , they would bring their fingers quite close , saying Samo , we are all one .
They were very fond of getting the men to their houses , where they kindly entertained them , after their manner , with tobacco , and beetel-nut  and where those who had money , and were decently dressed , were pressed to connections with the best families , and courted by the young females to the most familiar intimacy .
To men who have long been at sea , such inducements are irresistible  and many of them made themselves poor , by being too easily drawn in by these allurements to spend their money lavishly .
Some who accompanied Harris from the North Seas had gold in abundance  and the Mindaneian misses , when they knew their power , very soon found the way  to ease them of it .
In Mindanao they had goldsmiths and other artificers , who charged double their value for such baubles as these prodigals were for ever bespeaking to present to their favourites  besides , some of them bought houses , and hired servants , and lived as profusely as the Raja himself , imitating the custom of the country , and having a pagelly or principal companion , and half a dozen mistresses .
It was not long before the town 's people discovered the true humour of English sailors , and they likewise took care to make their advantage of it .
As they had no other but gold in lumps , when they wanted change , they gave them at the rate of 11 or 12 dollars an ounce .
To others the same gold was exchanged for 18 dollars .
The price of provisions and common necessaries was in like manner enhanced by those spendthrifts  and thus , says Dampier , the poor were made to suffer by the folly of the rich , and a foundation was laid for imposing upon all Englishmen who should hereafter have occasion to take up their residence in that port .


Captain Swan himself was seldom seen at any other house but Raja Laut 's or the royal palace .
At the latter he made frequent visits , and at the former dined every day , attended by such of his men as had no money to spend , who had rice in plenty provided for them , and sometimes the remains of fowls or pieces of buffalo , drest in a course , and served in a hoggish manner .
The Mindaneians use neither knives nor forks in eating ,  and they cram their mouths with lumps as large as they can take in , those being accounted the genteelest who can open their mouths the widest .


The religion of Mindanao is the Mahometan , and when the ships first cast anchor , it was their Ramadam , which answers to our Lent , when all sports and pastimes are suspended  on this account the Raja made an apology for not entertaining the Captain with the usual diversions of the country .
The wet season too came on , which caused a general suspension of all out-door business .


During the month of August the weather became tempestuous , and the rains excessive .
The river swelled and overflowed its banks  and it was with the utmost difficulty the ships were prevented from driving on the main land , or into the open sea  for trees of vast magnitude came floating down with the torrent , and frequently pressed against their bows with such weight , that they were in continual fear lest their cables should give way .
During the time of these inundations the city stands , as it were , in a pond , and there is no communication between house and house till the floods abate .
It was probably this circumstance that suggested to them the manner of constructing their houses .
They are all built upon posts from 12 to 20 feet high .
These posts are larger or smaller according to the height or magnitude of the superstructure .
The Sultan 's palace has but  one floor , on which , however , there are many rooms , to which they ascend by stairs from the street .
It stands upon 180 posts , and is twenty feet above the level of the ground .
The ordinary houses are also of one floor , and ascended by ladders .
The roofs are all covered with palmeto leaves .
The area beneath their houses is usually fenced in , and there the poorer sort keep their poultry  and there also is received the common draught of their sculleries  and , were it not for the frequent inundations that carry off the soil , the nastiness of the meaner people would render living in Mindanao impossible : but every crevice is scoured clean by the violence of the currents , which frequently overset the houses  though the posts on which they stand are sunk deep in the ground .


The inhabitants of Mindanao are , like all the Eastern people , very clean in their persons  they constantly bathe every day once , and sometimes oftener  they wash after every meal : and , if they happen to touch by accident any unclean thing , they have their times of purification allotted , before the expiration of which they are not permitted to leave their chambers .
Swine are held with them in abomination , and though they run wild in the woods , yet they are never eaten .
The chief food of the people is rice , sago , plantains , bread-fruit , cocoa-nuts , and other nutritious fruits  among the better sort , fowls and beef are used rather by way of relish , than as solid  subsistance  for they are boiled to rags in their strange messes .


The Mindaneians are of low stature , small limbs , straight bodies , little heads , and are of a brown copper colour .
The women are fairer than the men , and their hair is black and long , and generally well dressed .
Their visage too is rounder and better featured than that of the men  only their noses are small , and so flat between their eyes that the rising is scarce discernible .
At a distance they look tolerable , but on a nearer approach these imperfections are rather disgusting .
Their dress consists of a petticoat and a loose jacket .
The sleeves of the jacket are long and wide at the shoulders , but sloping down to their wrists , where they are so tight , that it is with difficulty they get their hands through in putting them on .
They then rise in folds about the arm , and in that lies their pride .
The better sort of people wear fine callico or silks  the meaner sort , an ordinary cloth made of the plantain-tree , which they call saggen .
The women , in general , ( as has been noted ) love the company of strangers , especially of white men  and Dampier adds , that the men belonging to the ships could scarce walk the streets without being pulled into their houses .


The chief artists among them are goldsmiths , ship-builders , carpenters , and smiths  all of whom are excellent in their way , allowing for the badness of their tools .
Dampier gives a description of their smith 's bellows , which is  simple and ingenious .
It is composed of two hollow cylinders , like the large wooden pipes used by us for the conveyance of water  they are cut flat at both ends , in length about four feet , and placed upright at the distance of two feet from each other upon a stone hearth before the fire .
Within two inches of the bottom of each a pipe is placed , projecting like a cock towards the fire , but bending so as that the pipes from both cylinders meet and terminate in one before they reach it .
Thus constructed , and fixed firm , a man with two light brushes made of feathers , which he works alternately like two pistons , keeps up a continual blast  and with this simple contrivance , without either vice or anvil , other than a large stone or the butt-end of an old cannon , they fabricate their work to admiration .
Their carpenters have neither saws nor planes , and yet they split and smooth their boards with great neatness .
This requires time , but their work is the more durable for it , because the grain being unbroken the timber remains the tougher .


In Mindanao there is only one mosque , or place of worship , and that but little frequented by the meaner people .
In this mosque they have a contrivance for striking the time .
A drum of vast dimensions , shaped in form of a bell , is placed over a large hollow cavity , the head of which drum is covered with brass , and called a gong .
A certain number of men are appointed to attend this gong , who relieve each  other alternately night and day , and with a stick as large as a man 's arm , with a ball at the end of it , at certain intervals , they strike the gong , the sound of which is heard from one extremity of the town to the other , and supplies the place of a clock .


The Mindaneians use circumcision , and that operation is performed with great ceremony .
The usual time among the common people is about the age of twelve  but the Princes of the blood are circumcised , like the Jews , at the end of eight days .
On this occasion , the warriors all appear in arms , and , like Europeans at a review , make a sham fight , for the diversion of the spectators , in which both the Sultan and his General are principal performers .


When the waters were subsided , and the Ramadam over , Raja Laut , the Sultan 's brother , and General of his forces , to entertain Captain Swan , assembled the dancers , who are women bred from their infancy , like those in Europe , to that art .
On this occasion , more than 50 of them were assembled , who , being ranged in a ring , danced to their own music .
In these dances their feet and legs are but little employed .
Having no other than vocal music , they sing at first solo parts in slow time  but their chorusses are brisk  and then their hands , arms , heads , and bodies , are all employed in such contortions , that one would think they were made without bones .


Dancing and processions were the favourite diversions among the Chiefs of this island  and ,  Captain Swan , in conformity to the prevailing taste , resolving to give an English entertainment , ordered his music ashore , and such of his men as could dance were likewise ordered to attend .
Accordingly , having hired a convenient house , he invited the Sultan , and Chiefs of the place , with their women , to be spectators of the splendor of the European dances .
He had caused the house to be hung round with the richest silks , of which he had store on board  and decorated it with gold and silver-lace , which , when illuminated with a profusion of wax-candles , made a most brilliant appearance .
When the company assembled , they were struck with amazement , and thought all they beheld was the effect of enchantment .
Among the dancers , there was one Jack Thacker , a common sailor , who at the music-houses at Wapping had learned to dance a horn-pipe .
This man attracted the notice of the Mindaneians more than all the rest , because more in the antic manner to which they were accustomed .
Him , therefore , they fixed their eyes upon , and considered as a man of consequence .
When they had spent the best part of the night in feasting their eyes and their appetites ( for Captain Swan had ordered his cook to prepare a cold collation of sweet-meats , and other savoury dishes ) , they were still unwilling to retire  and it was almost day-break before the Sultan retired , and , very unwillingly , was accompanied by his female train .
Raja Laut and his women staid longer  and , it is said , notwithstanding  his devotion to his prophet , drank plentifully of wine .


Nothing was talked of so much among the Mindaneians , during the stay of the ships , as the comic English dancer , of whom Raja Laut was willing to know the history  and , having enquired , was told by one of his companions , that he was an English nobleman who travelled for his diversion , and that all those who wore fine cloaths were gentlemen of inferior quality , who left their own country out of curiosity to see the countries abroad .


This harmless imposition , being told by the General to Captain Swan , who was of a morose unsociable disposition , cost the poor fellow a hearty drubbing , though he was wholly ignorant of what had been told .
He was first stript of his fine cloaths , in the presence of the Raja , by his Captain 's orders , and then stript of his nobility by flogging his back .
It was not long , however , before the man was revenged .


About the middle of November they began to prepare for their departure , and for that purpose their first business was to examine the ships bottoms , the sheathing of which they found eaten by the worm like a honey-comb  and the bottom of the bark not being sheathed , was eaten to the timbers , and the vessel thereby rendered unserviceable : application was therefore made to the Raja for planks to new sheathe the ship .
The Raja 's sincerity was never suspected , till this incident gave reason for jealousy .
When he  came down to the river , and saw the carpenters ripping off the sheathing , he shook his head , and seemed much disconcerted , declaring he had never before seen a ship with two bottoms .
His hope was , that the ship , like the bark , would have been eaten through , and that he should have had all her guns .
A like accident had formerly entitled him to a like advantage , when a Dutch ship , by anchoring in the same river during the westerly monsoon , was entirely disabled , and never again put to sea .
He was sensible enough of the mischief that would infallibly ensue to the ships by lying so long among those destructive vermin  for , whenever the natives disuse their vessels , they haul them up on the dry beach , burn their bottoms , and there let them lie , till they want again to use them .


While some were employed in ripping off the old worm-eaten planks , others were busy in preparing new  and , by the beginning of December , the sheathing was repaired and tallowed .
The latter part of the month was taken up in putting the ballast , stores , and guns aboard : this was a work of the greater labour , as it was first necessary to carry the ship out to sea before it was undertaken .
About the beginning of January they began to fill water , and to take in rice  and application was made to Raja Laut to furnish buffaloes , as he had all along promised to do .
He now began to form excuses , and pretended to take men out every day a-hunting ( for those creatures always run wild )  but always  came home empty , and pleaded ill success .
The Captain too began to act very mysteriously .
By the help of the government on shore , he had got the absolute ascendancy over his men , and was as implicitly obeyed as if he had been Captain of a king 's ship .
When he was importuned to declare when he intended to sail , he chose to be silent  and when the men wanted to know upon what enterprize they were next to be employed , he reproached them with their eagerness for piracy .
He had sold Raja Laut some tons of iron and lead , and was to have had in return rice and beef  as to the first , the Raja had failed in furnishing the stipulated quantity , and the latter he had hitherto in no shape fulfilled .
The Raja had besides borrowed of him 20 ounces of gold  and , when he required payment , the Raja demanded a much larger sum for his own board , and the board of his men .
This treatment , and these disappointments , served to discompose a mind naturally sour , and to put him out of humour with every body about him .


All this while the westerly monsoon was wasting that was to carry them on to India .
The men began again to murmur , and grow unruly : some , weary of rambling about , and who had formed connections with the natives , were for staying at Mindanao : some , who had husbanded their money , of whom indeed there were but few , were eager to get home  and others , who were poor ( by far the majority ) , were for continuing their ravages , and were impatient to be in action .


 While matters were in this situation , strong representations were made to the Captain to come on board , and to declare himself  and , after many delays , a day was at length fixed for a determination .


In the mean time , those who were bent on returning home , foreseeing that continued extravagancies would necessarily create new wants , and that new wants would require new means of supply , took occasion secretly to purchase a canoe , and formed a design to depart in the night for Borneo , where , by a letter just received from thence by a Mindaneian vessel , they hoped to meet with an English factory , and from thence find a passage home  but Captain Swan getting intelligence of their design , seized their canoe , and threatened to punish for deserters all those concerned in the plot .


Another party about the same time , hearing that the ship was about to sail , retired into the country , to conceal themselves till after her departure .


The party on board , who had nothing but the ship 's allowance to subsist on , became unruly , and sent ashore to the merchants iron to sell for arrack and honey , with which they made themselves drunk , and grew quarrelsome .
All these disorders , Dampier says , might easily have been redressed , had Captain Swan exerted his authority in time , and established proper discipline on board the ship  but he living with his merchants constantly on shore , and leaving every  one to do as he pleased on board , they encouraged one another in their villainies , and at length grew mutinous .


When these things were come to extremity , he gave orders that the whole crew should attend him on board the ship , on the 13th of January [ 1687 ]  but , unluckily for him , two days before this meeting was to take place , Captain Swan sent his gunner to fetch something he had occasion for out of the locker of his cabin .
This man , in rummaging for what he wanted , among other things happened to take out the Captain 's journal , which , being laid carelesly by , was taken up by one John Read , ( an ingenious young man , who likewise kept a journal ) out of mere curiosity to peep in it , to see how nearly his and the other agreed .


At the first opening of the book he cast his eye on a part , in which the Captain had made a memorandum of the mutinous behaviour of his men in their passage from Cape Corientes to Guam , and had particularly noted that of one John Read , a Jamaica-man , a namesake of the Read who took the journal , but no relation .
This naturally excited his curiosity to look farther , and he found means , while the gunner was busy , to convey the journal away to examine it at his leisure .
As soon as the gunner was gone ashore , John Read , the artist , shewed the book to John Read , the Jamaica-man , and both of them held a consultation with their comrages on the contents .
These men , who  were before ripe for mischief , now grew outrageous , and it was unanimously agreed to consult Captain Teat , who , as has been before noted , had received unworthy treatment from Captain Swan on shore , which , they knew , he only wanted an opportunity to resent .
Teat left nothing unsaid to aggravate the failings of his superior , and to incense the company against him .
He represented him as proud , ignorant , avaricious , cruel , and vindictive , and withal cowardly , and unfit to command upon any bold and manly enterprize  called to their minds the opposition he made to the attacking the Manilla ship off Guam , by the conquest of which they would all have been enriched  and which , he said , Swan did not oppose out of a principle of honesty or gratitude , but from the fear of engaging a ship so much superior to his own in weight of metal and in numbers , though he , Teat , would have pawned his head to have been master of her in a few hours close attack .
Men whose expectations have been raised to an unreasonable pitch , give easy credit to unfavourable suggestions against the authors of their disappointment .
The crew took lire , and instantly bound themselves by an oath to deprive Captain Swan of the command , without naming any officer to substitute in his room  nay , so precipitate was their resolution , that the majority were for setting sail immediately , and leaving all that were on shore behind : and this hasty resolve would certainly have taken place , had either of the  surgeons been on board  but , as their cry was for war , it was judged too desperate to go to sea without one skilful person on board to assist the wounded .


As all this passed in the night , it was agreed to stay till morning , and then to send a trusty messenger on shore , speedily to request the surgeons to come to the assistance of a man who had broken his leg .
The chief surgeon said he should see the man the next day , and in the mean time sent his mate , Mr. Herman Coppinger , to his immediate relief .
This man , a few days before , was sleeping at his mistresses , when a snake twisted itself round his neck , but quietly went away upon his waking without hurting him .
Coppinger , supposing the accident real , made haste to pack up his moveables to go on board  and , as the Captain was to have his general rendezvous the next day , Dampier took the opportunity of going with him .
They scarce had mounted the ship 's side before they discovered the trick .
But when the mutineers were thus in possession of the surgeon , they presently dispatched the canoe to shore again to invite all the men who chose it to come on board , but with a strict caution not to tell the reason , lest their design should reach the ears of their Captain .


The 13th in the morning they weighed , and fired a gun .
The Captain , much alarmed , immediately dispatched Mr. Nelly , his mate , to know the cause .
To him they told their grievances ,  and shewed the journal  he persuaded them to stay till next day to hear what the Captain and merchants had to say .
They did so , and Mr. Harthop came on board in the morning .
He advised them to a reconciliation , and to take more rice on board .
They were deaf to his persuasion  yet at his entreaty they staid till two in the afternoon to wait for the Captain , and such gentlemen or seamen as chose to accompany them , but suffered none to go ashore , except Mr. Harthop and a man with a wooden leg .
Dampier remarks , that , if Captain Swan had then come on board , as a man of sense and spirit ought to have done , he might at the very last have crusht their designs , and reduced the mutineers to order and discipline  but being of a sullen , suspicious , vindictive temper himself , he dreaded the resentment of those he had marked for vengeance  and therefore suffered the time to elapse , and was with 36 others left behind in the town .
Besides these , six or eight had deserted , and were up the country  and sixteen had died of poison , given them , as was supposed , by the husbands of those women whom they had seduced  and there were others on board , who had received the poison , and died of it some months after .
In this manner their numbers were considerably diminished , and of 150 who sailed from Cape Corientes , not above 80 were now on board .


It has been more than once hinted , that Captain Swan sailed from London with no design of  privateering , but of carrying on trade with the Spaniards on the western coasts of America .
He had therefore a great quantity of heavy goods , such as iron and lead , not yet disposed of , some of which he had sold to Raja Laut , and no doubt was willing to have received the payment before he departed .
This may , in some measure , account for his delay .
His crew was composed of men , who , most of them , had forced themselves upon him for purposes which he abhorred  and perhaps , he wanted to have rid himself of the greatest part of them , if he could have found a proper opportunity .
Those marked in his journal were , no doubt , the men most obnoxious to him , and the most averse to trade , which he was determined to follow in his way home , having already 5000 l. of his owners money , which he had received for the goods put up by auction at his first commencing buccaneer  with this he purposed to have purchased a cargo to take with him from the East Indies .
Hence arose his mysterious conduct , and his want of resolution .
The loss of his bark was his embarrassment .
Could that have been rendered serviceable , his design could more easily have been carried into execution .
The suspicious part of the crew might have been shipped on board the bark  and by giving them a wrong track , they might have been deserted in the night , and left to their own course .
But a discovery being made before the Captain 's designs were ripe for execution , he was entangled in his own net .


 But to return : On the 14th of January , 1687 , at three o'clock in the afternoon , they set sail from the river Mindanao , and next day came a-breast of Chambango , where formerly the Spaniards had a settlement , and where , it is said , there were plenty of Swine and buffaloes .
On the 17th , they anchored in a good bay on the west side of a small island , where they chose their officers , constituting John Read the Jamaica-man Captain , Thomas Teat Master , and Henry More Quarter-master  and , having cut some curious short-jointed canes , and plentifully supplied the ship with water from a clearspring , they pursued their course  but on their passage they struck on a rock , where after lying two hours , they were heaved off by the rising of the tide , and escaped with the loss only of a large piece of their rudder , though in more danger than ever they had experienced in the whole voyage .


On the 18th , they anchored at the north-west end of the island of Mindera , in 10 fathom water .
While they lay there a canoe with four Indians from Manilla came along side , who informed them , that at Manilla there was seldom less than 20 or 30 sail of ships of different nations , who came to traffic with the Spanish merchants  and that , if they meant to trade , they might for a trifle have a letter of recommendation from a friar to whom they were carrying dispatches , and would in a few days return with his answer .
Trade , however , was no part of their employment  and the Indians were suffered to pass without molestation .


 On the 23d , they reached Luconia , the island so ardently wished for by this piratical crew , and presently descried a sail , which they instantly pursued and took .
She proved a Spanish bark from Pangassanam , laden with rice and cotton-cloth , and bound for Manilla .
The master of this prize was boatswain to the Acapulco ship that passed by Guam  this man gave Dampier an account of all that happened on that occasion .
The time of the year being too far spent to effect any thing of consequence on this coast , they concluded to sail for Pulo Condore , and there wait till the latter end of May , about which time the Acapulco ship generally arrives at Manilla .
With this resolution they quitted Luconia on the 26th of February  and , on the 14th of March , cast anchor at the island of Condore , on the coast of Cambodia .
Among the productions of these islands ( for there is a cluster of them ) , there is a lofty tree , the body of which is in diameter three or four feet , from which the inhabitants extract a clammy juice , which being boiled becomes a perfect tar , and answers all the purposes of that balsam .
On the 16th , they entered a convenient harbour , and employed themselves in careening their ships , in which they were assisted by the natives of the island , who brought them hogs and turtle in exchange for rice , of which they had now great plenty .


While they lay in this harbour , two of the men died who had been poisoned in Mindanao  they were opened by the surgeon , and their livers  were found black , light , and dry , like pieces of cork .


Before they departed , they engaged an old native who could speak the Malayan language , to pilot them to Siam , where they expected to purchase dried fish , having nothing now but rice to eat at sea .


On the 21st of April they sailed from Condore , and , on the 24th , anchored in the bay of Siam , where , however , they could get no fish .
On the 21st of May they left Siam  and , in their return to Pulo Condore , overtook a Chinese junk , laden with pepper , who told them that the English were settled on the island of Sumatra , at a place called Silleber , which was the first intelligence they received of that factory .
This junk accompanied them to Pulo Condore , where Captain Read , observing a Malayan vessel at anchor within shore , sent a canoe to learn from whence they came  but , knowing the Malayans to be desperate fellows , cautioned his men not to trust themselves on board , but to hail them from the boat : but the men , not regarding the Captain 's instructions , went on board armed  which the Malayans observing , fell upon them unawares with their short daggers , and stabbed five or six of them dead upon the spot  the rest jumped into the sea , and saved themselves by swimming , among whom was one Daniel Wallis , who never could swim before or since , but in his fright made shift to reach the boat , and made his escape with the rest .
Here Herman Coppinger ,  the surgeon , went on shore , on purpose to leave this diabolical company  but Read sent an armed force , and pressed him on board again .
Dampier intended following his example , but waited a more convenient place .


They were now confined at this island by stormy weather till the 4th of June  and in the mean time a Malayan Portuguese from the junk entered on board , whom they entertained as an interpreter , to facilitate an intercourse with the natives .
When they weighed anchor , the wind was contrary  yet they kept plying to the westward in hopes of its shifting to carry them to Manilla , before their much longed-for prize should arrive .
In this hope they continued labouring incessantly for 10 days  when , being almost worn out with fatigue , and finding no probability of accomplishing their desires , they relinquished that project in despair , and , instead of it , stood away for Prata , in lat .
20 deg .
40 min .
N. where they flattered themselves with fishing up much treasure from the China ships that had been cast away on that island , some of which were said to contain immense riches .
But in this too they were disappointed by adverse winds  and , notwithstanding the utmost exertion of their skill in seamanship , they were driven by the violence of the gale to the island of St. John , on the coast of China .
While they lay at this island they visited the shore every day , and purchased hogs , fowls , and buffaloes .
Some of the men visited the continent , but found nothing there that answered their purpose .


 On the 3d of July they weighed anchor with a gentle breeze , but on the 4th there came on a violent gale from the north-east , which increased till the dead of the night , when the rain began to pour down in such torrents that the fountains of heaven seemed to be opened , and a second deluge threatened  at the same time the thunder began to crack , and the flashes of lightning that pierced through the torrents of rain , appeared upon the face of the deep as if the sea was overspread with a blue flame .
The darkness that succeeded between the flashes presented the most horrid gloom that ever covered the deep .
The sea was raised to an astonishing height , and the waves broke short upon the ship with such violence , that it was thought every succeeding billow must have dashed her to the bottom .
One sea struck away the rails of the head , and at the same time dislodged the sheet-anchor that was lashed with its fluke over the bend of the ship in the strongest manner , and it was every moment expected to beat a hole through the ship , by striking against her bows .
It then became necessary to steer right before the wind , to endeavour to secure the anchor  and it was impossible afterwards to change the course till the storm abated .
The fury of the storm abated about four in the morning , about which time they observed what the sailors call a Corpus Sant at the mast-head .
This meteor is seen at sea , sometimes at the mast-head , sometimes at the yard-arm , and sometimes upon the deck .
When  it appears aloft it is like a star , and is taken for a good omen  but when below , it resembles a glow worm , and always dreaded as a bad sign .
The crew was overjoyed on seeing it at the very pinnacle of the ship 's fane .


From two in the morning till seven they kept scudding before the wind  but the wind gradually dying away , and the sea subsiding , they set their mizzen , brought the ship up upon a wind , and lay to under their mizzen till eleven , when for two hours there ensued a perfect calm , yet the sky looked black and lowring .
About one the wind shifted to the south-west , and began again to blow hard , with violent rain .
They furled up their mizzen , wore ship , and suffered her to scud before the wind , as before , till ten at night , when the wind ceased , and before morning the sea was calm , and the sky perfectly serene .
This storm , however , dispirited the crew , who were now driven out of their knowledge , and were anxious for nothing but a place of shelter to preserve them from the fury of a second hurricane , which they had reason to expect towards the full of the moon .


They consulted their sea-charts , and concluded to steer for the Piscadores , islands situated in lat .
23 deg .
N. of which , however , they knew nothing but the name .
On the 20th of July they came in sight of them  and when they arrived were astonished to see so many junks passing and re-passing as were continually in sight .
They followed some of the largest into a spacious  harbour , which brought them to a considerable town , such as they did not expect to have found among islands so little known .
On their attempting to land , they were met by a Tartarian officer , who demanded , whence they came , of what nation they were , and whither they were bound ?
And being told they were English , and driven there in distress , they were kindly entertained  but were told , they must not come on shore  but whatever necessaries they wanted , should be sent them on board without delay .
Mutual civilities were exchanged .
The ship was supplied with the best provisions they had ever tasted  and the Captain in return sent a curious Spanish silver-hilted rapier , an English carbine , and a gold chain , as a present to the Governor .
They staid till the 29th , and then directed their course to a cluster of islands that lie between Formosa and Luconia , the place they still set their hearts upon .
On the 6th of August they came in sight of the islands they were in pursuit of , and , contrary to expectation , found them well inhabited .


On these islands were plenty of goats and swine , but very few birds or poultry .
It is an observation of Dampier , founded on reason and confirmed by experience , that , in countries abounding in corn and maize , birds and all manner of fowls are bred in abundance  but in those islands where the inhabitants subsist chiefly on fruits , roots , and fish , birds wild and tame are more rare .


 As these islands were without names in the sea charts , Captain Read called them all by one general name of Bashee Islands .
The situation of their towns was remarkable .
They were built on precipices inaccessible on every side , except by ladders placed at the ends of the streets , which all ran in lines parallel to each other , and on which the houses rise in ranges one above another , till they terminate in a single row .
The inhabitants of these islands were acquainted with the use of iron , and they had amongst them a yellow metal that very much resembled gold , for some of which Captain Read exchanged iron  and Dampier laments that he could purchase none of it , because he had nothing to bestow in return .
They were very ingenious , had large fishing-boats , and lived in a peculiar manner different from any people they had yet visited .
They were not very delicate in their food  for they would gather up the goats-skins and goats-paunches which the men threw away  and would singe , broil , and eat the former  the latter they would stew ( not over nicely cleansed ) , and , mincing raw fish very small , would mix the mess together , and with a little salt over it , make a very savoury meal .
The paunches of the swine they never touched .
They appeared to be very cleanly in their persons , and withal so honest and good natured , that they would take nothing but what was given them  nor were they ever out of humour with the strangers , though they had often cause enough , nor with one another .
 No provocation could incense them to anger  nor any opportunity induce them to theft .
They brought constantly every morning goats , hogs , potatoes , and fruits , to the ship , which they exchanged for iron , nails , old hoops , or bullets .
Thus the crew of the ship fared sumptuously every day , and salted 70 or 80 hogs for future use .
These islands lie in lat .
20 deg .
21 min .
N .


Being now sufficiently stored with provisions , and having filled their casks with water , after staying from the 13th of August till the 24th of September , and after having mended their sails , and scrubbed the ships bottom , they were preparing to sail , when a violent storm came on , which forced them to cut their cables and put to sea , leaving six of their best men on shore .


They put before the wind with their bare poles  but it was the first of October before they could recover to their former station .
On the following day their six men were brought on board by the natives , whom they rewarded with three bars of iron , a present to them more valuaable than so many bars of solid gold .
The men reported , that , as soon as the ship was out of sight , the natives were more kind to them than ever  that they endeavoured to prevail upon them to cut their hair short , like theirs  and that they offered to each the choice of a wife , with a small hatchet , a set of planter 's tools , and a portion of land for each of them to cultivate by way of dowry  and , when the ship came in sight again , they then importuned them for iron , which was the only recompence they required .


 This second storm quite disconcerted all their measures .
They began to think that the winds and the waves were employed against them , and were terrified with the thoughts of their unhappy situation .
Most of them were heartily weary of being tost to and fro to no manner of purpose , and were very desirous of getting home : only Read and Teat were determined to make their fortunes at whatever risque  they therefore , finding the crew resolute to leave this dangerous coast , persuaded them to accompany them to Cape Comorin , where , if they disapproved of their proceedings , every one should be at liberty to follow his own course .
To this they all agreed  but these freebooters , fearing to meet English or Dutch ships in the direct road , proposed to coast along the east side of the Philippines , and so , keeping south towards the spice islands , to pass into the Indian ocean near the island of Timor .
With this view they set sail on the 3d of October , 1687  and leaving the island of Luconia on the west , ' `` with all our golden projects , '' says Dampier , `` along with it , we stood to the southward till we came in sight of the island St. John on the coast of Mindanao , and on the 16th came to an anchor on the south-east side of that island . '' '
While they lay in this bay , the young prince of Meangis , formerly mentioned , came on board , and importuned Captain Read to transport him and his men back to his own island , promising to reward him handsomely for his trouble .
He  said , that a few days before he had seen Captain Swan and some of his people all well at the city of Mindanao  that they had accompanied Raja Laut in a military expedition against his enemies , and had acquired great honour and were in high favour with the Sultan  that Captain Swan was preparing to leave the island  and that he had offered 40 ounces of gold for a ship to carry him off , but did not think the Raja would suffer him to depart .
Captain Read promised to stay for the prince three days , and in that time he engaged to return with his men .
In the mean time Dampier took occasion to sound how the crew stood affected towards their old Captain , and found one party , who happened to be filling water ashore , very well inclined  and he desired them to be silent till he had consulted the other party whose turn it was next day to fill water at the same place  but one of the company , who appeared to be the most zealous in Swan 's favour , as soon as he got aboard discovered the secret  on which Read and Teat ordered all hands on board and weighed directly .


Dampier says he was afterwards informed , that Captain Swan and his men continued long at Mindanao  that Messieurs Harthop and Smith , merchants , both died there  that Rofy and Nelly , his mates , got passage in a Dutch ship to Batavia , and from thence , after various adventures , to Europe  and that Swan himself , with his surgeon , endeavouring to get  on board another Dutch ship , were run down and drowned by the natives by order of Raja Laut , who seized their gold .
Among other reasons assigned for this treachery , Dampier mentions Swan 's threatening , on some provocation , to raise a band of men to destroy the town , and seize upon the country .
Be this as it may , the poor Captain lost his life , and the Raja kept his money .
Part of his journal , as far as Cape Corientes , was recovered and preserved by a Mr. Moody , of whom mention will be made hereafter .


On November the 2d , the day the prince was to have come on board , Captain Read set sail , and stood to the west , till on the 9th , the wind changing , they came up with the north east end of the island of Celebes , in lat .
3 deg .
N. 30 leagues to the southward of Gilolo , on the western side of which lie the clove islands of Tidore and Ternate , the finest in the world .
At the southermost end of Celebes the town of Macasser is seated , the chief place of trade in those parts belonging to the Dutch .


They anchored in a sandy bay on the south-east side of Celebes , where they found a creeping kind of vine , the leaves of which pounded and boiled with hog 's - lard is an infallible cure for old ulcers .
The men , knowing its virtues , crammed their chests with it  and one man , whose legs were ulcerated , was perfectly cured by the use of it .


Here they cut down a tree 18 feet in circumference ,  and 44 feet in clean body .
It proved unsound , and therefore unfit for the purpose they intended it , which was that of a canoe  they therefore left it , and set sail .


On the 30th , they sailed south  and in the afternoon they had a violent tornado , and saw a spout .
This phenomenon appears at first like a small ragged cloud , hanging sloping from a black heavy cloud above , small at the bottom , seemingly no bigger than a man 's arm .
Underneath this the sea begins to be in gentle agitation , and gradually proceeds to foam and froth till a violent whirling ensues , and then it flies upwards in a pillar , the base of which may be about one hundred paces in compass , but lessening gradually till it decreases to the size of the spout , with which it meets , and through which the rising sea-water seems to be conveyed to increase the cloud .
As soon as the water reaches the spout , you then see the cloud , that was at rest before , drive along with incredible swiftness , sucking up the water in its course , and causing a furious wind to fly before it .
Thus it will continue sometimes half an hour , sometimes longer , till breaking off , all the water that remains below the spout falls down again into the sea , with a dreadful noise and violent agitation of the waves .
Dampier relates , that one Captain Records , of London , being on the coast of Guinea , in the year 1674 , in a ship of 300 tons , was overtaken by one of these spouts , which broke before he could well furl his fails to receive it .
On its breaking , it made  the same kind of noise as if a castle or some immense building had been plunged from a great height into the sea , and raised the billows in proportion to its height .
The fury of the wind , at the same time , took the ship on the starboard bow , and snapt off the boltsprit and foremast both at once like rotten sticks , and drove the ship along ready to overset her  but the ship presently righting , and the wind whirling round , took her again on the opposite quarter , and snapt the mizzen-mast as the fore-mast and boltsprit had been snapt before .
Three men were in the fore top when the fore-mast broke , and one on the boltsprit , when they fell into the sea  but all were saved , and the ship with difficulty carried into port .


December 1st , they continued to move slowly along , and on the 4th they came up with the north-west end of the island of Bouton , where their strikers killed some turtle , and brought with them an Indian who conducted them to a harbour , where they had an interview with the Sultan , and where they were permitted to purchase whatever they wanted , and where Captain Read was presented by the Sovereign with a little boy who had a double set of teeth , one set within another , on each jaw .


On the 12th , they took leave of the Sultan , and were about weighing anchor  but when they expected it to rise , being hooked to a rock , the cable came home without it .
As soon as they were loose , finding the anchor irrecoverable , they steered to the south-east , and fell in with  some islands five or six leagues from Callasusung harbour .
They appeared very green  and as they passed them in the night they heard drums beating , but whether for mirth , or spreading an alarm , they knew not .


On the 20th , they passed the island of Omba , and saw in it many smoaks by day , and fires by night , but observed no inhabitants .
From Omba they passed by Timor , where , meeting with tornados and strong gales of wind , they endeavoured to get clear of the shoals , and stood off south , intending to touch at New Holland to try what that country would afford .


On the 4th of January , 1688 , they fell in with the coast of New Holland in lat .
16 deg .
50 min .
S. and , steering close in , came to a point from whence the land trends east and southerly for 10 or 12 leagues , but how far southerly Dampier says he does not know .
That able navigator , however , pronounced , that , if it was not a continent , it neither joined to Asia , Africa , nor America .
They fell in upon the west side , and examined but a small part of this vast tract of land , of which Captain Cook , in his late voyage round the world in the Endeavour , traversed the eastern coast for near 2000 miles , and has left it still doubtful whether it is island or continent .
There is a remarkable difference between Dampier 's description of the part he visited on the west , and that described by Captain Cook in the same latitude on the east side . '
`` The land , '' says Dampier , `` is of a dry sandy soil , destitute of water , except  you make wells .
There are divers sorts of trees  but the woods are not thick , nor the trees large .
Most of them were dragon-trees , of the size of apple-trees - we compared the gum with the gum dragon we had aboard , and found it the same - we saw no trees that bore fruit .
We saw no animal , nor any track of animal but one , and that was of a beast of the size of a mastiff-dog - few land-birds , and none bigger than a black-bird - few sea-fowls - few fish , turtle and manatee excepted .
The inhabitants are the most miserable people in the world - without houses - without cloathing - without conveniences of any kind - and , setting aside their human shape , very little different from brutes .
They are tall , strait bodied , thin , and small limbs  they have great heads , round fore-heads , and large brows .
Their eyelids are always half-closed  they have great bottle-noses , full lips , wide mouths , and the two fore-teeth in the upper jaw wanting in all of them  but whether they draw them out or not , I know not .
[ Captain Cook says , those on the opposite side have their teeth entire . ]
They are long-visaged - without beards - of an unpleasing aspect , with no one graceful feature in their faces - their hair black , short , and curled like negroes - and their colour coal-black .
They live in companies , 20 or 30 men , women , and children , together - their food is fish , and their manner of catching them is in weirs across little inlets of the sea , in which every tide leaves some - they have no instruments  to take great fish - in other places they fish for cockles , muscles , periwinkles , but of these there are but few - of what they catch all partake alike - all watch the tides - for all depend upon the sea for their support  the earth producing neither herb , root , pulse , or any sort of grain .
These poor creatures , adds Dampier , have a sort of weapons , consisting of a piece of wood shaped somewhat like a cutlass , and a long straight pole with a sharp end hardened in the fire : with these they made a shew of frightening us  but on firing one gun , they all ran away frighted . '' '


Such is the description given by Dampier of the people of the north part of New Holland  and it is not a little astonishing , that a man , by once touching upon their coast , could so minutely describe a people with whom he could no otherwise converse but by signs and gestures .
The crew made an acquaintance with some of them , and gave them meat , which they readily devoured , but paid no regard to the ship , nor did they seem to admire any thing that was shewn or offered to them .
While the ship remained here , where nothing was to be gotten , Dampier endeavoured to persuade the men to carry her to some English factory  but that too being told the Commanders , he was threatened to be set ashore , , and left among these miserable beings .


On the 12th of March they quitted New Holland , with a view to sail to the isle of Cocos , in  lat .
12 deg .
12 min .
S. but the wind being contrary , they chose to bear away to the islands on the west of Sumatra , with which Dampier says he was well pleased , as he then might have an opportunity of making his escape from them .
They met with nothing worth notice till the 28th , when they fell in with a woody island , where they killed boobies and men-of-war birds as many as the ship 's company could eat , and where they found a land animal resembling a large crab without its great claws , such as Sir Francis Drake met with in the island of Ternate , and which being dressed , was excellent meat .
These creatures burrow in the ground like rabbits , and two of them were as much as a man could eat .


They made but a short stay at this island  and , proceeding on their course , on the 7th of April they came in sight of the high land of Sumatra  and on the 13th they came to a small island called Triste , 14 or 15 leagues to the west of Sumatra , where they loaded their boats with cocoa-nuts , and struck some turtle to supply their table , having now nothing but rice to live upon .


They continued cruising among the islands to the west of Sumatra  and , on the 29th , they came in sight of a sail , to which they gave chace , and on the 30th they took her .
She proved a proa , with four men belonging to Achin , laden with cocoa-nuts and cocoa-nut oil .
They took out of her as much as they thought fit , bored a hole in her bottom , and sunk her , keeping the  four men prisoners .
All this coast is known to the English by the name of the West-coast , without adding the name of Sumatra  and the prisoners shewed the channels and openings to the island of Achin , where the English had a factory , to which many on board wished to find a passage .


The 4th of May they came in sight of one of the Nicobar islands , the southernmost of which lies about 40 leagues to the N. N. W. of Sumatra .
The inhabitants of these islands are independent of every other people , and trade with the ships of every nation indifferently that happen to touch upon their coast .
Their chief commodities are ambergrease and fruits , the former of which they adulterate abominably  and Captain Welden , who touched at these islands a few weeks before their arrival , purchased some at a low price that was worth nothing .


On the 5th of May they anchored at the N. W. end of the island of Nicobar , properly so called , in lat .
7 deg .
30 min N .
Here Dampier quitted the free-booters , but not without some difficulty .
He knew it was impossible to do it by stealth  and therefore asked Captain Read , as soon as he learned that the ship was about to sail , to set him on shore on this island .
He says , he had another motive for staying at this particular place , besides that of leaving Captain Read , which he always intended , and that was , that he had here a prospect of commencing a profitable trade for ambergrease with these people ,  and of gaining a considerable fortune to himself  for , by rowing with the natives , and conforming to their customs and manner of living , he imagined he should be able to learn how they got their ambergrease , and likewise the whole secret of preparing it .
Captain Read , thinking this as obscure a place as any , and being willing , no doubt , to be rid of a man who was for ever exciting the company to oppose him , very readily consented  and Dampier as readily took him at his word .
In an instant he got all his moveables together , and stowing them in the ship 's canoe , he prevailed upon some of the people to row him ashore , and to land him on a sandy bay , near to which were two houses , but without inhabitants .
He had not been landed an hour before Captain Teat and three or four armed men came to fetch him on board again .
He tells us , that if a cabbin-boy had been sent for him he should have returned  but he no sooner entered the ship than he found the whole crew in an uproar , several others , encouraged by his example , insisting to be set ashore likewise , among whom was Herman Coppinger , the surgeon , who having jumped into the boat with a gun in his hand , swore he would shoot dead the first man that opposed him  yet John Oliver , the quarter-master , leapt into the canoe to him , and wrenched the gun from him : he was presently followed by others , who forced Coppinger again on board .
When this tumult was appeased , and the surgeon again in their possession , they suffered Dampier , with two other  malecontents ( a Mr. Hall , and a sailor named Ambrose ) , to depart quietly  and the man who rowed them on shore , having concealed an ax , gave it them at parting , well knowing what a valuable present it would be to conciliate them to the Indians .
These three Englishmen were soon joined by the four prisoners taken from the Achinese proa , and the mongrel Portuguese , formerly taken from the Chinese junk , all of whom Captain Read set on shore before he departed .
They were now eight in number  and , having concluded to leave the island , and row to Sumatra , at 40 leagues distance , they purchased a canoe of the natives for an ax  and , having provided a sufficient quantity of provisions for their subsistence , they all embarked on the 20 [ ... ] h of May , in order to proceed  but they had no sooner put to sea than the canoe overset , and turned bottom upwards .
Being near the shore they preserved their lives by swimming  but though the English recovered their chests and fire-arms , yet their books and papers were miserably defaced by the sea-water  their powder escaped without injury , being sealed up .
Though this accident seemed an unfortunate outset , yet it proved the means of their future safety  for while the English were drying their books , and cleaning their arms , the Achinese employed themselves in sitting up their boat with out-leaguers , which are beams placed across the body of the boat , projecting a yard or two over the sides , and united at the extremities by transverse  boards jointed to the ends  while these remain entire , the vessel can never over-set .
Besides the out-leaguers , the Achinesemen had provided a good stout mast , and had contrived a sail .
And thus fitted out , on the 15th of May they again embarked  but their provisions being exhausted , it was necessary for them to repair to a distant part of the island , to procure a supply .
Here a misunderstanding arose between them and the natives , which by the prudent management of Dampier was soon accommodated .
He observes , that there is not a people upon earth that he should be afraid to approach unarmed and alone , provided no previous injury had been done them by any of his company unprovoked .
An European has it always in his power to insinuate himself into the favour of the most savage people by some slight , by shewing them some toy , by smiles and submission , and even by shewing them the simple knack of lighting a match with a flint and steel .
The only danger , he adds , is from their first onset , because their way is to abscond , and kill by surprize  if therefore their first fury can be avoided , the fiercest of them becomes gentle as a lamb .


The natives being again brought to good humour , they were presently furnished with such provisions as they wanted  and they again embarked on their former project .
At their first setting out , the wind was fair , and the weather hot  and they proceeded rowing and sailing as occasion required , Mr. Hall and Dampier taking  it by turns to manage the helm .
However , after two days labour , they found that they had steered a wrong course  and , instead of approaching Sumatra , they were but eight leagues from Nicobar .
They then changed their course , but were still so violently opposed by a contrary current , that on the third day they had made but little way .


On the 18th the wind freshened , and the sky began to be clouded .
About nine in the morning they had an alarming presage by a circle round the sun , which in that climate is an infallible sign of an approaching storm .
They therefore , after some consultation , concluded to stand before the wind to whatever land was right a-head  and for that purpose they furled their sail , settled the yard about three feet above the boat 's sides , and in this manner prepared to receive the storm .
About 12 at noon the gale came on , and the wind continued increasing all the afternoon .
The sea swelled to an incredible height , and often broke over the little skiff ( hardly so big as a below-bridge wherry , only a small matter deeper , but not so wide ) , which , had it not been for her out-leaguers , could not have survived a single moment  but the thinness of her body , and the firmness of her out-leaguers , were her security  for the stern being high and narrow , cut the rolling waves like the edge of a knife , and divided their force  so that what fell in the skiff came down like a shower , and was easily baled out by the Achinese .
The evening  of this day shewed very dreadful .
Dampier 's own words will best describe his feelings : ' `` The sky looked very black , says he , being covered with dark clouds , the wind blew hard , and the sea was already roaring in a white foam about us  a dark night coming on , and no land in sight to shelter us  and our little ark in danger to be swallowed by every wave  and , what was worst of all , none of us thought ourselves prepared for another world .
I had been in many imminent dangers before now , but the worst of them all was but a play-game in comparison with this .
I must confess that I was in great conflicts of mind at this time .
Other dangers came not upon me with such a leisurely and dreadful solemnity  a sudden skirmish or engagement was nothing when the blood was warm , and pushed forwards with eager expectations  but here I had a lingering view of approaching death , and little or no hopes of escaping it  and , I must confess , that my courage , that had hitherto kept up , failed me here  and I made very sad reflections on my former life , and looked backward with horror and detestation upon actions which before I disliked , but now I trembled at the remembrance of them .
I had long before this repented me of that roving course of life , but never with such concern as now .
In this temper of mind , submitting ourselves to God 's good providence , and taking all the care we could to preserve our lives ,


 Figure 5 .
Dampier  his Companions in their Canoe , overtaken by a dreadfull Storm .
 Mr. Hall and I took turns to steer , and the rest took turns to heave out the water  and thus we provided to spend the most doleful night I ever was in .
About 10 o'clock it began to thunder , lighten , and rain  but the rain was welcome to us , having drank up all the water we brought from the island .
The wind at first blew harder than before  but within half an hour it became more moderate , and the sea assuaged of its fury .
And then by a lighted match , of which we kept a piece burning on purpose , we looked on our compass , to see how we steered , and found we varied but little from our intended course : and , finding our vessel lively enough with that small sail which was abroad , we began to bear up to the true point to which our views were directed .
But about two in the morning we had another gust of wind , with thunder , lightning , and rain , which obliged us again to put before the wind .
The hard rain soaked us so thoroughly , that we had not one dry thread about us , and the cold rain chilled us extremely  for any fresh-water is much colder than the sea-water , and much more unwholesome for man 's body .
In this wet , starving condition , we spent the tedious night .
Never did poor mariners on a lee-shore more earnestly long for the dawning light than we did .
At length the day appeared  but with such dark black clouds near the horizon , that the first glimpse of the dawn appeared dreadful .
 We continued our course before the wind till eight in the morning of the 19th , and then one of our Achinesian friends cried out , Pulo Way .
We , thinking the fellow had said Pull Away , were at a loss to conceive his reason  but presently observing his motions , we found he pointed to his companions to shew them land .
We , dropping with wet , cold , and hungry , were overjoyed at this sight .
It bore south , and the wind was still at west , a strong gale  yet with our small fail , no bigger than an apron , we changed our course , and bore up to it .
Here our out-leaguers did us great service  and , though our boat 's side was pressed down very much , we could brook it well enough , and next day we ran to the mouth of a river in the island of Sumatra , called Passange Jonca , where all fell ill of fevers , of which some died  and I that survived was a whole year before I recover'd my strength . '' '
Here they staid ten or twelve days , and were kindly entertained , because the Achinese told the natives , that they were prisoners on board the pirate as well as themselves , and that they were all set ashore together .
Hall and Dampier were strongly importuned to stay , to assist in improving their navigation  but , longing to get home , they chose to be conveyed to the English factory at Achin : a vessel was therefore provided for them , and in three days they arrived safe .
Three days after their arrival , the Portuguese  died , and Ambrose lived but a short time after him .
Dampier and Mr. Hall , after passing examination , were kindly entertained by Mr. Driscal , an Irish gentleman , interpreter to the factory  and the four Achinese were restored to their families and friends .


Dampier was so drenched by a Malayan doctor , that he never expected to survive the effects of the potions he prescribed  yet after more than sixty evacuations from one dose , he gathered strength daily  and , after his health was a little restored , both Hall and he undertook to sail with Captain Bowry to Nicobar .
This Capt. Bowry was the gentleman who sent the letter from Sumatra to Mindanao , already spoken of , which involved a double mistake .
Bowry imagined an English factory to subsist at Mindanao , and the English at Mindanao , from Bowry 's letter , imagined there had been an English factory at Sumatra .
They sailed from Achin-road the beginning of June  but , a storm coming on , they presently returned .
About this time Captain Welden arrived from Fort St. George  and Dampier engaged to sail with him to Tonqueen , in China , and afterwards made a voyage to Malacca .
His next ramble was to Fort .
St. George , and , after his return from thence , he came to Bencouli , an English factory on the west coast of Sumatra  from whence , about the beginning of 1691 , he set out on his return to England .


After his return to Achin from his voyage to Malacca , he found there one Mr. Morgan , formerly  belonging to the Cygnet , who was then mate of a Danish ship belonging to Tranquebar : and being curious to know the sequel of the adventures of his old companions , was told by Morgan , that , when they left Nicobar , they directed their course to Ceylon  but , not being able to weather that island , they were forced to seek refreshment on the coast of Coromandel , where they began to form new projects  but their schemes not succeeding , about half their number left them , among whom were Morgan and Coppinger , who both were entertained in the Danish service , and two or three others repaired to Fort St. George  but the main body went up the country , and listed in the army of the Great Mogul , where a few of them continued orderly for some time  but Oliver , the quarter-master , and a party with him , soon left the camp , and rambled about , plundering and robbing the villages , and flying whenever they were pursued .


Captain Read , having thus lost the better half of his men , after having filled his water and got rice , sailed again , still intending for the Red Sea .
He had taken off Ceylon a rich Portuguese ship , and had plundered her of what he liked  but not being able to bear up against the westerly winds , he stood for the island of Madagascar .
There , after various adventures , Captain Read , with half a dozen of his followers , slipt away from the rest of the company , and embarked in a ship for New York .
 Captain Teat succeeded Captain Read in the command  and , having joined Captain Knight , of whom mention has been made before , they sailed some time in company  but the Cygnet proving leaky , Knight gave her the slip , on which she returned again to Madagascar , and finally sunk in St. Augustin bay .


While Dampier was at Fort St. George , there arrived a ship from Mindanao , laden with clove-bark , on board of which came Mr. Moody , as supercargo .
This gentleman , while at Mindanao , purchased the Prince of Meangis , of whose country mention has already been made in the former part of this relation .
This unfortunate Prince , with his mother , and some attendants , had been driven off their own coast by a storm , and had been seized at sea by some Mindaneian fishermen , who brought them to Mindanao , and sold them for slaves  a common practice among savage islanders .
The Prince attracted the notice of Mr. Moody by the curious manner in which he was painted , and which , by Dampier 's description , exactly corresponds with that of tataowing among the New Zealanders .
His design was to have brought him over with him to England  but Mr. Moody speaking the Malayan language , and being otherwise well qualified to manage the company 's affairs at a new factory , he was persuaded by the Governor of Fort St. George to accept of the Chief ship of Indrapore , in the room of Mr. Gibbons , who had just resigned in order to return home .
Upon this unexpected  promotion , Mr. Moody importuned Dampier to go with him to be his gunner , and , in order to encourage him thereto , promised to purchase a small vessel to carry the Prince and his mother to their own country , and to send him as Commander , with full power to establish a commerce with Meangis , which could not fail of turning greatly to the advantage of all concerned .
This was a generous and friendly offer which Dampier could not refuse  and accordingly he embarked in a company 's coasting ship , in which there were seven or eight officers passengers , and about 60 soldiers for the new factories .
They had a pleasant passage till they came upon the west coast of Sumatra , when a storm arose , by which they were driven from their intended port , and forced to make the harbour of Bencouli .
At Bencouli they were all very kindly received , and the gunner of that fort being just dead , Dampier was offered the post , with a more ample salary than Mr. Moody , in a newly-established factory , could venture to allow .
Dampier consented to accept of this appointment , provided Mr. Moody approved of it  and Mr. Moody , not being certain of being able to fulfil his engagement , so far as the same related to the Prince of Meangis , very readily gave Dampier leave to contract with the Governor of Bencouli  and , at the same time , assigned to him a half-share in the two slaves , the Prince and his mother , that he might not  be a sufferer by leaving Fort St. George to follow him .


Matters being thus accommodated , Mr. Moody repaired to his station at Indrapore , and Dampier with the two slaves continued at Bencouli .
They lived at a house in the town , and Dampier was accommodated in the fort .
All this passed in 1690  but , before the year was expired , Dampier grew tired of his office , and , wanting to get home , applied to the Governor and Council for his discharge .
The Council thought it highly reasonable that his request should be granted  and the Governor made no opposition , there being at that time no ship in readiness to carry him off : but , as he had foreseen , when the Defence , Captain Heath , bound for England , came into harbour , he then made many excuses , and at length absolutely refused to permit him to go .
In vain did Captain Heath remonstrate  and in vain also did Mr. Goddard , the chief mate , interest himself in Dampier 's release , - the Governor was inflexible .
The Defence had touched at Indrapore before she put into Bencouli  and Mr. Moody had consigned the other half-share of the slaves to Mr. Goddard , on having been previously acquainted by letter from Dampier of his intention to sail for England .
In consequence of this assignment , the Prince who some time before had been attacked with an infectious distemper , of which his mother died , and of which he was but just recovered , was put on board the Defence  and it was privately agreed  between Captain Heath and Dampier , that , if the latter could make his escape , the former would undertake to carry him safe off .
Accordingly , when all the company 's business was completed , and the letters put on board , notice was given to Dampier of the precise time when the ship was to sail  ' `` and , says he , after several assays , I slipt away at midnight  and , creeping through one of the port-holes of the fort , I got to the shore , where the ship 's boat waited for me , and carried me on board . '' '


On the 25th of January , 1691 , they set sail for the Cape of Good Hope  and , the wind being fair , they proceeded at first very successfully : but they had not been long at sea before the men began to droop , being attacked with a distemper that stole insensibly upon them , and before they thought themselves ill were ready to die .
Dampier attributes this fatal disorder to the badness of their water , which was filled from a river fed by many noxious streams from the low swampy lands that in the dry season , as it were , drained their dregs into it , which at times were as black as ink .
Besides , it was stowed among the pepper in the hold , which heated it to that degree , that every morning when the men went to take their allowance , it was so hot , they could hardly bear to hold a bottleful of it in their hands  ' `` a thing scarce to be credited , says Dampier , that water should be ready to boil in a ship 's hold . '' '
This distemper was so universal , that not a man in the ship was wholly  unaffected by it  so that when the wind blew a hard gale , there wanted hands to work the ship .


Captain Heath , pitying the condition of his men , distributed every day among them a quantity of tamarinds , some jars of which he had brought with him from India  and this was a very seasonable relief : but the wind coming south , and the passage being already protracted to an unusual length , the Captain called the whole ship 's crew together , to consult what was best to be done in the present extremity , and desired every man , from the highest to the lowest , to deliver his opinion freely .
Thus all circumstances being duly considered , it was unanimously agreed at last , notwithstanding the wind was then contrary , to prosecute their voyage to the cape .
But as that determination would infallibly require a more than ordinary exertion of labour from those that were well , to supply the place of those that were sick , the Captain promised a month 's extra pay to every man who should assist on all occasions that should require help , whether it was his watch or not  and this premium he engaged to pay at the cape .
This offer was first accepted by the Officers , and then as many men as were capable of duty entered themselves upon the roll .
In a short time , it pleased God , says Dampier , to favour us with a fair wind , which being improved to the best advantage by the incessant labour of those new-listed men , wafted us in a short time to the cape  and , being brought safe to an anchor by the assistance  of 100 Dutch sailors , who unbent the sails , and did every thing for us they were required to do , the sick were presently sent on shore , where they remained about six weeks , and all but three or four recovered .


On the 23d of May they sailed from the cape in company with the James and Mary , and the Josiah Indiamen .
They directed their course towards the island of St. Helena , and met with nothing remarkable , except a swelling sea , which taking them on the broad side , rolled every thing about that was loose between the decks and in the hold .
This great tumbling sea took them soon after doubling the cape  ' `` an eminent token , says Dampier , that the south-west winds were now violent in the higher latitudes towards the South Pole , we having fine clear weather all the while . '' '


On the 20th of June they arrived at Santa Helena , where they staid four or five days , and afterwards continued their voyage to England without any remarkable incident  and arrived safe in the Downs , Sept. 16 , 1691 .


What advantage Dampier and his partner Mr. Goddard made of their painted prince is not related  but they certainly sold him to be carried about the country to be shewn for money .
He was painted all down his breast , between his shoulders , on his thighs , and round his legs and arms like bracelets . '
`` I can not , says Dampier , liken the drawings to any figure of animals , or the like  but they were very curious , full  of great variety of lines , flourishes , chequered-work , and innumerable convolutions , keeping a very graceful proportion , and appearing very artificial , even to the wonder of all that beheld him . '' '
It has already been remembered , that the mother of the Prince died in India of the infectious disorder of which he was but just recovered when he embarked for Europe .
On that occasion Dampier did what he could to comfort Jeoly , for that was the name they gave him  but he took on extremely , insomuch that it was feared he could not have long survived  on which account a grave was immediately dug to hide the dead body out of his sight  and being shrouded decently with a piece of fine new calico , the corpse was about to be interred  but Jeoly was not satisfied till he wrapped all his mother 's cloaths about her , and two new pieces of chintz that Mr. Moody gave her , saying they were her 's , and she must have them .
After this he suffered her to be interred , which was done with great solemnity  but he continued to pine after her during the whole time he continued in India .


In the printed relation that was given of him when he was shewn for a sight , the showmen heightened their account with a romantic story of a beautiful sister of his being a slave with him at Mindanao , and of the Sultan 's falling in love with her , and taking her to his bed  but these were stories indeed !
They reported also , that the paint with which he was ornamented  was of such virtue , that serpents and all venomous creatures would fly from him : but poor Jeoly was as much afraid of serpents , scorpions , and centipedes , as a little child , for he was exceedingly timorous .
He died at Oxford , but Dampier does not tell the year .


The publication of the above voyage round the world having recommended Dampier to the notice of persons of the first eminence  he was afterwards employed by government in discoveries , both in the Eastern and Southern Seas .
His first expedition was to the coast of New Holland , which could have no other object but discovery in view .
He sailed from the Downs , on Jan. 14 , 1698 , in his Majesty 's ship the Roebuck , carrying only 12 guns , and 50 men , and having 20 months provisions on board .
On the 1st of August they fell in with the western coast of New Holland , in lat .
26 deg .
S. where , however , they found nothing very different from what Dampier had before described .
The only land animals they saw , were a small sort of racoons , different from those of the West-Indies chiefly in their legs , which are short before , and on which they run jumping  and a sort of guano 's , or lizards , peculiar to the country , which appear to have two heads , but in reality have but one , and no tail  and , what is no less remarkable , their four legs seem to be all forelegs , so formed as that the creature may walk either way .
To these may now be added the kanguroo , a quadrupede of a particular shape , as large as a  sheep , and a creature of the oppossum kind , discovered by Mr. Banks  with dogs and wolves seen by the Endeavour 's crew  of the latter sort some were seen by Dampier 's men , but so lean that they were nothing but skin and bone .
In latitude 23 deg .
S. they saw dolphins , and small whales , and abundance of scuttle-shells , swimming in the sea .


Captain Cook found plenty of water on the east side of this island  but Dampier was much distressed for want of it on the west side .
Being ashore employed in digging a well , he was assaulted by ten or twelve of the natives , with whom he had a skirmish , and was forced to shoot one of them dead , to disengage a young man who was surrounded by three of them , and wounded in the cheek with a lance .
On a gun 's being fired over the heads of the assailants , though it startled them at first , they soon recovered their surprize , and continued their hostilities  but as soon as they saw a man fall , they were terribly frightened , and fled with precipitation .
Dampier very humanely adds , that he attempted the natives no farther , being very sorry for what had happened .


Among the natives engaged on this occasion , there was one who by his appearance and carriage seemed to be the chief of them .
He was a young brisk man , not very tall , nor so personable as some of the rest , though more active and courageous .
He was painted with a circle of white pigment about his eyes , and a white streak  down his nose from his forehead to the tip of it  his breast and some part of his arms were also made white with the same paint  not for beauty or ornament as it should seem , but , as some wild Indian warriors are said to do , to make themselves look more terrible in war .
He was indeed a very frightful being  for the manner in which he was painted , adding to his natural deformity , gave him more the appearance of a monster of the woods , than of a man born of a woman .
Dampier in this second voyage to New Holland , confirms what he said of the natives in his first , that they are the worst featured savages he ever beheld .
Captain Cook , on the contrary , or his editor , assures us , that their features are not disagreeable , their noses are not flat , nor are their lips thick  their teeth are white and even , and their hair naturally long and black , but universally cropt short : in general it is straight , but sometimes has a small curl  their beards are of the same colour with their hair , bushy and thick , which they shorten by singeing : they are of the middle stature , in general well made , clean limbed , remarkably vigorous , active and nimble  their countenances not altogether void of expression , and their voices remarkably soft and effeminate .
Such are the different descriptions given by voyagers of the same people  or , to speak more precisely of people on the east and west side of the same continent  for which it is not easy to account .


 Our voyager , however , not being able either to find fresh water , or a harbour to careen his ship , set sail from this miserable country about the beginning of September , 1699  and , directing his course to the island of Timor , arrived there September 15 , and received a supply of water and provisions from the Chief of the Dutch factory there .
He was likewise hospitably entertained by the gentlemen of the Portuguese factory on the same island .
From thence he sailed to the coast of New Guinea , traded with the inhabitants , and ranging along the coast , found the main land divided into two parts .
To the easternmost division he gave the name of New Britain .


In his return back he touched again at Timor , and from thence sailed to Batavia  where having careened his ship , and supplied himself with necessaries of every kind , on the 17th of October , 1700 , he set sail for the Cape of Good Hope  from thence continuing his voyage to St. Helena , he arrived at that island January 31 , 1701  but in his course home his ship sprung a leak at sea , and , after endeavouring in vain to stop it , he was obliged to run her a-ground on the island of Ascension  where having landed his men , and taken from on board all necessary provisions , they in a short time discovered a fine spring of water , and lived tolerably , till they were at last relieved by some English men-of-war , who were convoying home the Canterbury Indiaman , and brought them all safe to England .


 In 1703 , notwithstanding the bad success of the voyage just mentioned , Dampier was again employed in an expedition to the South Sea , in conjunction with Captain Pulling , who had each a ship of 26 guns , and 120 men under his command .
That commanded by Captain Dampier was called the St. George  and that by Captain Pulling , the Fame .
They were victualled for nine months , and had commissions from his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark , then Lord High Admiral , to proceed in a warlike manner against the French and Spaniards  and both were upon the same terms of , No purchase no pay .
But while they were in the Downs , some difference having arisen between the two Captains , Captain Pulling set sail alone , and left Dampier to take his own course  who , stopping some time in Ireland , was joined by the Cinque Ports galley of 90 tons , 16 guns , and 63 men , Captain Charles Pickering Commander .
In this expedition , Dampier had three grand objects in view : the first was , to sail to Buenos Ayres , in order to surprize the Spanish galleons that usually take in their lading at that port  the second depended on missing the first , in which case they were to pass through the straits of Magellan to cruise upon the coasts of Peru , for the Baldivia ships that carry gold to Lima  and the third was only to take place , if both the former miscarried  and was , to proceed to the coast of Mexico , to intercept the Manilla ship that annually arrives at Acapulco , and is said to be  worth eight or nine millions of pieces of eight , equal to a million and a half of our money .


Full of these projects , they set sail from Kinsale , in Ireland , on the 11th of September , 1703 , and on the 25th arrived off Madeira , where they learned that the galleons were sailed from Buenos Ayres , and then lay at Teneriff .
The first project being thus defeated , they proceeded to put the second in execution with all possible dispatch .
On the 24th of November they anchored on the island Le Grand , on the coast of Brazil , where they buried Captain Pickering , and chose Lieutenant Stradling in his room .


From this island they sailed the 8th of December  and , doubling Cape Horn on the 20th of January , they changed their direction , sailed to the northward , and on the 10th of February came to an anchor in the great bay of Juan Fernandez , where they met their consort Captain Stradling , with whom they had parted in passing Cape Horn in a violent storm , which happened on the 26th of January .


At Juan Fernandez they continued refitting their ships till the 29th , when seeing a sail , they slipt their cables , and put to sea .
She proved to be a French ship of 400 tons , 30 guns , and full of men .
The St. George fought her about seven hours , when a gale springing up , she sheered off .
On this occasion , the Cinque Ports behaved but indifferently , firing only a few guns , and lying by .


 Next day , in returning to Juan Fernandez , they fell in with two French men-of-war of 36 guns each  from whom they narrowly escaped , leaving their cables , anchors , and five or six of their men belonging to the Cinque Ports on that island , with a new suit of sails , and several other necessaries which they could ill spare .


They now proceeded upon their second enterprize  but they were equally unfortunate in that as in the former .
The Baldivian ships were sailed , and the gold secured .
They then meditated a surprize against the town of Santa Maria , in the gulph of Panama , where the Spaniards getting intelligence of their designs , laid ambuscades , and after killing and wounding several of them , put the rest to flight .


In this manner , disappointments succeeding disappointments , differences began to arise between the Commanders  and they concluded to part company .
But about this time , a large ship , fortunately for them , coming to an anchor in the night close by them , they instantly boarded and made prize of her .
She was deeply laden with flour , sugar , brandy , wine , about thirty tons of malmalade of quinces , a considerable quantity of salt , with some tons of linnen and woolen-cloth .
This proved a seasonable supply  and provisions that were before so scarce , that only five green plantains were the daily allowance for six men , were now so abundant on board the prize , that they might have laid in a stock for several years  yet in less than six months we find them starving .


 After rummaging the prize and dividing the spoil , the Captains parted  and in two or three days , Dampier fell in with a Spanish man-of-war , fitted out on purpose to take him .
The two ships had a smart engagement , and parted in the night by consent .


Soon after this engagement , Dampier and Clippington , his first Lieutenant , having some difference , Clippington seized upon the ship 's tender , in which were the stores and ammunition , and with 21 of the best men weighed anchor , and set sail .
When he had cleared the islands , he sent to invite all those who were willing to sail with him to come on board  but Dampier 's last project being now on the point of being carried into execution , the men who remained with him resolved to abide the issue .
Clippington , though he had quarrelled with the Captain , had no mind to distress the men  he therefore thought fit to restore the powder and ammunition , reserving only enough for his own use .
In the bay of Tacames , Dampier had taken a small bark of 60 tons , laden with plantains .
This bark they intended to keep as a tender .
She had two masts , with two square sails  and they named her the Dragon .


The Master of this bark , Christian Martin by name , was a Spaniard by birth , but taken prisoner while he was a boy , and bred up in England .
This man they kept prisoner on board  and now proceeded to intercept the Manilla ship .


 On the 6th of December in the morning , they saw a sail , and soon came up with her .
She proved their last hope , the great Manilla ship , from the East-Indies .
They instantly bore down upon her , and before she could bring her guns to bear gave her several broad-sides  and , taking her unprepared , put the company on board in the utmost disorder .
Captain Martin , though a Spaniard , advised to lay her aboard immediately , before the Spaniards had recovered their surprize  but that advice was disregarded till it was too late  for while two parties were quarrelling on board the St. George , the one for laying the enemy on board , the other not , the Spaniards got out a tier of 24 pounders , every one of which that took place was ready to send the St. George to the bottom .
The assailants were therefore soon beaten off with disgrace , after having received a shot between wind and water in the powder room , by which two feet of planking was driven in on each side the stern .
And now , being disappointed of this their last expectation , all the men grew discontented , and impatient to return home .
However , they were prevailed upon to cruise a few weeks longer on the coast of Mexico  and with that view passed the ports of Acapulco , Port Angels , Port Guatulco , and several others  but without meeting with any prize worth waiting for .


Ill success is generally succeeded by discontent  the men who were before impatient of fatigue without reward , grew now ungovernable .
 A party , therefore , formed the design of returning home by way of the East-Indies  and these were encouraged by Mr. Funnel , the chief mate , who , having the command of the small Spanish prize alreadly mentioned , determined to hazard every thing to regain his native country , rather than continue under the direction of a man with whom there was no keeping terms .
He therefore embraced the first opportunity to reach the gulph of Amapalla , to new-water his bark , and prepare for his voyage home .


It should seem , that this voyage of Dampier , though countenanced with a government commission , was notwithstanding fitted out by private adventurers  for , on this occasion , the owners agent is said to have divided the provisions and stores between those who chose to remain with Dampier , and those who determined to follow the fortune of Mr. Funnel .
Their whole number was already reduced to 60 effective men , 33 of whom chose to accompany Funnel , and 27 only remained with Dampier , but upon what terms they engaged , or what course they pursued afterwards , we are not told  for Dampier , though he returned home , never published any account of this voyage .
What we have related concerning it , in order to complete his adventures , as far as our materials extend , we have extracted from the account published by Funnel  who , having left Dampier in the gulph of Amapalla , on the 1st of February , 1705 , takes no farther notice of his Captain  but goes  on with the story of his own voyage , which was indeed unfortunate enough  for his ship was seized by the Dutch at Amboyna , the goods on board confiscated , and most of the men cruelly used , being confined and half-starved by our good friends the Dutch , who were jealous lest they should make discoveries prejudicial to their commerce .
Funnel himself , however , soon got released  and , having made strong representations against the authors of his sufferings at Amboyna , he at length obtained some shew of redress  with which , though not a compensation for his losses , he was forced to be contented .
On the 2d of November he , with two of his company , got passage to Europe in the Dutch East-India fleet  and , on the 15th of July following , arrived safe in the Texel , from whence , after visiting the principal towns in Holland , he came to England , and published the account just mentioned , in which he followed the example of Dampier , by giving a description of the natural productions of the islands at which he touched , their inhabitants , arts , and commerce .


We can find no traces of the latter part of the life of Dampier , who seems to have been an able navigator , but of a restless turbulent spirit , like the ocean on which he was bred .
He certainly possessed the art of sailing in a very eminent degree  but he wanted that happier art of conciliating the wavering discordant passions of his followers and associates .
He seems , too , to have been more cautious than brave , more subtle  than wise , and more enterprizing than fortunate .
In all his engagements , both as an inferior officer and as a commander , he seems neither to have braved danger nor to have feared it .
It is not easy to determine , whether his thirst for gold , or desire of knowledge , was the governing principle that led him to range the world for new discoveries .
If the former , he seems totally to have failed in the pursuit  if the latter , he was more successful .
At Mindanao , we find him poor  at the Bashee islands he laments the want of every article that could purchase from the natives a small specimen of the yellow metal that bore the resemblance of gold  but withal so honest , that he would neither take the iron belonging to the owners of the ship to give in exchange , nor would he take the metal from the inhabitants without an equivalent .
In short , I think , we may conclude , from what he himself has written , that Dampier was a man of strong natural parts , of blunt manners , of quick discernment , inflexible in his resolutions , but deficient in natural qualities to command respect , and in acquired abilities to maintain it .


5 .
THE VOYAGE OF MASTER COWLEY ROUND THE WORLD .


 OF Master Cowley we can find no other account than what is contained in the voyage written by himself  therefore , we shall , in his own words , preserve such parts of that voyage as have not already been related in the voyage of Dampier  premising only , that his first setting out among the buccaneers was in the same prize , in which Dampier set sail from Virginia , under the command of Captain Cook  that he continued to serve that Commander , as Master , during his life  and that , after sailing sometime in consort with Captain Eaton in the South Seas , he chose rather to serve that gentleman than to continue with his own Captain 's successor .
One remark more , and then to proceed .
We find him , in every collection of voyages in which he is introduced , distinguished by the appellation of CAPTAIN Cowley , though the highest employment to which he ever seems to have arrived , was Master on board the buccaneers before-mentioned  who , during the time they were suffered to commit their ravages , traversed the globe as wolves the forest ,  merely for the sake of whom they might devour .
We find , however , but few of them successful  by far the greatest part , like other robbers , died miserably  and such of them as escaped with life , were , at certain times , exposed to sufferings not less shocking to human nature , than the distresses to which they reduced innocent people by their cruelty and lust for gold .
But now to proceed :


In August , 1683 , I departed , says Cowley , from Cape Charles in Virginia , lying in latitude 36 deg .
N. and in longitude 305 deg .
in the good ship called the Revenge , Captain John Cook , Commander , pretending to me , that I should navigate the ship to Petitguavaz , where a Frenchman was the Governor , and to which port I began to shape my course  but was told , as soon as we had left the shore , that they were now bound for the coast of Guinea , to provide a better ship  and that then their design was to sail to the Great South Sea .
I was thereupon obliged to alter my course , and to steer E. S. E. for the Cape de Verd Islands in lat .
16 deg .
N .


In the month of September , we made the island of Salt , where we came to an anchor , careened our ship , and afterwards sailed to St. Nicholas , where was held a consultation of officers , whether to sail directly for the South Seas in their present ship , or pursue their former resolution and proceed to the coast of Guinea to seek a better .
After much debate , it was at length concluded , to try St. Jago , another of the  Cape de Verd islands , and , if any ship was found in that road fit for their purpose , to lay her on board , and make her their prize .


On our approach to this island on the eastern side , we descried a large ship from the mast-head , which proved to be a Dutch East Indiaman of 50 guns , and , as we afterwards learnt , of 400 men , most of whom were on shore  but on seeing us stand towards the road , they instantly repaired to their posts , clapt a spring upon their cable , heaved their broadside to us , struck out their ports below , and running out their lower tier of guns , made themselves ready to receive us .
We had now advanced too near  but marking their force , and that it was in vain to attempt a conquest , we put before the wind , and steered directly to the coast of Guinea , where we had no sooner arrived , than we fell in with a new ship of 40 guns , which we boarded , and carried away .
Upon examination , we found her well stored with brandy , water , and provisions  and in order to furnish her with other necessaries from our old ship , we put into Sherborough , resolving to touch at no other port till we should come to Juan Fernandez , in lat .
33 deg .
40 min .
S .


About the beginning of December , we sailed from latitude 8 deg .
N. steering S. W. till we arrived in 12 deg , S. when we steered away S. W. by W. till we came into soundings on the coast of Brazil  and finding 80 fathom water in a sandy bank , we altered our course to the S. W. and about the latitude of 40 deg .
S. found the  sea as red as blood , occasioned by great shoals of shrimps , which coloured the ocean , for many leagues together .
We found also a multitude of seals , and such abundance of small whales as to exceed the number found in the North Seas in the proportion of one hundred to ten .
We held on our course till we came into lat .
47 deg .
where we saw land , never before discovered .
It proved an uninhabited island , to which I gave the name of Pepy 's island , and at which ships may conveniently wood and water , having a harbour where 1000 sail may ride in safety .
In this island we saw plenty of fowls , and round it there is no doubt abundance of fish  but , it blowing a storm , we could neither dare to approach it , nor to examine its coasts .
We therefore stood to the southward , shaping our course S. S. W. till we came into the latitude of 50 deg .
S. and then steering S. W. by W. resolving not to attempt the straits of Magellan , but to make the land of Ter del Fuego  and there , finding great riplings , and apprehending danger , we resolved to attempt the passage discovered by Bartholomew Sharp , in 1681 , and to sail round all , leaving Staten land to the N. With this view , hauling away S. W. we came a-breast of Cape Horn on the 14th of February , where , chusing valentines , and discoursing of the witchcraft of women , there arose a prodigious storm , which continued till the last day of the month , driving us into latitude 60 deg .
30 min .
which is farther than any ship ever yet sailed to  the south  so that we concluded that talking of the wiles of women at sea was very unlucky discourse .


About the beginning of March , the wind coming to the south , we were soon wafted into a warmer climate  for in the 60th deg .
the weather was so extremely cold , that we could bear drinking three quarts of burnt brandy a man in four-and-twenty hours , without being the least intoxicated .
We steered north-by-east till we came into lat .
40 deg .
S. where we fell in with the Nicholas of London , Captain John Eaton Commander  and , being glad of each others company , we sailed in consortship to the island of Juan Fernandez , where we found plenty of good fat goats , good fish , wood , and water .
[ Here Cowley relates the story of the Moskito-man , the account of which has already been given by Dampier . ]
This island is naturally fortified  so that with 100 men , and at 100 l. expence , it may be defended from the attacks of 2000 men , in case of an invasion .
[ Accordingly the Spaniards have taken the hint  for when the last ships sailed upon discoveries , they found it fortified . ]
It lies 110 leagues due west from the port of Valparayso .


We steered from this island north-north-east , till we made the high land of Arica , in latitude 18 deg .
S. Being before the bay , the officers of both ships held a consultation whether best to go into Arica-bay , or proceed farther on the coast  when it was resolved to sail as low down  Figure 6 .
Cowley  his Men taking in Provisions at the Island of Iuan Fernandez .
 at Cape Blanco , and there wait for the Spanish plate-fleet coming to the bay of Panama .
This was an unfortunate resolution  for in Arica-bay rode at that time a ship with 300 tons of silver on board , which we missed , and in the room of her took a timber-ship bound to Lima , with 30 hands on board , which at that time stockt us with more mouths than we could well spare meat to fill .
With this ship we sailed away north to the island of Lobos , in lat .
7 deg .
S. where we set our sick men on shore , though we could neither find wood or water upon it .
Here having heeled our ships , at a general council it was resolved , to attack the town of Truxillo , in lat .
8 deg .
N. ten miles within land  and with this view just as we were weighing anchor to proceed , some of our people from the mast head espied three sail of ships passing by , which we instantly ran out and took .
These ships were all laden with flour , fruit , and sweet-meats  but having had intelligence that we were upon the coast , they had left all their silver ( their silver-service plate not excepted ) on shore .
Their provisions , however , were very acceptable  and we now thought only of seeking a proper place to lay up our stores in security , and where we might conceal ourselves for five or six months , to make the enemy believe that we had forsaken their seas , and that they had nothing to fear from fresh attacks .
On this occasion , the islands called by the Spaniards Gallapagoes , or Enchanted Islands , were proposed , and the only objection made was ,  the uncertainty of finding them  but that being overcome , we weighed anchor , and after three weeks sail came in sight of them , being seventeen in number , to all which I gave distinct names .
We came to an anchor in a very good harbour , lying towards the northernmost end of a fine island under the Equinoctial Line , in which we found plenty of fish , sea and land-tortoises , fowls of various sorts , among which were turtle-doves , so tame at first that they would often light upon the hats and shoulders of our men as they walked abroad  but not being able to satisfy their hungry appetite by catching them alive , the sailors so scared them at last , by frequently firing upon them , that they became , like other birds , very shy .
This island I called the Duke of York 's Island , near to which lies a small island , which being viewed in several directions , always assumed a different shape .
This I called Cowley 's Enchanted Island .
I examined several others  but upon none of them found fresh-water , save only upon the Duke of York 's Island .
The bay in which we anchored I called Albany bay , and the harbour York-road  and , after having laid up 1500 bags of flour , with a quantity of sweet-meats , and other provisions , in a convenient store-room , we sailed to the northward , to try for fresh water a second time  lest , being distressed , we should be forced , upon some future occasion , to seek relief in other harbours , when it might not be possible for us to reach the present  but we  found good water in none of them  and , to our great surprize , we met with such a violent current , that when we would have returned to the Duke of York 's Island , we could not stem it  and we were obliged to bear away N. N. E. when the first land we made upon the main was Cape Trespontas , upon the easternmost shore of which we watered our ship .
The first day after our arrival , we buried our Captain  the second day , three Spanish Indians came down , whom our men brought on board .
Being strictly examined concerning the strength and opulence of the town of Ria Lexa , they gave very satisfactory answers : but , while they were under examination , our long-boat being sent on shore to get beef , a party of Spanish Indians came down , and set their boat on fire , and drove the crew for shelter upon a rock , where they were forced to remain till we sent another boat with 20 men to rescue them .


We retained the three Indians , and led them with ropes about their necks as guides to conduct us afterwards to Ria Lexa  but one of them having got his neck out of the collar , made his escape , and alarmed the town  so that our men returned very much discouraged at this second disappointment .
We now found it necessary to turn all our prisoners away to shift for themselves  and then directed our course to the gulph of St. Miguel , where we took two islands , one inhabited by Indians , the other plentifully stocked with cattle  but for gold and silver , we got but little .
Here we staid and careened our ships   and here Captain Cook 's ship and Captain Eaton 's broke consortship  and , both ships being refitted , I got on board Captain Eaton , where I was entertained as his master , to navigate his ship to any place or port where he should direct .


[ It is now that the voyage of Master Cowley may be said to commence .
Hitherto he has gone hand-in-hand with Dampier  but now Cowley pursues one course with Captain Eaton , and Dampier another with Captain Davis , the successor of Captain Cook . ]


We in our ship , continues Cowley , towards the middle of August , set sail from the gulph of Miguel [ in the bay of Amapalla ] , steering for Cape St. Francisco , where we chaced a ship that escaped from us  and then we bore up to latitude 7 deg .
S. where finding the country alarmed , we stood for Payta , in lat .
5 deg .
S. where we took two ships lying at anchor  which the Spaniards refusing to ransom , we , by way of farewel , set them on fire .
From hence we sailed to Gorgona , at which island we watered our ship for the East Indies .


This island lies in lat .
3 deg .
15 min .
N. and in long .
305 deg .
E. and as soon as we had supplied ourselves with wood and water , we took our departure , steering W. N. W. till we came as low almost as the rocks of St. Bartholomew , in long .
240 deg .
then we sailed into lat .
15 deg .
N. till we judged we were past those rocks  and then returned into 13 deg .
N. which latitude we held till we made the island of Guam , in lat .
 13 deg .
N. and in long .
150 deg .
E. according to our reckoning  at which island , when we arrived , we had a very sickly ship , no man being free from the scurvy , and most of us in a consuming condition .
It was on the 14th of March about seven in the morning that we saw land .
At 12 o'clock we were in lat .
13 deg .
2 min .
N. by observation , having made out on our sailing , by judgment , 7646 miles , that is to say , departed so many miles from Gorgona by loss made out in longitude , which is about 2549 leagues .
The next day we sailed about the south-west part of the island , and came to an anchor in a fair bay , from whence we sent a boat on shore , with a flag of truce  but , on landing , our people found that the natives had burnt their houses , and had fled  however , our men felled some cocoa-nut trees , and brought a hundred or two of them on board to refresh the crew .
In the mean time a party of Indians rushed from behind the bushes , and in a hostile manner threatened to attack us  but we made signs of friendship , and one of the Indians returned to the wood , and having peeled a stick so as to make it appear white , he came forward , when one of his companions perceiving that he had no cap to compliment our people , called him back , and presented him with one for that purpose .


From Sunday the 15th till Tuesday the 17th , we continued a free trade with the Indians  but on that day our men going over to a small island on the west side of Guam , the Indians fell upon  them with stones and lances , which occasioned a fray , in which some of the Indians were killed upon the spot .


Two days after , the Governor , who happened to be a Spaniard , came to a point of land near the ship , and sent a letter written in Spanish , French , and Dutch , demanding in the name of the King his Master , who we were , whither we were bound , and from whence we came ?
Our answer was written in French , that we were employed by some gentlemen in France upon the discovery of the unknown parts of the world .
On the return of the messenger , the Governor sent a letter of invitation to the Capta [ ... ] n to come on shore , with which he instantly complied , and was received under a triple discharge of cannon from the fort , which was answered by the same number of guns from the ship .
They soon came to a good understanding .
Our Captain made an apology for killing some of the Indians in his own defence  and the Governor gave for answer , that , if he had killed them all , he should have esteemed the favour the greater .
We were afterwards told , that the Indians on the small island were in rebellion .


On Wednesday , about 12 o'clock , a Spanish Captain came on board , and continued with us till 12 the next day .
He brought as a present from the Governor 10 hogs , a large quantity of potatoes , plantains , oranges , papas , and red pepper  in return for which our Commander  sent the Governor a diamond-ring , and presented the Officer with a rich sword .


The next day the Governor sent on board a captain , a Jesuit , and a friar , with a request to our Commander to spare him some powder , of which he was in want .
This request was readily complied with  we sent him four barrels , and offered him four great guns .
The first he thankfully received , and sent a box in which were 1600 pieces of eight in gold and silver for the Captain to pay himself for the powder  but the guns he politely declined accepting .
Our Captain returned the box with the money untouched , and afterwards received from the Governor a valuable present .


While mutual civilities were passing between the Governor and our Captain , our people went out every day chasing the Indians , whom they had full licence to kill and destroy wherever they met with them  but they , finding us not to be Spaniards , became very tractable , and offered to assist in supplying us with fish and fruit , which they exchanged with us for old nails and old iron .
After having tarried here sometime , and a free intercourse had been established between the Indians on shore and our people on board the ship , the Indians made signs for as many of our men as chose it , to come and see them haul the seine .
Our men , not suspecting any design , manned the boat , and went to look at them  but , while the men were amusing themselves with the sport , the Indians had very  artfully brought their seine round the boat , with a design to draw it on shore , and thereby entangle both boat and crew  but the sailors , discovering the plot , gave the Indians no time to carry it into execution  for , being provided with fire-arms , which they never went ashore without , they fired amongst the thickest of them , killed a great many , and drove the rest away .


These Indians are large in stature , some of them being seven feet and a half high  they go stark naked  never bury their dead , but let them lie in the sun to rot .
They have no arms but slings and lances  the sharp ends of the latter are pointed with dead mens bones , which , being cut like scoops , and jagged at the edges like unto saws , if a man happens to be wounded by them , and is not cured in nine days , he certainly dies .
Our people took four of these treacherous savages prisoners , bound them , and brought them on board  but they had not been long among us , before three of them leapt into the sea , and with their hands tied behind them swam away like fishes .
However , we sent the boat after them , and found that a strong man at the first blow could not penetrate their skins with a cutlass .
One of them , in my judgment , had received 40 bullets in his body before he died  and the last of the three that was killed , swam a good English mile , not only with his hands tied behind him , but with his arms pinioned , before he expired .


 The Spanish Governor 's kindness increased in proportion to the mischief done to the Indians .
He sent us , the succeeding day , by one of his captains , thirty hogs , some melons , pumpkins , potatoes , fruits , and rice  and received in return six small patararoes .


Having now new rigged our ship , and supplied ourselves with wood and water , we began to prepare for our departure .
On the first of April , we weighed anchor , and next day came a-breast of the fort , which we saluted with three guns , and were complimented with the same number  and on the 3d the Governor sent his last present to our Captain .
On the 4th we set sail , and steered W. by S. till we arrived at the height of St. Bartholomew , when we shaped our course W. N. W. till we came into the latitude of 20 deg .
30 min .
N. where we fell in with a cluster of islands lying to the north of Luconia , distant from Guam 560 leagues .
They seemed to be uninhabited  but the men who went ashore in the boat , found abundance of nutmegs on one of them , and saw some goats .


From these islands we steered S. W. for the island of Luconia , and on the 26th of April Cape Bajadore bore from us east  after which we came up with Cape Mindato , where the S. W. monsoon overtaking us , we were obliged to bear away for Canton in China , where we lay and refitted our ship , and where we might have laden ourselves with plunder from thirteen Tartar ships , who came thither full of the richest goods  of China : but our men , being under no government , refused to attack them  saying , They came for gold and silver , not to be made pedlars to carry packs .
But , alas !
had reason prevailed , we might have all made our fortunes , without injuring any prince or subject in christendom  for these goods the Tartars had taken from the Chinese about two years before , and had stored them at Macao , an island near Canton , to be taken away when they judged it convenient .


From Canton we sailed for Manilla , to wait for the Tartar ship that annually goes thither , and which , we were informed , was laden one half with silver  but , tho ' we were fortunate enough to come in sight of her , yet she out-sailed us , and escaped .
We then bore away for an island that lies to the north of Luconia , intending there to stay till the wind came fair to carry us to Bantam , not then knowing that Bantam had been taken from the English by the Dutch .


At this island we stored ourselves with fruit , goats , and guanos  which last are here good meat : and here we found an Indian who directed us to an island , where there was plenty of great cattle  but the wind soon coming fair , we made sail to the southward , steering our course S. S. W. till we came into lat .
10 deg .
N. where we were so entangled among the islands of Paragoa , that none of us ever expected to escape with life .
After three days , however , we very  providentially got clear  and stood in for an island at the north end of Borneo , where we hauled our ship ashore , and erected a tent , planting a battery of ten guns for our defence , in case of an attack from the natives .
Here we unloaded our ship , and , having provided sufficiently for our security , we ranged the country for natives to trade with us  but they , having never seen any white men before , were very shy  and when , by chance , our men fell in with one of their canoes that was full of women , ( among whom was the queen of the country and her retinue ) on the approach of our ship 's boat , they all leapt over-board  but , after taking them up , and treating them kindly , they laid aside their fears , and grew familiar  and , upon our offering them civility , instead of avoiding , they soon became fond of us .
They brought us fish in great plenty , with oranges , lemons , mangoes , plantains , and pine-apples  and , besides these , we exchanged some trifles for bezoar , musk , and civet , with which the island is well stored .


The year was now drawing to a close , when we set sail from this little island , directing our course for Timor , where , finding the ship 's company begin to grow mutinous , and not under command of their Captain , myself , Mr. Hill , and eighteen more , joined our forces together , and purchased a large boat , in which we sailed to the island of Java , distant from Timor 300 leagues .
The wind being contrary to carry us to Batavia , we bore away for Cheribon , a factory  belonging to the Dutch , lying eastward of Batavia , where we were kindly received by the Governor .
There we heard that King Charles was dead  and that his brother James was proclaimed king  we heard also that Bantam had been taken from the English  and that the Dutch had erected a new factory in that island .


After refreshing at Cheribon , we agreed to divide our twenty men into three parties  two of which chose to sail for the bay of Bengal , and the third to stay with me  but knowing that Batavia was the Hollander 's magazine for India , we proposed first to sail thither , and there to provide for ourselves as well as we could .
Being all arrived , we were courteously received by the General  and I , with Mr. Hill and another friend , who were all my party , were promised our passage to Europe in their East-India fleet .
About this time the General was sending four or five ships of war , with soldiers , to procure satisfaction from the King of the island , for an outrage that had been committed on a party of Hollanders , who , to the number of 80 , had been slaughtered by the Javanese .
These ships , it seems , were originally designed against Sillebar , an English settlement on the west coast of Sumatra  but this act of hostility happening to intervene , it had diverted their purpose , and saved the factory for this time .
There were now in Batavia twenty of us , who , on hearing this news , would willingly have repaired to Sillebar  but the Dutch would by no means permit  us , though we had bought a sloop for that purpose .
When we were just ready to sail , the General ordered our sloop to be seized  and when we remonstrated against this incivility , they produced an old law , by which the subjects of the republic in India are forbidden to sell any vessel to any foreigner  and they even went so far as to imprison those who had transgressed it .
To us , indeed , they gave the prime cost of the sloop , but paid us nothing for fitting her up .


This project failing , Mr. Hill , another friend , and I , embarked on board the Solida Indiaman , bound to Holland  and , as we were putting out of the road , we saw our ship Captain John Eaton coming in  however , we held our course  but finding the wind unfavourable , we turned down to Bantam to take in provisions , and from thence steered to Prince 's Island , where we lay for a fair wind three weeks .
About the end of March , we set sail from thence , with the wind at N. W. and shaped our course to the Cape of Good Hope .
On the 11th of May , after a pleasant passage , we made the land called Point Primicra , bearing from us N. W. distant 12 leagues .
We had the wind at N. E. being distant from the cape 560 miles , the land trending away S. W. by W .
The fish which came about the ship near the island of Mona , the 30th of March , left us now , when we judged ourselves in latitude 32 deg .
47 min .
S. From the 15th of May to the 29th we had sailed only 96 miles  but observing next day , we found by our latitude that we  had a very strong current , that had driven our ship to the southward 34 miles farther than we judged ourselves to be  for we thought we had been in the latitude of 33 deg .
41 min .
S. whereas we found ourselves in lat .
34 deg .
15 min .
S. our course having been S. W. 40 miles .
I argued the reason with the chief mate of the ship , and he told me it once happened in this place , that they lay a-trie with three main-sails , and the wind at W. S. W. three days  and when they took their observation , they found the ship driven to windward 200 English miles  and likewise in lat .
36 deg .
37 min .
they say , they often find the like .


From hence to the 27th nothing remarkable happened  but on that day we had the wind very furious , blowing a storm from W. S. W .
We lay a-trie with our main-sails , and found we were in lat .
30 deg .
2 min .
S. coming in with the land  and now the current went to the eastward , and we began to fear lest we should lose our passage by the cape .
Our Captain , who had long been sick , was now judged to be past recovery , and in the middle of the night died : this occasioned a great deal of confusion  and , to add to our difficulties , our water began to fail , and we were reduced to a pint a day per man .
Next day we heaved our Dutch Captain 's corpse overboard , when a council of-war was called , wherein it was resolved , that Captain Tominall , Commander of the Critsman , should command the Solida , and that Captain Tominall 's chief-mate  should command the Critsman .
The pilot also of the Solida , whose name was Houdin , was ordered on board the Critsman  but he refused to go , and the men assembled tumultuously , and declared , they would not part with him .
The Lord Van Heldine was in a great rage with the steersman  but the crew were resolute , and he was obliged to yield .


On the 1st of June we again came in sight of land .
It appeared like a round hill flat at top , and bore from us N. N. E. with a smaller hill to the eastward of it .
Next day we were before the harbour of the cape , with the wind at north , and fine fair weather .
On the 3d , at night , we came to an anchor in the bay before the castle , in nine fathom water .
Three days before we lost sight of the Critsman in the hard gale  but this day we saw a sail at sea , and concluded that it must be the Critsman .
Here we heard , that the Francis Maria was lost , with 400 men on board  and here likewise we were told , that the King of England had taken the Duke of Monmouth , and that he was beheaded .
Another piece of news we learned was , that a Portuguese carrac was cast away upon the reef , having on board four millions of guelders in gold , sent as a present from the King of Siam to the King of Portugal  and that four Dutch ships had likewise struck upon the same reef , but that they had fortunately escaped with very little damage .


This day four of the natives came down to the city , dancing naked , and offering their wives  to the Hollanders for little bits of tobacco .
They were the filthiest men I ever saw .
Next day my two friends and I walked about the town , in which are about 100 houses , built very low to save them from the boisterous gales of wind that blow here in the months of December , January , and February : but the Dutch have here a strong castle , with 80 guns well mounted , and a spacious garden with pleasant walks , and planted with almost every kind of fruit , flowers , and herbs .
This is the greatest rarity that we saw at the cape .
We walked , moreover , without the town to the village inhabited by the Hodmandods ( so called by the Hollanders ) , who are the natives of the country .
These people are said to be born white , but make themselves black by anointing their bodies , and exposing their infants to the sun and smoke .
Their houses , or huts , are built round , like the cabbins in Ireland of the wild Irish , with the fire-place in the middle , round which they all lie in common , covered only with the skins of some beast , and without any other bed than the ashes of the wood on which they dress their meat .
They eat any thing that is foul , and will gather from the dunghills the offal that is thrown out by the Dutch to feed their dogs .
Their men are not at all jealous of foreigners  but will beat their wives unmercifully for lying with their neighbours .
When the women marry , they cut off a joint of the middle-finger  and if the husband dies , and the widow marries again , she cuts off another joint   and so many men as they marry , so many joints of their singers they lose .
They are supposed to worship the moon , because at the full and change they assemble in great numbers , dancing and rejoicing when she shines , but howling and lamenting when they are deprived of her light .


It happened while we were at the cape , that one of the Hodmandods drank himself dead at the fort  of which his countrymen getting intelligence , they assembled about him , and with oil and milk endeavoured to recover him  but , finding all their efforts vain , and that they could perceive no spark of life remaining , they began to make preparations for his funeral , which they performed in the following manner .
They first brought knives , and shaved him from head to foot  then , digging a hole in the ground , they carefully placed him in a sitting posture , with his body and head erect , and his legs and thighs stretched out horizontally , and pressed down streight  this being performed , they propt him up in this attitude with stones  and then came a company of their women to howl over him , who accompanied their lamentations with a hideous shrieking , as if death appeared before them in the shape of a monster , and was ready to devour them .
After their time of mourning was over , they filled up the hole with earth , and covered it over with the green turf .


During the time of our stay at the cape , our people were chiefly employed in cleansing and scouring the ship , in fishing her masts , and in  fitting and trimming her rigging .
We also took in wood and water , supplied ourselves with fresh provisions  and , on the 15th of June , when the wind came fair , we were ready to sail .


We were now three ships in company , the Solida and Critsman , who came together from Batavia , and the Emeland who came from Bengal .
On Tuesday the 16th , we pursued our course to the N. W. and N. W. by W. till Tuesday the 29th , without any material incident intervening .
We had no observation  but I judged we were in lat .
19 deg .
54 min .
S .
This day it was that I spoke with an Englishman on board the Emeland , that had been some time in the Dutch service , who told me , that they came out in company with two English ships , one named the Resolution , the other the Defence , with both of whom they had parted in a storm on the coast of Coromandel  that the Resolution was leaky , and that there were little hopes of her crew 's being able to keep her above water .
He told me likewise , that there were several Englishmen in the King of Siam 's service  that the English East-India Company was but little regarded by the Moors  but that the interlopers were very much encouraged  and that one Mr. Deane , being their Chief , lived in great splendor , never going out without 70 or 80 Moors to attend him .


We had , moreover , this day great feasting on board us , the Commanders of the other ships being invited to an entertainment .
But while  the men were loading the guns to pay the usual salute , they were alarmed by a strange voice from the sea , crying out , Come help , come help , a man over-board !
on which they forthwith brought the ship to , thinking to take him up  but they neither saw , nor heard any more of him .
Enquiry was then made through all the ships , if any of them had lost a man  but upon the strictest examination , it appeared that every ship had her proper complement  so that they concluded it was the spirit of some man that had been drowned in that latitude by accident .


On the 11th of July another very wonderful incident very much astonished our company .
When we left Batavia we took a she-goat on board , which had then two young kids about three weeks old .
This creature was observed to grow bigger every day  and all that our people could conjecture was , that it proceeded from the unwholesomness of the water that made her swell  but , to the astonishment of all of us , she now brought forth four young ones , although no male had been on board .


On the 4th of July we threw one man overboard who died the night before , though no one knew of his being ill .
He was an old Dane , who , having no body on board to take care of his effects , those who first perceived he was dead fell to rummaging his chest , to secure to themselves what he had saved  but , as in like cases , they could not agree about dividing the plunder , the matter came to the knowledge of the Captain ,  who made the thieves give up all they had stolen , which he took under his own care for the benefit of his family .


On the 12th of July we came up with the Island of Ascension , and next day took a new departure from thence .
On the 20th we found we were in lat .
15 deg .
N. And now a council-of-war was called upon our Captain .
His accusation was , that he had formed a conspiracy with five men more , to murder a person of quality and his lady , with some other passengers on board , and that , when the murders were accomplished , they were to seize upon their riches , and run away with the ship .
The purser was the chief accuser  but , upon examination , the whole charge seemed so improbable , and the man who broached the story denying upon the trial what he had confidently affirmed before to the purser , the Captain was honourably acquitted , and the villain punished .


Wednesday the 22d , we made out in longitude from the cape 11 deg .
56 min .
judging ourselves to be in long .
355 deg .
56 min .
And no wit was that I cut the same Line which I did when I departed from Virginia in the year 1683 , having encompassed the globe  and can not but note , that I have been farther southward than any man that I ever heard or read of before me in this voyage , having , as I have already said , reached as far as lat .
60 deg .
30 min .
S. and so it happened , that , being bound to go north about Scotland to make Holland , I passed about 60  deg .
north , though I mention this as no extraordinary thing .


We met with no extraordinary occurrence till the 2d of August , when our Captain , after three days illness , died of a pain in his bowels .
His chief steersman was made Commander in his room  but , though his cause was warmly espoused by the men on a former occasion , yet it was not till after much opposition that they acquiesced in his present advancement .


On the 5th of September , about 10 at night , we had a violent storm , and we had like to have been on board the Critsman  and , by endeavouring to avoid it , had well nigh overset our own ship .


On Sunday the 19th , when the weather began to clear up , I saw land , as did also two men more .
I supposed it to be the island of Shetland  but our Captain would not believe it  however , about six in the evening , the Critsman 's people saw land also , and let go the flag , which nettled our Captain , who blamed his own incredulity .


We came up with the Isle of Farley by the 22d , steered on , and on the 25th had the wind all round the compass .
About this time we came up with a Scotch ship , who steered so that we ran her on board on her quarter  and , had we not slackened sail , should certainly have sunk her .
Two passengers leapt into our ship to save their lives  but they happened to be more afraid than hurt .
The ship was called the Lion of Leith  and the crew told us , that the Turks lay at Plymouth  and Dartmouth , where they had victualled and careened , and from whence they had occasionally slipt out , and had taken 100 sail of Hollanders , and among them a Dutch frigate of 36 guns , which gave occasion to many hard speeches against the English nation  though we found afterwards that the whole was an idle story , framed only to amuse the Dutchmen , and to flatter their humour by belying the English .


On sailing next day with the wind at E. S. E. we found ourselves in latitude 53 deg .
35 min .
N. and I judged us to be on the West-bank .
At the same time we came up with two ships , one a Dane , the other an Englishman from London , with whom I sent my quadrant , and with whom myself and my two friends would willingly have gone , if our Dutch lord would have given us leave  but he told us , he could not answer the letting us go , to his Masters the States-General .


On Tuesday the 28th , we came before the Maes , with the wind at E. N. E .
When it was day we saw the Brill Church , and came to an anchor in 10 fathom water .
On the 30th we got bread and beer on board .
Next day we entered the harbour at Helvoetsluys , after we had been seven months in our passage from Batavia .
Three days after our arrival , one of my two mates died , and I made no great stay here but went to Rotterdam , where I found the Anne yacht .
In her I came passenger for England , and , through the infinite mercy of God , arrived at London , October 12 following .


 Of Cowley 's history , as we can know nothing but from this relation of his voyage , so it is not easy either to form a judgment of his capacity , or of his acquirements .
He seems to have been an excellent navigator , as we do not find , in the whole course of his pursuits , either that he was ever at a loss in finding the ports he sought , or that the ships of which he had the direction were ever in danger of being cast away .
The nature of his employment in a subordinate station , led him rather to a habit of obedience than of opposition  and therefore his quitting the ship in which it was his choice to sail , is more to be wondered at , than that he should steal away from his company at Batavia with only two friends .
Perhaps his conduct on this occasion might be owing to principle  for of the enormities committed by the buccaneers , with whom he was engaged , Cowley must be acquitted , because he was drawn into their service by stratagem  and a strong proof of his honesty is , his embracing the first fair opportunity of deserting them .


We know there are writers , and those of no mean credit , who have taken pains to justify the practices of the buccaneers , and who have attributed to their discoveries and to their exploits the advancement of the art of navigation , and the emolument of their country : but it neither appears to us , that their discoveries were of any consequence in a national sense , or that the riches they brought home were a counter-balance  for the lives that were sacrificed in the acquisition .


Their discoveries were chiefly of lurking-places to which they were forced to retire to escape the pursuit of the enemy  and , as to the treasures they acquired , they were generally purchased with the lives of many brave men , who , had they been employed in honest commerce , would have gained profit to themselves and honour to their country .


It is not from the temporary excursions of a banditti that a nation can hope to become rich  nor is it by a hasty race round the world that the art of navigation is to be improved .
The improvements of art are slow in their progress  and the acquisition of national wealth can only be obtained by a steady perseverance in industry and commerce .
It is , therefore , the true interest of every commercial nation to discountenance plunderers , and to applaud those only who are employed in cultivating the arts of peace .


6 .


 [ ... ] ough the following relations may see [ ... ] [ ... ] to our design of g [ ... ] ng [ ... ] of the dis [ ... ] overi [ ... ] of our Engl [ ... ] sh navi [ ... ] y [ ... ] we have judged them too curious [ ... ] omitted .


6.1 .
[ ... ] Dutch Relat [ ... ] of ROGGE [ ... ] 'S Discover [ ... ] of Easter Island .


[ ... ]  we permitted him to go into his boat again [ ... ] depart .
Two days afterwards the whole sea [ ... ] | covered with the savage inhabitants of [ ... ] , who came swimming round the ship [ ... ] multitudes , that we neither could , [ ... ] it adviseable to land .
They clam [ ... ] [ ... ] ke cats up the ship 's sides with the [ ... ] , and came aboard , where they did [ ... ] appear t [ ... ] be in the least afraid of us , but [ ... ] surp [ ... ] zed at the largeness [ ... ] ext [ ... ] of our ships and rigging , and could [ ... ] conce [ ... ] ve the meaning of all that they saw  [ ... ] curiosity was chiefly engaged by the g [ ... ] guns , which they could not enough admire , [ ... ] which th [ ... ] y f [ ... ] equently struck their hands up [ ... ] could not li [ ... ] them up , and [ ... ] but when they saw that such log [ ... ] [ ... ] were too heavy for them , and [ ... ] , and were , in appearance , ve [ ... ] mu [ ... ] [ ... ] .
They no sooner [ ... ] than we immediately found that [ ... ] [ ... ] urally [ ... ] sh nimble [ ... ] the inhab [ ... ] tants of those isl [ ... ] to which [ ... ] [ ... ] ixed the name of the [ ... ] from the great propensity of [ ... ] rob and steal , if they were not [ ... ] from it .
Rusty nails , old iron , and whate [ ... ] [ ... ] lay hold on , was equ [ ... ] the [ ... ] with which th [ ... ] y jumped overboard [ ... ] .
They at [ ... ] empted with their [ ... ] of the ship , but these [ ... ]  too fast for them .
These huge fellows came at last aboard in such numbers , that we were hardly capable to keep them in order , or keep a watchful eye upon their motions , and the quickness of their hands  so that fearing they would become too many for us , we used our best endeavours to get rid of them in a friendly way  but they not seeming inclinable to leave us , we were obliged to use harsher methods , and drive these savages out of the ships by force .


`` On the 10th of April we made for the island in our boats , well armed , in order to land , and take a view of this country , where an innumerable company of savages stood on the sea side to guard the shore , and obstruct our landing  they threatened us mightily by their gestures , and shewed an inclination to await us , and turn us out of their country  but as soon as we , through necessity , gave them a discharge of our muskets , [ ... ] and there brought one of them to the g [ ... ] ound , they lost their courage .
They made the most surprizing motions and gestures in the world , and viewed their fallen companions with the utmost astonishment , wondering at the wounds which the bullets had made in their bodies  whereupon they hastily fled with a dreadful howling , dragging the dead bodies along with them  so the shore was cleared , and [ ... ] in safety .


`` These people do not go naked , as many [ ... ] savages do  every person is cloathed in [ ... ] colours of cotton and worsted , curiously  woven , or stitched  but nothing [ ... ] [ ... ] comes them more than their ears , which [ ... ] abominably long , and in most of them [ ... ] upon the shoulders  so that , though they themselves look upon this as the greatest ornament they appeared very uncouth to us , who were [ ... ] accustomed to such  the more so , as there [ ... ] in them such extravagantly large holes [ ... ] openings , that we could easily put our [ ... ] through them .


`` Thus far my narrative will gain credit , because it contains nothing uncommon , yet I [ ... ] declare , that all these savages are of a more [ ... ] gigantic size , for the men are twice as tall an [ ... ] thick a [ ... ] the largest of our people  they [ ... ] ed , one with another , the height of twelve [ ... ] , so that we could easily , ( who will not wonder [ ... ] it ) without stooping , have passed betwixt [ ... ] legs of these sons of Goliah .
According to the [ ... ] [ ... ] ght , so is their thickness , and are all , one with another , very well proportioned , so that ea [ ... ] could have passed for a Hercules  but none of the [ ... ] wives came up to the height of the men , being commonly not above ten or eleven fee [ ... ] ?
The men had their bodies painted with a red [ ... ] dark brown , and the women with a scarlet colo [ ... ]


`` I doubt not but most people who read [ ... ] voyage will give no credit to what I now [ ... ] and that this account of the [ ... ] eight of these [ ... ] will probably pass with them [ ... ] fiction  but this I declare , I have [ ... ]  going but the real truth , and that this people , upon the nicest inspection , were in fact of such a surpassing height as I have here described


`` After the inhabitants of Easter Island had made trial of the strength of our weapons , [ ... ] have before related , they began to the [ ... ] more civil manner , and brought us f [ ... ] om [ ... ] all kinds of vegetables , sugar canes , with yams , plantains , and a great quantity of fowls , which came very a propos , and tended to refresh us greatly .


`` What I have seen of the worship and idols of these savages is very wonderful .
Two stones , of a largeness almost beyond belief , served them for gods  the one was broad beyond measure , and lay upon the ground  upon this stood the other stone , which was of such extent and height that seven of our people with outstretched arms would hardly have been able to encircle it  so that it appeared to me , and all others , impossible that this stone could have been lifted up and placed upon the other by the inhabitants of these islands , how large and strong soever they might be  for , besides the thickness , it was fully as high as three men .
About the top of this [ ... ] there was cut or carved the shape of a [ ... ] head , adorned with a g [ ... ] [ ... ] , which was [ ... ] together in th [ ... ] manner of inlaid work , made [ ... ] all stones , in a manner not very improper , [ ... ] name of the la [ ... ] est idol was called Taurico , [ ... ] the other Dago  at least these were the words  they called to them by , and wherewith they worshipped them .


`` These savages had great respect for the [ ... ] idols Taurico and Dago , and approached them with great reverence , namely , with dancing , shooting , jumping , and clapping of hands , [ ... ] the same manner as we read in holy writ , [ ... ] the children of Israel worshipped the golden ca [ ... ] which [ ... ] aron set up  and when the cannon ( of which they seemed to be in great terror ) were discharged , and the heavy shot founded in the [ ... ] eurs , they made surprizing and wonderful gestures and leaps , and pointed with their fingers first to our people , and then to their gods , whom they appeared to supplicate for help against [ ... ] and to call upon with a frightful shout , [ ... ] howling of Dago ?
Dago !


`` Wh [ ... ] le we say before this Easter Island , a heavy tempest surprized us , which pressed so much on the ships , that I had no thought but that they would drive from their anchors , and we with them come to a miserable end on thi [ ... ] coast , which God prevented , the storm being at last appeased , without having done any damage to the ships .


`` On the 1 [ ... ] th of April , leaving this island , we put to sea again , and shaped our course to the westward .


`` On the [ ... ] 0th of May we came into the latitude of [ ... ] deg .
[ ... ] [ ... ] here we fell in wi [ ... ] a great [ ... ] together  so that we were of opinion , they had been joined together in former times , and composed one solid piece of land , but separated from one another afterwards by a pressure of the waters .
Among these an island appeared above the rest , the most stately and eminent , intersected by [ ... ] ny rivers and springs of water , which there [ ... ] e was christened Water Island by Schouten and Le Maire , who discovered it in 1616 , on their voyage to the Terra Australis .
In this labyrinth of islands and rocks , we had the woeful misfortune to lose one of our ships , the African Galley , which struck upon the rocks , and beat to pieces .
It may be accounted , however , a happy circumstance , that all the people aboard were saved and brought off  and being d [ ... ] led among the two remaining ships , were a r [ ... ] nforcement to their crews .
It was impossible [ ... ] or the ships to approach very near the land , where no anchoring ground was to be found .
[ ... ] low , sandy , and rocky island , being in the inland parts almost all drowned land  but upon the borders it is full of trees , among which n [ ... ] ther palmetto or cocoa-nut trees were to be found  which I believe is the reason of its not [ ... ] inhabited  nevertheless , five of our men [ ... ] went ashore willingly remained on the [ ... ] , and would not return again to the ships , [ ... ] wearied out with the hardships they had [ ... ] , and fearing many more unfore [ ... ] [ ... ] were [ ... ] ll awaiting them .
The loss [ ... ] above-mentioned ship would be a happy  circumstance for them , since from the wrec [ ... ] and what would be drove ashore , [ ... ] [ ... ] ight [ ... ] supplied with arms , and all other nec [ ... ] ies .


`` On the 25th of May we passed by the isla [ ... ] of Flies , al [ ... ] o discovered by the foresaid Schoute [ ... ] in his above mentioned voyage .
The inla [ ... ] parts of it are likewise full of salt water , and [ ... ] abounds in great plenty of wild green trees , [ ... ] is inhabited by savages of a large stature , [ ... ] w [ ... ] th bows and arrows .
The island was ve [ ... ] properly named , from the incredible quanti [ ... ] of nasty flies wherewith it is covered , which and come aboard , and fall so thick or the face , [ ... ] other parts of the body , that one is at a loss to conceal himself from them , and every thing one eats or drinks is full of them : they put [ ... ] for two or three days , when [ ... ] uninvited guests [ ... ] .


`` On the 29th [ ... ] f May we passed among [ ... ] num [ ... ] of rocks and islands , from whence we sometimes saw a smoak ascend , a sign [ ... ] were inhabited  but we had no opportunity [ ... ] g [ ... ] ng ashore .
This day we found ourselves [ ... ] lat .
1 [ ... ] deg .
17 [ ... ] S. and long .
224 deg .


`` On the 1st of June , in 15 deg .
4 [ ... ] min .
and [ ... ] deg .
we came in sig [ ... ] t of an island hitherto unknown to , and [ ... ] [ ... ] ooked [ ... ] , Th [ ... ] ther we went on our boa [ ... ] s , in order to take a view of it , and to procure refreshments  when the inhabitants , who saw us approach from afar , came [ ... ] own upon the shore to make us return back , and to prevent our  landing .
They are people of an excellent shape , well proportioned , and comely in person  and what is surprizing , their skin is as clear and whit [ ... ] as that of a native of Holland .
They seemed to shew a resolution to stay for us  for , as soon as we came near , they jumped like madmen into the water to meet us , and pushed with great [ ... ] with their weapons , which consisted of [ ... ] and lances , whose points were armed with [ ... ] sharp wood as hard as iron : wherefore , [ ... ] ing obliged to free ourselves , and preserve our [ ... ] from this hostile attack , we fired upon them [ ... ] our muskets , which made those savage war [ ... ] immediately take to their heels , and oblig [ ... ] [ ... ] to look out for a place of safety  for as [ ... ] they had tasted the deadly effects of these [ ... ] pons , they turned their backs upon us , and [ ... ] a high steep rock , which they scrambled [ ... ] like monkies , with incredible swiftness .


`` From thence , being convinced of our supe [ ... ] r force , they gave us to understand , that all [ ... ] ostilities should cease on their part , and they [ ... ] ould treat with us as friends  and on our side we used every means to allure them to us , being [ ... ] the utmost want of all manner of refreshments .
[ ... ] very thing succeeded according to our wishes  they brought us their commodities , consisting of cocoa-nuts , and a certain bitter herb of the taste of Dutch cresses , which is found here in great pl [ ... ] nty .
For these we gave them in exchange several trifles and trinkets  such as small look [ ... ] ng-glasses , glass beads of all colours , combs ,  bells , and a number of such toys of little value , [ ... ] which they were as well , and even better pl [ ... ] d than we were with [ ... ] cocoa-nuts and bitter [ ... ] bs , which , however , were much more [ ... ]


[ ... ]  [ ... ] have understood from this , that those barbarians would attack them from the tops of the [ ... ] ks with stones , yet they paid no [ ... ] to the signs and admonitions of the good [ ... ] , but marched forward , trusting to their [ ... ] Th [ ... ] y had not gone far before a dreadful sho [ ... ] er of stones came [ ... ] upon them [ ... ]


[ ... ]  no delay was made there , but we got again under sail  and because the provisions [ ... ] | sened gradually from day to day , and the d [ ... ] | [ ... ] ers , notwithstanding the relief from the [ ... ] herbs , continued to increase , to the great [ ... ] , it was r [ ... ] olved , in a council of [ ... ] principal officers , to return home by the [ ... ] Indies .
We then lay up to lat .
[ ... ] 5 deg .
47 min .
[ ... ] and according to our reckoning 224 deg .
[ ... ] min .
long .
being then about 1 [ ... ] leagues [ ... ] the coast of Peru .


`` On the 12th of June we found ourselve [ ... ] latitude 15 deg .
1 [ ... ] min .
S. and longi [ ... ] ude [ ... ] deg .
8 min .


`` O [ ... ] the 14th we discovered two island w [ ... ] ich we could not approach near enough [ ... ] take a proper view of , by reason of the ro [ ... ] and stormy sea  but , on the other hand , we [ ... ] this satisfaction , that the inhabitants [ ... ] , and kept hovering about [ ... ]  pable of producing more curious workmanship .
The people in these fine boats were armed with darts , and had their heads adorned with green leaves , and their bodies cloathed with reeds .
This island got the name of Bowman 's island from a [ ... ] ptain of that name .
It was very pleasant and [ ... ] lightful to behold , fruitful , and surrounded w [ ... ] trees , among which the palmetto shewed [ ... ] uch


`` On the 15th we came in sight of an island about [ ... ] even miles in length , lying in lat 13 deg .
[ ... ] and 25 deg .
long ?
Many of us felt a longing desire to touch at this island in hopes of procuring some refreshment , but it was de [ ... ] red , and we pursued our voyage without landing , in order to sav [ ... ] tim [ ... ] , because our miseries and inconveniencies [ ... ] increased , and the disorders from many causes increased also .


`` On the 18th of July we perceived many different islands , and among others New Zealand , computed to be in extent about 300 leagues , lying under 6 deg .
of S. lat .
and 166 [ ... ] long . ''


[ ... ] relation is copied verbatim from Mr. [ ... ] 's valuable Collection of Spanish and [ ... ] Discoveries in the South Sea , [ ... ] is like [ ... ] [ ... ] the following Relation of the Discovery of [ ... ] , but neit [ ... ] the one nor the other [ ... ] discoveries have since been [ ... ] con [ ... ] .


6.2 .
An Account of the DISCOVERY of the La [ ... ] called DAVIS 'S LAND .


 `` WE went from the Gallapagoes under [ ... ] Line , for the southward  [ ... ] no where till we came to the island of J. [ ... ] rnande [ ... ] .


[ ... ]


[ ... ]  made us think there was some spit of sand  but [ ... ] we had [ ... ] ounded , it confirmed our opinion [ ... ] the earthquake .
Some time after , we heard [ ... ] , that at that very time there was an earthquake at Callao , which [ ... ] the road for Lima , and that the sea ebbed so far f [ ... ] om the shore , [ ... ] hat on a sudden there was no water to be seen  [ ... ] that after it had been away a considerable [ ... ] , it returned in rolling mountains of water , [ ... ] [ ... ] ed the [ ... ] in the road of Callao a [ ... ] up into the [ ... ] , overflowed the city [ ... ] , though [ ... ] upon a hill , together [ ... ] , and drowned man and beast for 30 [ ... ] along the shore , doi [ ... ] g misch [ ... ] ef even at [ ... ] , [ ... ] ough six miles w [ ... ] th [ ... ] n land from the [ ... ] of C [ ... ] llao .


[ ... ] ving recovered our [ ... ] ght , we kept on to [ ... ] southward ?
We steered [ ... ] , until we came to lat .
27 deg .
20 min .
[ ... ] about two [ ... ] before day , we fell [ ... ] , low , sandy island , and heard a [ ... ] noise , like that of the sea beating [ ... ] a-head of the ship : where [ ... ] [ ... ] foul upon the [ ... ] the captain to put the [ ... ] , and to stand off till [ ... ] app [ ... ]  [ ... ] the capta [ ... ] n gave his [ ... ] onsent .
So we [ ... ]  not foggy nor hazy .
To the westward , about twelve leagues , by judgment , we saw a range of high land , which we took to be islands , for there were several partitions in the prospect .
This land seemed to reach about fourteen or sixteen leagues in a range  and there came hence great flocks of fowls .
I , and many more of our men , would have made this land , and have gone ashore at it , but the Captain would not permit us .
The small island bears from Copayapo almost due east [ ... ] 00 leagues , and from the Gallapagoes , under the line , 600 leagues .


Dampier says , ' `` Captain Davis told me lately , that after his departure from Ria Lexa , he went , after several traverses , to the Gallapagoes , and that standing thence southward for wind , to bring him about Terra del Fuego , in the latitude of 27 deg .
S. about 500 leagues from Copayapo , on the coast of Chili , he saw a small sandy island just by him  and that they saw to the westward of it a long track of pretty high land , trending away to the N. W. out of sight . '' '


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME .
Notes * .
This man made himself remarkable by one of the boldest undertakings that ever was devised ?
As soon as he arrived in England , with the pr [ ... ] ze-money acquired in this expedition , he purchased a bark of 14 [ ... ] tons , and manned it with 70 brave seamen  with these he sailed to the Isthmus of Darien , and , laying his bark up in a creek , marched cross the neck of land which separates the North Sea from the great Pacific Ocean , where he arrived , with his companions , without being discovered  and , having there seized a ship for their purpose , they ranged the coast , and made themselves masters of an immense treasure  but , falling out among themselves , they separated  and , thus weakened , they became an easy prey to the Spaniards , who recovered their treasure  and Oxenham being taken , with those that continued with him , and having no commission to produce , both he and his companions were executed as pirates .
When they parted , they had in their possession two ships laden with gold , to the amount of half a million sterling .
* .
This commission , which was always questioned , is now upon the strongest presumptive evidence denied , as will be seen in the sequel .
* .
Lopez Vaz , a Spanish writer , says , that Drake carried from the coast of Peru , 866,000 pezoes of silver , equal to 866 quintals , equal to 100 pound weight each quintal , amounting to 1,139,200 ducats .
He also carried away 100,000 pezoes of gold , equal to 10 quintals , each quintal value : at 1500 Spanish ducats  and all this over and above the treasure in the ship , which was not entered , consisting of gold , silver , pearls , precious stones , coined money , and other things of great value .
He also rifled the ships from the Philippines , laden with spices , silks , velvets , and other rich merchandize , the value not known .
- By the above account , the silver only , at 5 s. per oz .
amounts to 259,800 l. and the gold to 48,000 l. sterl .
But we have seen a manuscript that makes the value of the whole cargo brought home by the Golden Hnrd ( for that was the name that Drake chose his ship , the Pelican , should be known by ) amount to 800,000 l. though that which was divided among the crew was only 80,000 l. [ ... ] reasonable then to conclude , that the Queen [ ... ] a considerable share of the remainder ?


VOLUME THE SECOND .


LONDON : Printed for F. NEWBERY , the Corner of St. Paul 's Church-Yard .
MDCCLXXIV .


1 .
THE VOYAGES OF CAPTAIN COOKE .


 THE rich cargo of the annual ship from Manilla to Acapulco , has ever been the object which private adventurers to the South Seas have had in view  while , on the other hand , the annual ship from Acapulco to Manilla has been the pursuit of the ships of war .
This difference has arisen from the different constitution of the two ships  for the galleon , when she sets sail from Manilla , being deep laden with a variety of bulky goods , ( such as Chinese silks and manufactures , vast quantities of Indian stuffs , callicoes , and chintz , besides the minuter articles of goldsmiths work , embroidery , c. wrought at Manilla by the Chinese , ) she has not the conveniency of mounting her lower tier of guns , but generally carries them in her hold .
Her hands too are as few as are consistent with the safe navigation of the ship , that she may be the less encumbered by the stowage of provisions  so that being but weakly manned , and indifferently provided for defence , she is thereby more exposed to the attacks of small privateers , and more easy  to be made their prey  and , though she does not contain so great a treasure as the other , yet she is sufficiently rich to recompense the undertakers , and to enrich the captors , her cargo being generally estimated at three millions of dollars .


But the ship from Acapulco making her return chiefly in silver and gold , and having little or no bulky goods on board , as her cargo lies in less room , her lower tier is always mounted before she leaves the port , and her crew is augmented with a supply of sailors , and with one or two companies of foot , which are intended to reinforce the garrison at Manilla .
Besides , there being many merchants who take their passage to Manilla on board the galleon , her whole number of hands on her return is usually little short of 600 fighting men  so that she is more than a match for such small privateers as are generally sent upon hazardous expeditions , and a prize only for a royal ship of war  and has therefore never been attempted by any other .


The voyage we are now about to relate was purposely fitted out with a view to intercept the Manilla ship at the instance of Dampier , in concluding of whose character ( from reading the accounts written by himself ) we were led into an error , which the present voyage , written by Captain Cooke , has enabled us to correct .
The ill success that attended the voyage to the South Seas , under the immediate command of Dampier , of which a brief relation is given in the first  volume of this work , was so far from discouraging that enterprizing officer from pursuing his favourite project of making prize of the Manilla ship , that , after his return , when he had wearied the merchants of London with fruitless solicitations , he repaired to Bristol , where his representations were better understood , and where they were attended with better effect .
By his solid remonstrances he prevailed upon nineteen of the principal merchants and gentlemen of that city to unite and form a company , for the purpose of fitting out two private ships of war , to shew what advantages might be derived from a well-conducted enterprize against the Spaniards in the South Seas : and it may , perhaps , be attributed to his judgment and experience , that they were more properly adapted to the service on which they were to be sent , and were better provided against every accident to which they might be exposed , than any privateers that ever were fitted out before them .
Add to this , that their crews were furnished with better regulations , and subjected to stricter rules , and under severer penalties , than men listed to go on hazardous adventures are generally willing to submit to .


Their principal officers were gentlemen of experience , or highly interested in the success of the voyage  being the first subscribers , and the chief promoters of the undertaking  and these also were assisted with a second set of officers , equally able and experienced , who , in case of accidents , were ready to supply the places of those who might be disabled .


 But , besides being awed by penalties from trespassing the articles of agreement that were signed by every man on board from the highest to the lowest , they were likewise encouraged by rewards to behave gallantly  every common sailor who should lose a limb in time of action being entitled to a douceur of 30l .
and so in proportion to officers according to their respective ranks : yet , notwithstanding all these precautions , we find them ever ready to mutiny .


The two ships , thus fitted up and regulated , were called the Duke and Dutchess  the first , of 300 tons , 36 guns , and 183 men , was commanded by Woodes Rogers  the other , of 270 tons , 30 guns , and 151 men , by Captain Stephen Courtney .


Captain Rogers , who commanded in chief , was a bold , active man , an indefatigable officer , one who would not give up his opinion readily to others , nor be flattered by other people 's giving up their opinion , without being convinced , to him .
He had been , according to Harris , a large sufferer by the French , and was naturally no great friend to that nation  but his most singular quality , and that which indeed recommended him to this command , was a peculiar art he had of maintaining his authority , and at the same time preserving his influence , over his seamen  an art , or gift rather , in which Captain Dampier was remarkably deficient .


Captain Courtney was a man of birth , fortune , and of many amiable qualities  he contributed  largely to the expence of the voyage , and took a share in it to superintend the management , and to interpose and qualify the differences that might arise in the course of a tedious and dangerous navigation  being a person of an admirable temper , and remarkable for moderation in all his decisions , in which almost all men were ready to acquiesce .


Besides these two gentlemen , who were first in command , Dr. Thomas Dover ( the same , who , about forty years ago , so effectually recommended the use of quicksilver in a little book , entitled Dr. Dover 's Last Legacy to his Country , that ladies as well as gentlemen of rank and fortune bespangled the floors and carpets with quicksilver , and scattered their diamonds wherever they met to dance , or to play ) was second Captain on board the Duke  and Captain Edward Cooke , our author , was second to Captain Courtney .


Dover was a considerable contributor to the voyage , but he was of a rough ungovernable temper , seldom pleased with either measures or men  but incapable of forming any party to support his own notions , because no party could ever be brought to approve them .


Captain Cooke was an able and experienced seaman , had been twice taken prisoner , and twice released by the enemy , and now embarked his All in this bottom with a view to make one effort more to gain a fortune .


Captain Dampier , who projected the voyage ,  was made pilot on board the Duke to direct it .
Of him the reader has already heard enough in the former volume of this Work  and from the character of the leaders it is natural to infer , that they were choice in the appointment of their inferior officers , and that even the common men were not of the meaner sort .


The general instructions of the owners were , first , to repair to Ireland to take in provisions , and then to proceed with all possible expedition to the South Sea  if luckily they met with any prizes by the way , they were either to send them home or to America , as should best suit  they were ordered by all means to keep together , and to act in concert  to undertake no enterprize of consequence without first deliberating the matter in a general council of officers in both ships  to be particularly careful in assisting each other in every circumstance of necessity  and that in giving relief in times of danger , or in supplying provisions or water in case of want , they should be as one ship , and that on no pretence the one should be suffered to want while the other had any thing to supply  but , as they were to share alike in all advantages , they should share alike too in all sufferings .


Thus fitted out and thus instructed , and the officers of both ships being provided with legal commissions to cruise against her Majesty 's enemies , the French and Spaniards , in the South Seas , on the first of August , 1708 , they unmoored from King-road , and on the 4th of the  same month cast anchor at the Cove in Cork , where they continued victualling , and adjusting their men , changing some and enlisting others , among whom were many foreigners , till the first of September , when they sailed in company with the Hastings man of war , having first agreed , in case of separation , to meet at Madeira , there to take in wine and brandy for the remainder of the voyage .


[ Here it is necessary to apprize the reader , that , as there are TWO very authentic accounts of this voyage , one written by Captain Rogers , and one written by our author , we shall endeavour to reduce them into ONE , by supplying from Captain Rogers what is wanting in Captain Cooke , and shall , contrary to the method pursued in Harris , continue the narrative in the person of Captain Cooke , though sometimes we may be obliged to use the words of Captain Rogers .
And this being premised , we will now proceed :]


On the 10th of September , says Captain Cooke , we spied a sail , which we chaced and came up with .
She happened to be a Swede , bound for Cadiz  and though from several circumstances there was reason to suspect that she had contraband goods on board , yet it being difficult to prove it , and we being in haste , dismissed her .
This caused a mutiny on board the Duke , headed by the boatswain and three inferior officers , who persuaded the men not to give her up .
Captain Rogers confined the authors  of this disorder , in which there was not one foreigner concerned .
He put ten of the mutineers in irons , a sailor being first soundly whipped for exciting the rest to join him  others less guilty he punished and discharged  but the chief officers continued armed , fearing what might happen , the ship 's company seeming too much to favour the mutineers .
They had afterwards a great deal of trouble with these fellow , who did more mischief when in irons than before , by stirring up the men to release them , pretending that they suffered in the cause of the crew , and therefore the crew ought to rise and release them .
This determined the Captain to make some examples , but not to irritate too much  he therefore began by removing the boatswain from his office , and appointing another in his room , without intending any thing further .
But on the 14th this intestine storm rose higher than ever  for then a sailor , with the best part of the ship 's company at his heels , went up to the Captain , and demanded the boatswain out of custody .
With this man the Captain desired to speak alone , and when he came upon the quarter-deck , the officers seized him , and caused one of his chief comrades to whip him .
Thus by different corrections of the like kind , the officers on board the Duke broke the combination , and allayed the tumult .
The boatswain they sent home in the Crown Galley in irons  the other prisoners they released upon their humble submission  such among  them as were petty officers they restored to their commands , and all on board were forbidden to disobey or reproach them : and thus ended an insurrection , which , had it succeeded , would have put a stop at once to the farther prosecution of the voyage .


On the 15th , finding ourselves to the southward , and at the same time somewhat to the eastward of Madeira , we changed our place of rendezvous , and bore away for the Canaries .


On Saturday the 18th , at five in the morning , we saw a sail right a-head , to which we gave chace .
About ten , we came up with , and took her , being a small Spanish bark bound from Teneriff to Fuertaventura , with several men and women passengers on board , and laden with sundry sorts of goods .
Next day we bore away for Oratavia-road , where we stood off and on , and sent away the prize 's boat with one of our owner 's agents , a priest , and the master of the prize , to treat about the ransom of her , and to get wine , provisions , and other necessaries , for the refreshment of both the ships .
About eight next morning , a boat came from the town , with a letter from the English merchants residing there , wherein they expostulated with us for making prize of the bark , alledging that there was a free trade agreed to in these islands between her Majesty of Great Britain and the Kings of France and Spain , so religiously observed by the latter , that they had caused an English ship taken there by a French privateer ,  to be restored  and farther , representing the danger that might arise to themselves , living by permission in an enemy 's country , if the bark was not immediately given up , for which reprisals would be made on them  as also , that we should be answerable at home for interrupting the settled commerce .
This letter was signed by the Consul and three capital merchants .
Our Captains immediately returned for answer , that , having no instructions relating to the Spanish vessels trading among those islands , they could not justify the releasing of the ship on their bare opinions , without some order or proclamation of her Majesty , the English being protected there only on anchoring ground , and the bark being taken in the open seas  that , in case Mr. Vanbrugh , the owners agent , was not restored , they would carry away all the prisoners they had  and , if they apprehended any detriment to the factory , they might ransom the bark , and seek their redress in England .
They desired dispatch , there being no time to lose  and , upon sending back Mr. Vanbrugh , they would release the prisoners .
At night another letter came in answer to theirs , from the Consul , importing , that the English men-of-war were civilly received there , and never committed any hostilities  and that it was strange we should insist on ransoming any Spaniards , who were never made prisoners in England , or elsewhere  and the Governor there delivered up to him any English prisoners that were brought in by Spanish privateers  wherefore  he insisted , that those in our custody should be dismissed , and the bark discharged , accepting a present of wine in return .
With this from the Consul at the city of Laguna , came another letter from the merchants at Oratavia-port , much to the same purport , only offering to pay to the value of 450 pieces of eight , the sum demanded for the bark , in wine , brandy , sugar , oil , barley , and greens , to prevent incensing the natives against them , not doubting but that reparation would be made them in England .
Our Captains replied , by threatening to cruise among the islands to avail themselves for their loss of time , and to cannonade the town of Oratavia , unless they received instant satisfaction .
On the 22d , at four in the morning , we stood in for the shore , making a clear ship  but , soon after , we saw a boat coming with our owners agent , and Mr. Cross , one of the English merchants , bringing five buts of wine , and other refreshments .
We lay off the town , took the goods out of the prize , sold the bark to Mr. Cross , and put the prisoners on board her .
Thus ended this troublesome business , which being unanimously approved of at a council of officers of both ships , they proceeded on their voyage  and , seeing a sail to the westward , gave chace to her , but , night coming on , lost her .


On the 24th we crossed the Tropic of Cancer , and , the Sunday following , performed the ceremony of dipping the men of both ships who had  not crossed it before  a ceremony that causes a good deal of mirth among the common men .


On the 30th we passed by Santa Lucia , one of the Cape de Verd islands , and by eight in the morning came in fight of St. Vincent , and about eleven came to an anchor in ten fathom water within the rock .


As we knew the island not to be inhabited , we were not a little surprized to see some people on shore  and , in order to learn who they were , and what their business was , I armed the pinnace , and went on shore , when we found them to be Portuguese come from the island of St. Anthony to catch turtle , who told us we might here wood and water .


This island lies in lat .
16 deg .
55 min .
N. and in 25 deg .
36 min .
W. long .
from the meridian of London .
There are on it Guinea-hens , hogs , and goats , and about the shore plenty of fish .
In the woods there are spiders as large as little birds , whose webs are not easily broken through , being woven with a substance nearly as strong as ordinary thread .


The Cape Verd islands are eleven in number , St. Anthony , St. Vincent , St. Lucia , St. Nicholas , Sal , Bona Vista , Mayo , St. Jago , Fogo , Romes , and Brava  and take their general name from a promontory on the African shore .
They belong to the Portuguese , but are not all inhabited .


While we lay at St. Vincent 's , new disturbances arose among the men in relation to plunder  for  here they had an opportunity of trading , and therefore every man wished to have something to exchange .
The effects taken in the late prize occasioned a general murmur throughout both the ships  to put an end to which , and to fix the people in a firm resolution of doing their duty , we determined to settle the matter at once , by framing such articles , as , without giving our owners any ground of complaint , might inspire the seamen with courage and constancy , and make them as willing to obey as their officers were ready to command .
It cost some trouble to adjust the articles  but that was fully compensated , by their effectually answering the purpose .
And now , having composed all differences , the men again chearfully returned to their duty , all but two or three of the Duke 's men , who made their escape on shore  among whom was their linguist , who probably had no mind to be left behind  but , having staid beyond his leave of absence , and paid no regard to the orders that were sent him to repair on board , it was thought proper , by way of example , to depart without him .
Accordingly on the 7th of October we unmoored , and , on the 8th , after lying by all night for our consort , we set sail together for the coast of Brasil .
But on our passage thither , some fresh disputes arose among our men  and , after various consultations to accommodate the differences , it was resolved , that Mr. Page , who was our second mate , should be sent to serve on board the Duke , and Mr. Ballet to come from  the Duke to serve on board the Dutchess in his room .
This was not to be effected without force , Page refusing to obey the order  and when it was on the point of being put in execution , he resisted  but , being overpowered , and carried on board the Duke , he was there charged with mutiny .
He desired to go to the head , for a necessary purpose , before he made his defence , and was permitted so to do  when he instantly jumped over-board , with the design of getting back again to the Dutchess , but was taken up , tried , and punished , which put an end to the disturbance for that time .


On Wednesday the 27th we crossed the Line , and on Sunday the 14th of November saw land at a great distance , and at noon made Cape Frio , on the coast of Brasil .
On the 18th we anchored before Islo Grande , and on the 19th moored our ship in ten fathom water .
Here one of our men going from the ship without leave , giving the first Lieutenant foul language , and threatening soon to be revenged , was put in irons  and his messmates and confederates demanding his release , or desiring to share in his punishment , seven voluntarily went into irons .


On the 21st I went on shore in the pinnace with a present to the Governor , and to acquaint him we were friends .
At our first landing they fired several shot , taking us for French  but afterwards made an apology , and received us civilly .
On the 23d two of the mutineers were whipped , and put in irons again .
On the 24th  four of the eight men in irons were released , on their submission  and two men went on shore , designing to leave the ship , and , having bargained with a canoe to carry them to the main , they were by mistake put ashore at a distant part of the island , where , finding themselves on an uninhabited coast , they began to relent  and , after staying a night in the woods , where they were terrified with the roaring of wild beasts , they came in sight of the ship , and made signs of repentance , humbling themselves in the most suppliant manner , and on their knees , with their hands lifted up , endeavouring to move compassion .
After some time the boat went off , and brought them on board , where they were confined in irons till the next day , and then ordered to be flogged and released .


On the 25th two Irish landmen stole away from the Duke , and secreted themselves in the woods , in like manner as the two seamen had done from the Dutchess .
About four next morning the watch on the quarter deck spied a canoe , and hailed her to come on board  but the rowers not answering , but striving to escape , the Duke 's pinnace pursued the canoe , fired into her , and mortally wounded one of the Indian rowers .
He that owned and steered the canoe was a friar , and had a quantity of gold on board , which , after running the canoe ashore , he had just time to hide before the Duke 's pinnace reached the land .
A Portuguese , who was in the canoe , and who had no gold to lose , would not follow  the friar  but , on the contrary , knowing the English to be friends , called the Father back , who , upon his return , was carried with the wounded Indian on board the Duke , where the poor man was dressed by the surgeon , but died in a few hours .
The officers in both ships were very sorry for this unfortunate accident , and entered their protest against it , and caused the man to be buried on shore in a very solemn manner .
The friar , however , who had lost his gold , was not to be appealed , but threatened to seek for justice in Portugal or England .


In towing the ship about the easternmost part of the island , we spied the Duke 's two men waiting tor a canoe to carry them over to the main  and two of our Lieutenants manned the boat , and , landing some men in a convenient place to get behind them , to prevent their escaping to the woods , they rowed to the place where the fellows were seen to lurk .
When they found themselves beset , they endeavoured to fly  but , being intercepted , they were brought on board , put in irons , and sent to their own ship , where they were afterwards severely punished .


On the 27th the principal officers on board both ships went in their pinnaces to the town of Angra dos Reys on the main , carrying the ships music along with them .
They were kindly received and entertained by the Governor and Fathers , who with their servants are the principal inhabitants , there not being more than 50 or 60  low-built houses in the place .
They have a guard-house , where , at our landing , we were received by the Governor , with about 20 men under arms , and treated with a dinner , sweetmeats , and rum .
The Governor and Fathers desired we would go to see their Franciscan monastery and church , that day being a festival with them , and the people coming from the plantations in the country to celebrate it .
We complied  and , at their request , our musick , consisting of trumpets , hautboys , and violins , played in a gallery belonging to the church , and assisted in heightening the solemnization , to the no small satisfaction of the Fathers .
After divine service we likewise joined in procession with them , and accompanied them from the church in the evening , every one carrying a large wax candle in his hand , according to the custom of the country on such occasions .
The procession being closed , we were conducted into a great hall , and treated by the Fathers with an elegant supper of fish , sweet meats , and fruits of various sorts in the highest perfection .
At our coming away , they gave us some vollies with their small arms , and we returned the compliment by a flourish of trumpets , c..


Fifteen days journey up the country there is said to be a very rich gold mine  and it was not long since the French plundered a bark with 800 weight of gold-dust on board , which it was bringing from the mine .
Some men of credit told me , that the mines here are more  profitable than even Mexico or Peru  but that the Tapoyars , who inhabit the inland plains , are an unconquerable race of men , taller and stronger than the Portuguese , and not to be brought to labour .
The Brasilian women are very fruitful , have easy labours , retire to the woods , where they are delivered alone , and return no more till after a certain time allotted for purification .


On tuesday the 30th of November we weighed anchor  but a tornado coming on , we tacked , and stood under the island till its fury abated .
On the 1st of December both ships sailed out of the bay , and pursued their course to the southward till the 21st , without meeting with any remarkable occurrence  but on that day a young man fell from the mizen-top-sail yard , and fractured his skull .


On the 23d we made land , which I supposed to be Falkland 's Island , in lat .
51 deg .
25 min .
S. by estimation .


On the 24th , as we ran along shore , the land looked like some part of England , having several good bays and vallies , but believe it to be wholly uninhabited .


On the 5th of January , 1709 , we had a violent gale of wind at north-west , and very bad weather .
At two in the afternoon we reefed both courses , then lowered our fore yard , and lay by till five , at which time our waste was filled with water , and we expected the ship to sink every moment : got down our fore-yard as  well as we could , and loosed the sprit-sail to wear the ship , which at last we accomplished  but in wearing we thought we should have foundered with the weight of water that was in her waste .
Thus we scudded before the wind , the Duke following , and at nine shipped a sea in the poop , as we in the cabbin were going to supper .
It beat in all the cabbin-windows and bulk-head , and hove the first Lieutenant halfway between the decks , with several muskets and pistols that hung there , darting a sword that was against the bulk-head of the cabbin through my man 's hammock and rug , which hung against the bulk-head of the steerage  and , had not the bulk-head of the great cabbin given way , all we who were there must inevitably have been drowned before the water could have been discharged .
Our yaul was staved on the deck , and it was a wonder that many were not killed with the shutters , the bulk-head , and the arms , which were driven with a prodigious force  but Providence delivered us from this and many other dangers  only one man or two were hurt , and some bruised  but not one rag of dry cloaths was left us , our chests , beds , and bedding , being all soaked in sea-water .
Next day the storm abated , and we continued our course , coasting very far to the south , where we endured much cold , by which many of our men were greatly affected , insomuch that a third part of both ships companies fell sick , occasioned , as I suppose , by their being long wet and cold .
We  were now in lat .
61 deg .
48 min .
S. long .
from Falkland 's Isles 18 deg .
5 min .
W .


Monday 17 , by a good observation I found that we were got round Cape Horn , Terra del Fuego , and the Straits of Magellan , and to the northward of Cape Vileria .
On the 19th I reckoned we were to the northward of Port St. Stephen on the coast of Patagonia in the Great South Sea .


On Monday the 31st , at eight in the morning , made the Island of Juan Fernandes , where we designed to wood and water .
In the afternoon Capt. Dover went off in the Pinnace to get some provisions , and in the evening saw a fire ashore , which made us conclude there were ships in the road , as we were assured the island had no inhabitants : we therefore made the signal for the boat to return , and she accordingly came on board about twelve at night .


Tuesday Feb. 1 , we rowed and towed into the great bay , and came to an anchor in 50 fathom water .
All this day we had a clear ship expecting a rencounter  but were much disappointed , when , instead of a valuable prize , we discovered only an odd figure of a man , who had been the sole resident on the island for more than four years .
His name was Alexander Selkirk , a Scotchman , who had been Master of the Cinqueports , the ship that accompanied Dampier in his voyage to the South Seas , and was , as Dampier said , one of the best men in her .
Captain Rogers immediately agreed with him to be his mate .


 It was this man who made the fire in the night when he saw our ships , which he judged to be English .
During his stay here , he saw several ships pass by  but only two came to an anchor .
As he went to view them , he found them to be Spaniards , and retired from them  upon which they shot at him .
Had they been French he would have submitted , but chose to risque his dying alone on the island rather than fall into the hands of the Spaniards , because he apprehended they would either murder , or make a slave of him in the mines  for he feared they would spare no stranger that might be capable of discovering the South Seas .
The Spaniards had landed before he knew what they were , and they came so near him that he had much ado to escape  for they not only shot at him , but pursued him to the woods , where he climbed to the top of a tree , at the foot of which they charged their pieces , and killed several goats just by , but went off again without discovering him .
He told us , that he was born at Largo , in the county of Fife , and was bred a sailor from his youth .
The reason of his being left here was a difference between him and his Captain , which , together with the ship 's being leaky , made him willing rather to stay here , than to go along with him at first , and when he was at last willing to go his Captain would not receive him .
He had been at the island before to wood and water , when two of the ship 's company were left upon it for six months , till the ship returned , being  chaced thence by two French South Sea ships .
He had with him his cloaths and bedding , with a firelock , some powder , bullets , and tobacco  a hatchet , a knife , a kettle , a bible , some practical pieces , and his mathematical instruments and books .
He diverted and provided for himself as well as he could  but for the first eight months he had much ado to bear up against melancholy , and the terror of being left alone in such a desolate place .
He built two huts in Piemento-trees , covered them with long grass , and lined them with the skins of goats which he killed with his gun as he wanted , so long as his powder lasted , which was but a pound , and that being almost spent , he got fire by rubbing two sticks of Piemento wood together upon his knee .
In the lesser hut , at some distance from the other , he drest his victuals , and in the larger he slept , and employed himself in reading , singing psalms , and praying  so that he said he was a better Christian while in this solitude than ever he was before , or than , he was afraid , he should ever be again .


At first he never eat any thing till hunger constrained him , partly for grief , and partly for want of bread and salt , nor did he go to bed till he could watch no longer .
The Piemento wood , which burnt very clear , served him both for fire and candle , and refreshed him with its fragrant smell .
He might have had fish enough , but could not eat them for want of salt , because they occasioned a looseness , except crayfish ,  which are as large as lobsters , and very good .
These he sometimes boiled , and at other times broiled , as he did his goat 's - flesh , of which he made good broth .
He kept an account of 500 that he killed while there , and caught as many more , which he marked in the ear and let go .
When his powder failed he took them by speed of feet , for his way of living and continual exercise cleared him of all gross humours , so that he ran with wonderful swiftness through the woods and up the rocks and hills , as we perceived , when we employed him to catch goats for us .
We had a bull-dog which we sent with several of our nimblest runners to help him to catch goats  but he distanced and tired both the dog and the men , caught the goats , and brought them to us on his back .
He told us that his agility in pursuing a goat had once like to have cost him his life .
He pursued it with so much eagerness that he catched hold of it on the brink of a precipice of which he was not aware , the bushes hiding it from him  so that he fell with the goat down the precipice a great height , and was so bruised with the fall that he narrowly escaped with his life  and , when he came to his senses , found the goat dead under him .
He lay there about twent-four hours , and was scarce able to crawl to his hut , which was about a mile distant , or to stir abroad again in ten days .
He came at last to relish his meat without salt or bread .
He had a constant supply of good turneps , which had been sown there by  Captain Dampier , and have now overspread some acres of ground .
He had good cabbage from the cabbage-trees that grow wild upon the island , and seasoned his meat with the fruit of the Piemento-trees , which is the same as Jamaica pepper , and smells deliciously .
He found also a black-pepper , called Malageta , which was very good to expel wind and strengthen the stomach .
He soon wore out all his shoes and cloaths by running in the woods  and at last , being forced to shift without them , his feet became so hard , that he ran every where without difficulty  and it was some time before he could wear shoes after we found him  for , not being used to any so long , his feet swelled when he came to wear them again .
After he had conquered his melancholy , he diverted himself sometimes with cutting his name upon the trees , sometimes with contrivances to vary and increase his stock of tools , and sometimes in clear evenings in counting the stars .
He was at first much pestered with cats and rats that had bred in great numbers from some of each species which had got ashore from ships that put in there to wood and water .
The rats gnawed his feet and cloaths while he slept , which obliged him to cherish the cats with his goat 's flesh , by which many of them became so tame , that they would be about him in hundreds , and soon delivered him from the rats .
He likewise tamed some kids  and , to vary his diversions , would now and then sing and teach them to dance  so that  Figure 1 .
Alexander Selkirk Makes his cats and kids dance before Capt Cook and his Company  by his natural flow of humour , and the vigour of his youth , being now but 30 years old , he came at last to conquer all the inconveniences of his solitude , and to be very easy .
When his cloaths were worn out , he made himself a coat and a cap of goat 's skins , which he stitched together with little thongs of the same that he cut with his knife .
He had no other needle but a nail  and , when his knife was worn out to the back , he made others of some iron hoops that were ashore , which he beat thin , and ground upon stones .
Having some linnen cloth by him , he sewed himself some shirts with a nail , and stitched them with the worsted of his old stockings , which he pulled out on purpose .
He had his last shirt on when we found him on the island .
At his coming on board us , he had so much forgot his language for want of use , that we could scarce understand him  for he seemed to speak his words by halves .
We offered him a dram  but he would not touch it , having drank nothing but water since his being there  and it was some time before he could relish our victuals .
He could give us no account of any other product of the island than what we have mentioned , except some black plumbs , which are very good , but hard to come at , the trees which bear them growing on high mountains and rocks .
The officers that went first on shore were invited to his retreat  but the way to it being very rugged and intricate , only a very few of  them had curiosity enough to visit it , He had conceived an irreconcileable aversion to an officer on board the Cinque Ports , who , he was informed , was on board the Duke  but , not being a principal in command , he was prevailed upon to wave that circumstance , and to accompany Captain Dampier , for whom he had a friendship .
He was very useful while the ships staid at Juan Fernandez , in supplying them with fresh provisions , and in facilitating the business of taking in wood and water .
He said , he had seen snow and ice in July , which is the middle of winter in that climate  but the months of September , October , and November , are inconceivably pleasant  the air being perfumed with a fragrance that cherishes and revives the spirits , and has a wonderful effect upon animals , as well as men , which Selkirk remarked by their playwardness and plumpness .
He particularly directed us to a plant not much unlike feverfew , of a most grateful and cordial scent , with which we strewed the tents of the sick , who were thereby much comforted , and their cure facilitated .
We gathered many bundles of it , dried them in the shade , and sent them on board .


On the 13th of February , a general council of officers was held on board the Duke , when many necessary regulations were agreed to , for the maintenance of order , discipline , and secrecy  among which , two inspectors were appointed from on board the Duke , to take account of all p [ ... ] s taken by the Dutchess  and the like  number from the Dutchess , to register such as should be taken by the Duke .


While we continued in this bay the carpenters fitted up the pinnaces , the frames of which were ready prepared at Bristol , at our first setting out .


On the 14th the pinnaces were launched , and having each a gun fitted to her prow , were tried in the bay , to see how they would sail , being intended to serve as small ships of war , to examine the harbours where the large ships could not venture to approach the shore .
And now , having all things in readiness , we began to prepare for our departure , all our sick men being recovered , except two who died , and were buried on the island .


On the 15th we cleared the bay , and pursued a northerly course till the 24th , when we crossed the Tropic of Capricorn , and shot some Tropic birds about the size of a partridge , with only a single feather in their tails , but that very long , and very taper .
We had now the sea as smooth as a pond  and , having little to do , we ordered the men to attend prayers regularly twice a day , prohibited gaming , to prevent the artful from taking advantage of the simple  and imposed a penalty against swearing , by which that vice was almost excluded the ship 's company .


On Monday the 28th I ordered three of our men to be put in irons , for cutting the meat in the steep-tub , and hiding it  and on the 2d of  March , Captain Courtney caused them to be whipped and pickled , by way of example .


On Thursday he 14th of March , Captain Rogers , Captain Dover , and Captain Dampier , came on board the Dutchess  and concluded , that the strict , observation of Lent having prevented the Spaniards from trafficking in those seas , the most eligible plan would be to bear away under an easy sail for Lobos , and there to supply ourselves with boats to land at Guayaquil  but in the afternoon saw a sail , gave chace , and took her She came from Guayaquil , and was bound for Cheripe to load flour , and had been out 16 days .
The crew were all Indians , except one Spanish passenger .
They had nothing on board but about 50 l. in money to pay for their cargo , and told us , that part of the new town of Guayaquil had lately been burnt  that the Jesus Maria , formerly a man-of-war , was coming from Lima to be there rebuilt  that another large ship was expected from Panama at Payta  and that they had heard nothing of any English men-of-war or privateers being in those seas .


On the 16th we made the island of Lobos , and in the evening anchored in the road .
It lies in lat .
6 deg .
5 min .
S. about 16 leagues from the continent , is barren , and affords neither wood nor water  but there is good riding for ships , and harbours proper for repairing and careening .
Here the prize was fitted up , and it was agreed , that I should go out in her with 35 men , to cruise  in company with the Dutchess  and with that view she was new named , and called The Beginning Galley .


On the 26th , at day-break , we saw a ship standing to the southward , and soon came up with her .
She was a bark of 50 tons , bound from Guayaquil to Truxillo , with timber and cocoa-nuts .
It was agreed , that Captain Courtney should stand in with her in the night  and that I should continue to cruise till farther orders , which on the 27th I received , and the same evening came to an anchor by the Duke and Dutchess in Lobos-Road .
Next day , the prisoners being examined , reported , that a ship of 36 brass guns was expected from Lima with the Viceroy of Mexico and his mother on board  and that they were bound to Panama .
Upon this intelligence it was resolved in full council to cruise in quest of this ship , and if she escaped to attack Guayaquil .


While the Duke lay at Lobos , the carpenters built a large boat to land men , in case of an attack  and , having made all necessary preparations , and the sick men from both ships being put on board the last prize , which was called the Increase , our first Lieutenant was ordered to command the Beginning Galley  and on the 31st of March we left Lobos , and agreed to cruise six leagues to the windward of the Saddle of Payta , as the most likely station to succeed in our enterprize .


On the 2d of April we fell in with a large  ship , of 400 tons , from Panama , heavily laden with dry goods , commanded by Captain Morel , and thought to be one of the largest merchant-ships in all those seas .
He had 50 or 60 blacks on board , besides several passengers .


The next day we took another prize of small value , having only about 90 or 100 l. in plate , and a small quantity of timber .
She was of 50 tons burthen , commanded by Juan Perezillo Bastillo , who told us that a bishop was coming by sea from Panama to Lima with 200,000 pieces of eight , and a considerable quantity of family plate  but no ship appearing in sight from the 3d to the 9th , it was then upon consultation agreed to call in the cruisers , and to attempt the conquest of Puna and Guayaquil .
This resolution being taken in council , it was next debated , who should command in chief on shore  and , after a warm contest , it was at length agreed , that Captain Rogers and Captain Courtney should each command a company of seamen , and Captain Dover a party of landmen  that Captain Dover should give the word of command the first night , and the other two Captains take their turns .


On Sunday the 10th , Mr. Vanbrugh , the owner 's agent , was removed from the council , and Mr. Samuel Hopkins was chosen in his room  the charge against him was founded on killing the Indian , as already mentioned , and engaging to vote with Captain Rogers upon all occasions .
Captain Dover likewise charged  him with insolence , and with disobeying orders .


On the 12th , the attack of Guayaquil was finally settled , and the whole fleet set sail for that harbour .
Some new regulations were framed , and fresh encouragement proposed to animate the men to behave resolutely .


The three commanding officers selected each their respective parties , Captain Dover the marines , and the Captains Rogers and Courney two parties of sailors , 75 men in each  Captain Dampier commanded the artillery , and was to form a body of reserve , to act as occasion should offer .
The whole number employed in this service amounted to 238 effective men .
The care of the ships and prizes was at the same time entrusted to the Captains Cooke and Fry , who , besides a small complement of sailors , had 226 Indians and blacks on board .


Friday 15 .
Saw a sail near the shore , and , having little wind , the Duke 's boat commanded by Captain Fry , and ours by myself , made directly for her , going off in such haste that neither of us had the swivel guns we used to carry , nor our full complement of men .
The Duke 's boat nearing her first , she put out Spanish colours , fired a gun , and hoisted her Spanish flag at the main-top-mast head .
The Duke 's boat then lay by for us to come up .
We saw she was French-built , and , by the description the prisoners had given us , concluded it must be the ship we had been so long cruising for , which  was to carry the Bishop .
Our ships being almost out of sight , and the Spaniards so near the coast , we resolved to lay her on board on each bow , and accordingly fell to it .
The dispute was hot for a long time , we keeping a constant fire , and the enemy returning it , who killed two of Captain Fry 's men , besides wounding one of his and two of mine .
One of the killed was Mr. John Rogers , our second Lieutenant , and brother to Captain Rogers .
The Duke 's boat , finding the enterprize desperate , bore away  and some time after we did the like : but Captain Fry having put some of his men aboard of us , given us some powder and shot , and taken in our wounded , I made again to the chace , resolving to keep her from the shore , and , rather than fail , to clap her aboard .
The Spaniards , perceiving our design , edged off to sea , and we followed them .
Our ships came up apace , and the Dutchess having fired a shot or two , she struck her colours , and surrendered .
The men begged for good quarter , and we promised them all civility .
This ship came from Panama , and was bound for Lima , to be fitted out for a man of war .
There were 70 blacks , and many passengers , with a considerable quantity of pearls , on board : the lading consisted of bale goods , and some things belonging to the Bishop  but they had set him , with his attendants , ashore at point St. Helena , from whence he was to go by land to Guayaquil .
While the French possessed this vessel , she was called La Lune d'Or .
She  was of 270 tons burden , and commanded by Don Joseph de Arizabella .


Saturday 16 .
Took a small bark laden with hides and some flour , and buried our Lieutenant , being all much concerned for the loss of so good an officer .


Sunday 17 .
All things being now in order , our men went aboard the two barks in order to land , and Captain Fry and I took charge of the ships , prizes , and prisoners .


Monday 18 .
At one in the morning , being near the island Santa Clara , our two barks with the land forces left us .


Tuesday 19 .
The boats rowed with 45 men towards the island Puna , and came to a grappling close under the land , out of sight of the look-outs .
We seized the Governor of the island , and sent our carpenter and two or three hands along the shore , to cut all the bark-logs , and canoes in pieces , for fear they should get away and alarm the town of Guayaquil .


Thursday 21 .
I sent the Beginning a-head , for fear of danger , who , seeing a vessel riding close under point Arena , fired two swivel guns at her  but found nobody on board .
She was a new Spanish bark going to load salt , and had nothing in her but a few jars of water .
At five in the afternoon the transports rowed for the town of Guayaquil , and at eleven at night were so near as to hear one centinel call to another for fire to be brought .
Perceiving we were discovered , we rowed over to the other side , and  saw a fire made where the centinels talked , and soon after many lights all over the town .
We heard them likewise ring the alarm-bell , and fire several volleys  and we observed them to light a fire on the hill to give the town notice of our being come up the river .
Hereupon the boats came to a grappling , when such a hot dispute arose among some of our chief officers , that they were heard ashore  the officers differing in their opinions , whether to land immediately , or stay till morning  however , at last it was agreed , that , since we did not know the ground , it was best to stay till day-light .


Friday 22 .
Our forces being all joined , we sent a flag of truce , with the Captain of the French-built ship , and another prisoner , to the Corregidor , who asked him our number , which the Captain magnified .
The Corregidor suggested that we were mere boys  but the Captain replied , he would find we were men , for we had fought him bravely in our open boats , though he had killed one of the Commander 's brothers , and wounded and killed others  and therefore advised him to agree for the ransom of the town .


Saturday 23 .
The pinnace went up the river after some vessels , and brought six of them to anchor by our barks  and we also took possession of two new ships , of about 400 tons each .
We then went ashore with a flag of truce , and the Governor came on board to agree about the ransom of the town and ships  but this not  being then concluded , he promised to meet the Captain at seven in the evening , but was not so good as his word .


Sunday 24 .
The Governor came off again to treat , and our Captains would have seized him for having forfeited his word  but he alledging that it was incompatible with his coming with a flag of truce , was set ashore again , and all things were made ready for the attack .
Accordingly the men landed , and , being commanded to proceed , they went on with so much bravery , that the Spaniards fired only their first volley and fled , our people pressing and pursuing them to their cannon , which they soon deserted , the gunner only , who was an Irishman , standing by them till he was wounded in four places , of which wounds he soon after died .
Our men then marched in a body through both towns , drove out the enemy , and , placing three guards in the three churches , set fire to five or six houses adjoining to the wood , lest the enemy should annoy our guard , which was within pistol-shot .
All this night they kept firing out of the woods at our centinels , but did them no harm .
In the mean time the Dutchess 's pinnace , commanded by Lieutenant Connely , went up the river , landed at every house , took the plate , and what else of value they found , and had some skirmishes with the enemy , in which one of our men was wounded .


Monday 25 .
In the night one of our centinels shot another belonging to us , who was going  from his post , and did not answer when challenged three times  our first Lieutenant 's pistol went off by his side , and wounded him in the leg  and another of our men was also shot through the foot by one of our own people : moreover , our surgeon cut off a man 's arm who had been hurt by one of our grenadoe shells , which broke in the bark when fired out of the cohorne .
The afternoon was spent in shipping off provisions from the town , and disposing all things in case of an attack in the night .


Tuesday 26 .
A flag of truce came to treat concerning ransoming the town , which was at last agreed on for 30,000 dollars .
We were to have three hostages , and to stay at Puna till they could raise the money .


Wednesday 27 .
The hostages came on board  and we took down our Union flag , and hoisted a flag of truce , firing a gun for a signal that the Spaniards might come into the town , and that no farther hostilities should be committed on either side .


Thursday 28 .
Our barks weighed with the beginning of the ebb , the Duke 's pinnace making the best of her way down to the ships  and the float , after going ashore to fetch off the great guns , weighed also , and fell down the river .


Friday 29 .
Captain Rogers came aboard , and gave us an account that they had taken , plundered , and ransomed the town of Guayaquil  that three of our men had been killed ,  two by our own people , and one by the Spaniards , and four wounded , that the inhabitants , whilst treating , had carried off their money and plate , retiring to the woods , and leaving their guns , four whereof were taken , with a considerable quantity of meal , pease , sugar , brandy , and wine , all which was coming down in the barks .
This day Hugh Tidcomb , who was shot by his fellow-centinel , died .
At four in the afternoon , spied a sail standing up the river with the tide of flood : we sent both ships boats after her , and before night they brought her in .
She was a small Spanish bark from Cheripe , having on board 330 bags of meal , 35 hundred weight of sugar , some onions , quinces , and pomegranates .
This , with the six barks , and two great ships ransomed by the town of Guayaquil , made fourteen prizes taken in those seas .


Sunday 30 .
Captain Rogers went aboard the French built ship to carry her up to Puna , in hopes of disposing of her cargo and some of the blacks , who only served to eat up our provisions  as also to bring down what water and provisions could be got  Captain Courtney being gone there before on the same account .


Monday , May 1 .
A boat came down from the town with part of the ransom , whereupon most of the prisoners were set on shore .


Thursday 5 .
Captain Rogers returned with the French-built ship , the Spaniards having brought none of her cargo  but they had paid  24,000 dollars , part of the 30,000 ransom  upon which , the Governor of Puna , one of the hostages , was discharged , but the others kept .


Friday 6 .
In the afternoon the Duke and the prizes joined us , when we were seven sail in all .
A boat came down with about 3000 dollars more , in money and plate  and the men told us , that the other 3000 dollars would soon come , and 12,000 more to purchase goods : but this we supposed to be a trick to keep us till the men-of-war should come from Lima  whereupon we made all possible dispatch to get out of the bay , kept three of the hostages , and sent the prisoners ashore .
The Beginning , being of no other use , since we had better vessels , we sold to the Spaniards for the value of 50l .
in pearl , gold chains , c. and put the prisoners aboard , but kept pilots , and a man that could speak English , the President of Panama 's son , and the hostages .
The weather being very hot , some of our men fell into fevers  and in a few days we had near 100 sick , and among the number Capt. Courtney .


Sunday 8 .
Sailed with a small breeze at N. W .
At noon it began to blow fresh  but nothing material happened till the 13th , when , believing ourselves near the longitude of the Gallapagoes , where we designed to water , fit our ships , and refresh our men , we lay by from six in the evening till four the next morning , for fear of running by those islands in the night .


Monday 16 .
Mr. Hopkins , Lieutenant of the  marines , and one of the doctors of the Duke , died .


Tuesday 17 .
Saw land , being one of the Gallapagoe islands .
Next day the Duke 's boat went on shore to seek for water , but could find none in any of them , tho ' Captain Cowley , in his voyage round the round , says there is good water in one of them  but we missed the place .


The 20th , 21st , and 22d , we spent in plying among the islands , where the boats found abundance of turtle , large rock-fish , and guanos .
These last named creatures are larger here than those in other parts of the West Indies , and are of several colours and sizes .
They are eaten by the seamen , and reckoned good meat , though their deformity made me loathe them .


Thursday 26 .
Captain Rogers and Captain Dover came aboard the Dutchess , and , after holding a council , it was resoled to run in for the island of Plata to water , and so come off again , for fear of meeting with two French ships , one of 60 , and the other of 46 guns , and the Spanish men-of-war , which , we were told , would be shortly in search of us .
Some days before this we lost Mr. Hatley , who was in one of the prizes , with five or six white men , four blacks , and an Indian , having on board little or no provisions or water , and no boat  and we never more heard of them .


Monday 30 .
The officers of the Duke came aboard , to consult about the properest place to careen and water at  and 't was agreed to go to the  island Gorgona , to see whether any Spanish ships were there , and from thence to Mangla , where are some indians , enemies to the Spaniards , who , it was said , would supply us with swine and fowls , good water , turtle , plantains , and other refreshments .


Wednesday , June 1 .
Some of our men were told , that a conspiracy was forming on board the galleon among the prisoners and blacks .
We examined the Spaniards , who protested they knew nothing of it  then put matches between the fingers of two blacks , making them believe we would burn them to the bone if they would not confess .
They owned there had been a talk of killing the English among the Indians and blacks , but they believed it was not in earnest  however , they were dispersed into several ships to break , the combination .


Sunday 5 .
Saw a sail right-a-head of us , chaced , and at eight in the evening came up with her , fired a chace-gun , and she struck .
The vessel was of about 80 tons burden , bound from Panama for Guayaquil , was laden with iron and other merchandize , and had two women and several passengers of note on board , one of whom was going Governor to Baldivia , whose name wa [ ... ] Don Juan Ca [ ... ] do [ ... ] o , and who had been not long before taken on the other side by the Jamaica cr [ ... ] ers .


Monday 6 .
Made the best of our way for Gorgona  and at three in the afternoon next day , the Duke with the galleon came to an anchor  in that harbour .
Same day saw a sail bearing down towards the island , till spying the galleon in the offing , she stood to the westward .
I went out in the pinnace well-manned , and at noon took and brought her to an anchor .
She was a bark of 50 tons , called El Soldado , came out of a small port the night before , and was bound for Guayaquil , to load salt , brandy , c..
She had in her in gold chains and money to the value of 5 or 6 hundred pounds , designed to purchase her cargo .


Monday 13 .
Held a full council on board the Duke , and resolved to careen our ships here as soon as possible .
Here we continued till Sunday , August the 7th  and in the mean time plundered a settlement on the main , right opposite the island , set most of our prisoners on shore on the continent , and brought seven beeves , 14 hogs , some poultry , about 50 bushels of Indian wheat , and a few goats on board : at the same time a black born in Jamaica , who spoke very good English , and had been taken with some Jamaica-men eight years before , came over to us in a canoe .
Captain Morel , too , formerly commander of the galleon , brought some money and fruit , and a merchant or two , who bought some of our blacks .
During our stay at this island , Captain Rogers , Captain Courtney , myself , and some other officers , underwent much fatigue in fitting up the Marquis , for which ship we were forced to get entirely new masts and yards , make most of the sails , and a great deal of new cordage .
 The smith also made much new work  as did the carpenters , sail makers , riggers , and rope-makers , who all came to help us from each ship .


The 6th of August , I received my orders to command the Marquis , carrying 20 guns , 60 white men , and 16 blacks  and , the ships having taken in their loading from the prizes , and all our business being over at the island of Gorgona , we weighed anchor at 10 in the morning , and ran to the north of the island : but the masts of the Marquis being new and heavy , and a great weight of goods between decks , I found she proved crank , and sailed dull upon the wind  so that the Duke and Dutchess were fain to spare a great deal of sail for me to keep up with them .


Friday 12 .
Held a consultation about sending the Marquis and a bark laden with bale-goods directly for India , to save provisions and gain time  but this was opposed by Captain Courtney , and others , in regard to the Marquis , which being a good vessel , might be of great use in case we should meet with the Manilla ship , or the men-of-war we supposed were looking for us .


Thursday , August 18 .
At six in the morning saw a sail a-head , gave chace , and the Dutchess soon coming up with her , and firing a few guns , she struck , being a bark of about 70 tons , bound from Panama to Troxillo , with merchants goods , passengers , and blacks , on board .
The master told us , he had been detained three months at Panama by an embargo , which being taken off  upon advice that we were going to the island of Juan Fernandez , he had set sail .
Enquiring what ships were out in quest of us , the prisoners said , they had advice at Panama of five or six ships being ordered after us , two of them French , of 48 guns each , and some Spanish , of the like force , and good sailors .
They could tell no other news , than that the whole coast was alarmed .


August 19 .
The Duke and Dutchess fired some vollies to exercise their men .
Next day we fell in with land about a league to the leeward of Tacames , ran within a league of the shore , and on the 24th cast anchor in the bay , from whence the Dutchess sent her pinnace ashore for water , but could get none .
Tacames is a village of only seven houses and a church , standing in a bay , about seven leagues to the northward of Cape Francisco .
The houses are built of split bamboes , and covered with Palmeto-leaves , standing on stilts or posts  and , instead of stairs , they have a piece of timber cut in notches to ascend by .
The men employ themselves in killing wild swine with bows and arrows , and striking fish with their lances , at both which they are very dexterous .
The women have only a piece of baize tied about their middle , and carry their children at their backs .
They are under the authority of the Spanish priests , and are not permitted to trade without their licence .


On the 27th .
They received a letter of leave ,  and our boats went ashore to the houses for cattle  and on the 28th and 29th continued trading and watering till we had sufficiently supplied the ships .
In return for the civility of these Fathers , I sent as a present to the church at Tacames four large images , one of which was the Virgin Mary with our Lord and Saviour in her arms  and I believe Captain Rogers and Captain Courtney also gave something to adorn their church .
On Wednesday the 31st of August we set sail , the wind being at S. W .


Thursday , Sept 1 .
Saw abundance of water-snakes , one of which was coming up the side of our ship , and our men beat it off .
The Spaniards say , there is no cure for such as are bit by them  and one of our blacks happened to fall under that misfortune , and died , notwithstanding the utmost care was taken by our surgeons to recover him .


On Wednesday , Sept. 7 .
Made one of the Gallapagoe islands .
On the 10th , stood close in for the head-land , sending our boat on shore for water and turtle .
At night our boat came aboard , bringing 13 turtle , some weighing 200 weight  the other boats got near 50 each  and the Dutchess 's several land-turtle , but no water .
Our men saw several jars , and some of the wreck and rudder of a vessel , and should have guessed it to be the prize , Captain Hatley , lost when here before , but the rudder was too small for her .


Wednesday 14 .
The Dutchess , Marquis , and small prize , weighed , ran out , and lay by for the  Duke , which could not get out for want of wind .
On the 15th , set sail in the morning  and , considering the sun was directly over our heads , the weather was cold , occasioned , as I believe , by the southerly winds , which are coldest in those parts .


Thursday , Sept. 22 .
The Marquis kept the pump continually going , having sprung two leaks , not being well caulked at Gorgona  therefore weared her on the other tack , and stopt one leak , but could not find the other , being about the stern .
Weared again , and stood to the westward .


Friday 22 .
At a consultation on board the Duke , it was agreed to steer to the islands Marias , for a convenient place to refit , wood , and water  then to cruise in quest of the Manilla ship , which was large , and of great value , being reported by the Spaniards to be worth 2,000,000 sterling .


On the 3d of October .
Cape Corientes appeared , bearing N. E. 10 leagues  and on the 4th in the morning we made the islands called Tres Marias , at the distance of about 16 leagues  but could not fetch them till the 6th , when we got under the lee of one of them .
I lay off with the ship , and sent the boat ashore for water and turtle  but neither the one nor the other was to be got , because of the surff .


Before our coming to this place , we discovered the white rock , formerly mentioned by Dampier , and took it for a ship  on the sight of which the Dutchess let go the bark she had in tow , telling  her to make the best of her way to the middle island  under the lee of which both the Duke and Dutchess came to an anchor on the 7th and 8th  and I might have been there as soon , had I not seen the bark six or seven leagues to leeward .
It was fortunate that I came in time to relieve her , otherwise she must have perished , having neither wood nor water on board , and not being able to make up against the wind and current to reach the land .
I bore down to her , supplied her wants , and took her in tow till the 20th in the morning , when the middle island bearing north , distant about seven leagues , we saw a sail coming from the island before the wind , which proved the Dutchess , who came in search of us , and was glad to find us safe  brought us some water and turtle , and told us there was game enough in the island , if we could bear up to it .
Captain Courtney took us in tow , to help us in the sooner , having cleaned his ship 's bottom before he set sail to come to our assistance .


On the 11th , I came to an anchor , after much trouble and fatigue in plying so long against the wind and current .
Seven of Captain Rogers 's best blacks this day left him , and ran away .
We continued in this bay till


Monday the 24th , when a general council was held , at which it was resolved to cruise off Cape St. Lucas for the Manilla ship , all our ships being now very well fitted , wooded , watered , and provided with turtle .
Several warm debates happened in council among our chief officers  and ,  Captain Dover quitted the Duke , and went on board the Dutchess , by his own free choice .
I endeavoured to accommodate these differences , but to no purpose , which gave several of us great concern .


The islands of Tres Marias , where we anchored , abound with animals of various kinds , and the shores with fish  among these the sea and land turtle may be accounted of most use to navigators .
Of the sea-turtle there are various sorts  as the green , which are the sweetest and best  the hawk 's - bill , which are very good  and the logger-head , which the sailors never refuse when the others are not to be caught .
The method of taking them is by turning them , and when they are on their backs , they appear as in the Plate , fig. 1 .


The land-turtle lives constantly ashore , feeds upon grass , moves very slow , and , when an enemy approaches , covers itself under its shell , squatting close to the ground , from which it is not easily discernible , appearing like a bare patch without verdure .
The shells of these animals are so hard , that a man may tread upon them without hurting them .
Their flesh is very good and nourishing .
They will live five or six weeks without food , and appear to be never the worse .
They lay round eggs , about the size of a hen 's , and are very good to eat .
Some of the sea-turtle taken in the bay where we anchored had 200 eggs in them .
Our men lived almost wholly upon turtle , and their eggs , from the time they went first to the Gallapagoes  till their departure for the East Indies , saving their ship-provisions till their run across the South Seas .
For the land-turtle , see fig. 2 .


At these islands our men caught plenty of the fish called old wives .
They have very small mouths , large eyes , a high fin on the back , and shaped as you see fig. 3 .
The colour of the body is a deep blue  the fins of a lighter colour , tipped with yellow .
Others are of an ash colour on the back , and white under the belly .


The rock-fish we caught in the island of Tres Marias were large , had great mottled fins , yellow backs , red bellies , and red and black tails .
See fig. 4 .


Another fish our men caught was the cavallo , in shape not much unlike the dolphin , with a large bright eye , black back , white belly , a long streak from his gills to the middle of his tail , and is about the size of a mackarel .
See fig. 5 .


A small fish we found there , about six inches long , was very delicious  the back of an indigo blue , a deep yellow streak running from the gills to the tail , the belly white , and the tail forked .
It seems peculiar to these islands , and wants a name .
See fig. 6 .


Of the animals , the racoon was the most plentiful .
It has a large black eye , whiskers and nose like a pig , tail and feet like a rat , a brownish fur on his back , and a white belly .
See fig. 7 .


Of the venomous creatures , the scorpion is the most noxious  its tail is jointed with a small sting at the tip  it has two claws like those of   the lobster  and its head and feet have a near resemblance to those of the same fish .
See fig. 8 .
Among the singing-birds found in those islands , the cardinal bird was seen in greatest abundance .
It is a very beautiful bird , with scarlet feathers , and on its head the male has a tuft of the same colour .
They are of the same kind with those we call the Virginia Nightingale  but the Spaniards call them cardinal birds , from their scarlet feathers .
See fig. 9 .


Among the vegetables we found the Magney-plant , or silk-grass , of which the Indians make ropes , sails , sacks , and all their curious netting .
It also yields a liquor of which they make wine , honey , and a good balsam .
The liquor as it comes from the plant is as sweet as sugar  after standing it becomes a wine , and will intoxicate powerfully .
It has thick juicy leaves , not unlike those of the houseleek , but grows up to a considerable height in the form represented by fig. 10 .
And , when it has stood about six years , the Indians cut out the middle leaves , leaving the heart of the plant hollow , which of itself fills with the juice , and is every morning during the season taken out and preserved .
Of this juice the Spaniards make spirits  and it is so universally used in one shape or other by the Spaniards and Indians in New Spain , that the duty arising from it in one year is said to have amounted to 110,000 pieces of eight at the port of Angels alone .


 The prickly tree found on those islands is esteemed a great curiosity .
The trunk of it is angular , and covered with prickles  is of a pale green , and yields a gum which the druggists call euphorbium , which is said to be powerful in removing pains in the head .
It grows about 12 feet high , in the form represented in the plate , fig. 11 .


These were the principal peculiarities observable in the animal and vegetable tribes at the islands of Tres Marias .


On Tuesday , Oct 2 , at two in the afternoon , we weighed , and set sail for Cape St. Lucas , where we spread ourselves for fear the Manilla ship should pass by unseen .
The Duke cruised about two leagues to the southward of the Dutchess , the Dutchess in the middle , and the Marquis two leagues to the northward of her .
Place of rendezvous six or seven leagues in sight of Cape St. Lucas .


Nov. 1 .
The Marquis sprang two great leaks , and broke the collar of the fore-stay , which obliged me to wear the ship to fix the stay , and then hauled up after the other ships , and stopped the leaks .


Tuesday 2 .
All the officers and men on board the Marquis signed an instrument , obliging themselves to stand by the articles agreed to by the companies of the other ships .


Nov. 4 .
I spoke with Captain Courtney , and changed stations with him , he having better boats than mine to send ashore for water and  turtle  or , in case of seeing the Manilla ship , to prevent her sending the passengers ashore with their wealth .
The 10th , the Duke and Dutchess having spoken with each other , changed stations , the Duke going in for the shore , and the Dutchess off to the outward station .


Nov. 22 .
Captain Rogers informed me , that the bark and his boat had been in with the shore , and had spoken with the natives , who seemed very civil , and had pearl and some grain to dispose of  and that there was wood and water enough .
Nothing material happened till


Dec. 13 , when we had a consultation on board the Dutchess , to enquire into the stock of provisions on board the ships , and found by the accounts given in , that only three months meat at short allowance , and two months bread , remained unexpended  and , as there was no appearance of the Manilla ship , though the usual time of her coming was elapsed , it was agreed to make all possible dispatch in fitting up the ships , in order to make the best of our way across the Pacific Ocean , that we might take the advantage of the trade-winds to carry us to Guam on our return home .
In pursuance of this resolution , I was ordered into harbour , as the Marquis wanted more considerable repairs than either of the other two , and the Duke and Dutchess proposed to cruise a few days longer , while I was getting forward to be in readiness to accompany them to Europe .


On the 14th , I bore away for Puerto Segura ,  and on the 15th entered the harbour at midnight .


On the 16th proceeded to business , my first orders being to return again to cruise as soon as possible  but these orders were afterwards countermanded , it being absolutely necessary that all the ships should rendezvous together before their final departure from the American coast .


This place is inhabited by about 200 Indians , living in huts made of boughs of trees and reeds , built like a bower , with a fire in the middle , round which they lie and sleep .
They all go naked , only the women have short petticoats made of silk grass , or else of pelicans or deers skins .
The men are straight , and well limbed  live by fishing and hunting , and value knives , scissars , nails , or iron , beyond gold and silver .
They have long black hair , and are of a dark brown complexion .
The women are very ordinary , and employ themselves in gathering and grinding corn , and in making fishing-lines .
They are very honest and very civil .
They assisted in fitting up the ships , and took nothing away but what was given them .
Our people at their first coming got some pearls among them , but I never could see any afterwards .
I made signs for them to bring gold  but they pointed up to the mountains .
They use bows and arrows , and even the boys are so dexterous as to kill birds flying with them .


Dec. 22 .
Being busy about our repairs , at 10 in the morning heard some guns firing in the  offing : I bent my sails to hasten to the assistance of my consorts , but the sea breeze coming on rendered it impossible  whereupon I ascended an adjacent hill , and saw our ships engage and take the Manilla ship , which we had been so long expecting ,


The account Captain Rogers gives of the engagement is as follows :


`` At day-break , says he , we saw the chace upon our weather-bow about a league from us , the Dutchess a-head of her to leeward , near about half as far .
Towards six in the morning our boat came on board , having kept very near the chace all night , and received no damage  but told us the Dutchess passed by her in the night , and she fired two shot at him  but they returned none .
We had no wind , but got out eight of our ship 's oars , and rowed about an hour , when there sprung up a small breeze .
I ordered a large kettle of chocolate to be made for our ship 's company , having no spirituous liquors to give them .
Then we went to prayers  and before we had concluded , were disturbed by the enemy 's firing at us .
They had barrels hanging at each yard-arm that looked like powder-barrels , to deter us from boarding them .
About eight o'clock we began to engage her by ourselves , for the Dutchess being to leeward , and having little wind , did not come up .
The enemy fired her stern chace upon us first , which we returned with our fore-chace several times , till we came nearer , and went close on board each other .
We gave her several broadsides , plying  our small arms very briskly , which they returned as thick for a while , but did not ply their great guns with the same alacrity .
After some time , we shot a little a-head of them , lying thwart her hawse , close aboard  and plied her so warmly , that she soon struck her colours two-thirds down .
By this time the Dutchess came up , and fired about five guns , with a volley of small shot  but the enemy , having submitted , made no return .
We sent our pinnace on board , and brought the Captain with the officers away  and , having examined them , found there came another ship out from Manilla with them of larger burden , having about 40 brass guns mounted , and as many patararoes  but they told us they lost her company about three months ago , and reckoned she was got to Acapulco before this time , she sailing better than this ship .
This prize was called by the swelling name of Nostra Signiora de la Incarnacion Desengenio , Sir John Pichberty Commander .
She had 20 guns , 20 patararoes , and 193 men on board , whereof nine were killed , ten wounded , and several blown up with powder .
We engaged them about three glasses , in which time we had only myself and another man wounded .
I was shot through the left check  the bullet struck away part of my upper jaw , and several of my teeth , part of which dropt down upon the deck where I fell  and the other , an Irish landman , was slightly wounded in the hip .
They did us  no great damage in our rigging , but their shot disabled our mizzen-mast .
I was forced to write what I had to say to prevent the loss of blood , and because of the pain I suffered by speaking .


On the 23d of December , after putting our ships to rights , we stood in for the harbour , which was distant about seven leagues to the N. E .
Our surgeons went on board the prize to dress their wounded men .
About four in the afternoon we came to an anchor , and received the compliments of all on board the Marquis on our sudden and unexpected success , which gave us no small satisfaction .
We found that ship in good condition , ready to sail , and all the men on board her very brisk , and eager for action .


At eight in the evening , we held a consultation on the two great points  first , what should be done with the prisoners and hostages  and next , how we should act with regard to the other Manilla ship , which we thought at least there was a great probability of taking .


With respect to the first , we proposed , as the hostages from Guayaquil were men of honour , and as we had good reason to believe that the Chevalier Pichberty , being brother to the famous M. du Cass , was the same , to make the best terms we could with them , and set them at liberty .
Accordingly , we put a part of the goods on board the bark into the prize , and then offered the remainder with the bark , together with what remained unpaid of the ransom , for 6000 pieces of eight , and to take the Chevalier 's bills payable  at London for the money .
This they accepted , and gave us an acknowledgment at the same time , that they thought it a good bargain .
When this was settled , we had nothing more to do than to provide for our own security , and to look after the other galleon .


I was very desirous of going out with the Dutchess to cruise for her  but there having been some reflections cast , on account of the Dutchess 's not engaging our last prize so soon as it was thought she might have done , Captain Courtney was absolutely bent on going out with the Marquis  and the officers of both ships voting for this in council , my proposal was over-ruled , and we were forced to stay in the harbour against our will .
It was , however , agreed , that we should put 10 of our best hands on board the Dutchess  and on Christmas-eve she and the Marquis sail'd . ''


- We now return to Captain Cooke in the Marquis .
Sunday 25 .
At eight in the morning , being two leagues off Cape St. Lucas , we saw a sail distant about seven leagues , which we concluded to be the ship we were in pursuit of .
The Dutchess was two leagues to the westward , and we both gave chace .
At noon the enemy bore south , distant about five leagues .
At 12 at night , the Dutchess got along-side , and began to engage her .
Captain Courtney fought her bravely about four glasses , and then lay by to secure his masts , and knot his rigging , which were much wounded and shattered .
Our ship not being so  good a sailor as the Dutchess , could not come up .


Monday 26 .
As soon as it was day , we saw the Spaniard 's flag , and knew him to be the Admiral of the Manilla .
At eight we perceived the Duke coming out to us .
At two in the afternoon we got alongside the enemy  but the wind shifting , could fetch no nearer than about half musket-shot to leeward of her .
She then fired two shot at us , and we returned a broadside and vollies of small arms , beginning the combat with three cheers .
When we had fought two glasses , the Dutchess came up under her stern , and raked her fore and aft , and then fell astern again , we still continuing hot at her for five glasses : then weared , and stood to the westward , to fetch nearer up to her  for firing so many guns had laid us to leeward .
The Dutchess went up , and engaged again very briskly for half an hour , and then stretched a-head of her .
We could perceive many shot in her between wind and water .
At five we tacked , and raked her fore and aft with our starboard broadside , then weared under her stern , and did the same with our larboard broadside  and firing several vollies while we loaded our larboard guns again , gave her the other broadside .
By this time it grew dark , and we fell a stern , to speak with the Dutchess , and to get more ammunition , having but three rounds of shot for most of our guns left .
At eight I went on board the Dutchess , and found her much disabled in her masts  and rigging , and had seven men killed and wounded .
Capt Courtney and I agreed to be yard-arm and yard-arm with the enemy in the morning , he to lie on the bow , and I on the quarter  and if he boarded , I was to clap him aboard , and enter my men over him .
Being supplied with more ammunition , I returned on board the Marquis , both of us keeping close under the chace 's quarter , and firing guns all night , to annoy the enemy , and to give the Duke notice where we were .
Before day the Duke joined us .
The chace , mistaking him for her consort , had made signals all night , and had edged away to meet him , otherwise the Duke could not have come up , there being but very little wind , and that contrary .


Then we all three agreed to fall upon the enemy at once , as soon as it was light  but while we lay athwart her hawse , those guns that missed the enemy flew through the Duke 's masts and rigging , which obliged him to change his station , and to draw up along-side close aboard her , where he kept up a constant fire of round shot , all other shot proving ineffectual , because of the strength of the ship 's sides , which no other shot would penetrate  and as none of the Spaniards appeared in sight , but all kept to close quarters , it was in vain to make use of small arms , except now and then , when a man appeared to observe our situation , and to keep an eye upon their ensign .
In this manner , the Dutchess lying upon her hawse , the Duke along her broadside , and  the Marquis athwart her stern , we kept pelting her for four glasses  and , in the mean time , the Duke received a shot in his main-mast , which much disabled it  and , in shifting , both he and the Dutchess came back close under the enemy , and had like to have been all aboard her .
The Duke , in endeavouring to recover his station , received a fire ball , which lighting upon his quarter deck , blew up a chest of arms and cartouch-boxes , all loaded , and several cartridges of powder in the steerage , by which means Mr. Vanbrugh , our agent , and two others , were very much burnt  the Dutchess going to lash to the enemy , was forced to cast off , and get clear , for fear of being set on fire .
The enemy fired at us all three at once , but slowly , seldom missing our masts and rigging , and sometimes hulling us .
After lying near half an hour along the chace 's side , the Dutchess lay by to stop her leaks , and secure her fore-mast , being very much disabled , having 25 men killed and wounded , and the sails and rigging much shattered .
Captain Rogers some time after lay by to secure his mast .
Then I lay athwart the enemy 's hawse till I had fired three broadsides , some odd guns , and several vollies  then gave another broadside and some vollies into her stern .
The Duke came up again , and fired several guns , and both fell a-stern the chace , keeping under sail , and standing to the westward .
We knotted some of our rigging , and stopt our leaks made with twelve pounders .
Our main-mast was disabled also , the sails and  rigging much shattered  but the enemy , aiming to disable my masts , I had the good fortune to have only my second mate , and some others , blown up with powder .
The ship was once set on fire by the enemy 's stink-pots , but we soon put it out .
About eleven I wore the ship , and designed to have attacked the enemy again  but , seeing the Duke and Dutchess lying by , the one with a waift in his ensign , and the other with a Spanish jack , the signals to speak with one another , I brought to .
Captain Courtney came on board of me , and we both went on board the Duke  where we considered the condition the three ships were in , their masts and rigging being much damaged in a place where we could get no recruit  that if we engaged her again we could propose to do no more than what we had already done , which was evident did her no great hurt , because we could perceive few of our shot entered her sides to any purpose , and our small arms availed less , there being not a man to be seen above board  that the least thing in the world would bring the Duke 's main-mast , and likewise the Dutchess 's foremast , by the board , either of which by its fall might carry away another mast , and lay us a perfect butt for the enemy , having nothing to command our ships with  so that by his heavy guns he might either sink or take us  that , if we went to board him , we should run a great hazard in losing a great many men with little hope of success , they having above treble the number on board to oppose us , and there  being now , in all our three ships , not above 120 men fit for boarding , and those but weak , having been very short of provisions  so that , if we had boarded her , and been forced off , or left any of our men behind , the enemy by that means would have known our strength , and then gone into the harbour , and took possession of the prize in spite of all we could do to prevent it .
Besides our ammunition was very short , having only enough to engage a few glasses longer .
All this being seriously considered , and knowing the difficulty we should have to get masts , and the time and provisions we must spend before we could get them fitted , we resolved to forbear attempting her farther , since our battering her signified little , and we had not strength enough to board her  therefore , we agreed to keep her company till night , and then to lose her , and make the best of our way into the harbour to secure the prize we had already taken .
We engaged first and last about seven hours , during all which time they had on board the Duke but eleven men wounded , among whom was the Captain for the second time , who had part of his heel-bone struck out with a splinter , and all under his ancle cut above half through with the same  on board the Dutchess , they had eleven killed , and more than that number wounded  and on board us only two men scorched with gun-powder .
The enemy 's was a brave , lofty , new ship , named the Virginia , and this the first voyage she had made .
Her burden was 900 tons , and her complement  of men 450 , besides passengers , 150 of whom were European pirates , who , having now got all their wealth on board , were resolved to defend it to the last .
The gunner , who had a post at Manilla , was an expert man , and had provided for her defence with great skill .
He had filled up all the space between the guns with bales to secure the men .
We shattered her sails and rigging very much , shot away her mizzen-yard , and killed two of her men out of her tops , which was all the damage we could see done , though we could not place less than 500 shot in her hull .
Thus ended our attempt .


These large ships are built at Manilla , of excellent timber that will not splinter  and their sides are thicker and stronger than those of ships of the same burden constructed in Europe .
Had we been together at first , and boarded her , we might , perhaps , have taken her  but , after her netting and close quarters were fixed , she valued us but little .
We might , indeed , have burnt her , at the expence of one of our ships  but that was objected to , not only from a principle of humanity , but because we had goods of great value on board all our ships .


The enemy had heard at Manilla , that there were two ships fitted out at Bristol to cruise in the South Seas , and that Captain Dampier was to be their pilot  they had , therefore , provided for their own defence accordingly .
However , to do them justice , they fought gallantly  and , had the two ships been together , it is more than probable , that neither of them had been taken   but as it happened , had not our unreasonable squabbles prevented our sailing out together , the chance would have rather been in our favour : yet this miscarriage , instead of leading to a reconciliation , served only as a foundation for new disputes .


On the 1st of Jan. 1710 , we returned again into port , and determined to hasten home with all possible dispatch .
The first thing of consequence was to discharge our prisoners , and to provide for their voyage to Acapulco  and this being dispatched , we applied to the settling of our own affairs .
We spent our time till the 7th in repairing the damage our ships had received from the enemy , in taking in wood and water for our voyage to the East Indies , and in taking an account of the goods and stores on board the prize : and it was no small satisfaction to find as much bread on board the prize as with our own stock would serve us , at short allowance , during our long run to Guam .


About this time a warm contest arose about appointing a Commander of the Manilla ship , which was looked upon as a trust of no small consequence .
Captain Dover , being an owner , desired he might command in chief on board her .
Captain Rogers and several officers of the council contended , that , as Captain Dover was wholly unacquainted with the navigating part of the business , the command should be given to Captain Fry , or myself  but , as I had already the command of the Marquis , I declined any  farther charge , and voted for Captain Dover  at the same time recommending Captain Fry and Captain Stretton to act under him  against which Captain Rogers and his officers entered their protest .
However , on the 9th of January , at a full council , it was carried against them , and voted by a great majority , that the Captains Fry and Stretton should both act in equal post in the sole navigating the Batchelor Frigate ( for that was the name now given to the Manilla prize ) , and in fighting her , if occasion should require , under Captain Dover , who at the same time was restrained from interrupting them in their business , but charged to be careful of what was in the ship , and to see that nothing was acted on board contrary to the interest of the owners and captors .
The matter being thus qualified , the nominal command given to Captain Dover , and the executive power vested in the naval officers , Captain Rogers withdrew his protest , and the council proceeded to the choice of the inferior officers , appointing Alexander Selkirk master , and Joseph Smith , chief mate : they also agreed to furnish her complement of men , by selecting 30 from the Duke , 25 from the Dutchess , and 13 from the Marquis , which , with 36 Lascars taken on board her , formed a tolerable crew of more than 100 mariners .
This business being thus fully settled , and the island of Guam pitched upon as the place of rendezvous in case of separation , on the 10th of January we weighed anchor , and ran out at midnight .
 At 12 the next day Cape St. Lucas bore north , distant about five leagues .
We steered away for some days S. W. by S. till we got into the trade-winds , and then our course was uniform .


All the natives of California that we saw during our stay at Puerto Seguro did not amount to 300 .
They had large limbs , were very straight and tall , and of a much darker complexion than any other people that we had met with in the South Seas .
Their hair was long , lank , and black , and hung down upon their hips .
The men were all stark-naked  but the women had a covering about their waists made of the silk-grass already mentioned , fringed and knotted .
All of them that we saw were old , and miserably wrinkled  perhaps they concealed from us their maidens , for reasons that need not be explained .
The language of the natives was guttural , very harsh , and unpleasant .
They seemed to covet nothing that we had , except axes , saws , and knives  and even these they did not attempt to steal .
Their huts were low , and wholly made up of branches of trees  and seemed rather a kind of temporary coverings than settled dwellings .
While we lay in port they subsisted chiefly on fish  and though they neither made use of nets or lines , yet they had a method of striking them with lances that was very dexterous , and at which they were very expert .
They were besides most excellent divers , and instead of canoes made use of rafts .
They were very civil and inoffensive  and were observed to pay  great respect to one among them , whose head was adorned with feathers very artificially combined , and who probably was their wizard , or cunning man .
Some of them had strings of pearls , and party-coloured shells so prettily intermixed , that , though we had glass-beads , and other showy trinkets , yet they paid no sort of attention to any of them  but prized their own ornaments above every thing but cutting instruments .
Their arms are bows and arrows , in the use of which their boys were so expert as to shoot birds flying by way of amusement .
They grew very familiar with us while we staid , and came frequently to gaze at the men as they cut wood and filled water , but never offered to assist in any thing like labour .
They get fire like other Indians , by rubbing two sticks together , which kindle almost instantaneously .


From this harbour we departed but very slenderly provided , having but little live-stock , and hardly any liquors but what were found in the prize .
As soon as we were out of sight of land , we were all put to short allowance , officers and men : to the latter four-and-twenty ounces of flour , four pounds of meat , and two gallons of water , to a mess of five men in 24 hours .
But in a few days , the Batchelor made a signal to give us some bread , they having found a large quantity concealed , with some sweet-meats .
We had 500 weight for our share , the Duke 1000 weight , and the Dutchess as much  in return for which we sent back to the prize some casks  of flour , and a barrel of English beef  and the like present was returned from the other ships .
From this time till the 10th of March nothing remarkable happened .


On that day we made the island Saraua , one of the Ladrones , and the same evening came in sight of Guam , distant about three leagues .
Next day we came to anchor in the port of Umatta , at about a mile distance from the houses , in lat .
13 deg .
30 min .
N. by estimation  long from Cape St. Lucas , 100 deg .
19 min .
W .
We went in with French and Spanish colours , that they might not suspect us to be enemies .
Several of their boats came about our ships  but none would venture on board , till being off the anchoring-place , one was sent by the Spanish Governor , desiring to know who we were , and what we wanted .
We presently dispatched our interpreter with a letter , purporting , that we were subjects of Great Britain , and driven by necessity to stop at those islands to purchase provisions and other necessaries  that , if our wants were supplied with civility , we should pay generously  but , on the contrary , if our request was denied , we should proceed to act according to the laws of war .
To this letter we received a very obliging answer from the Spanish Governor .
Don Juan Antonio Pimental , and were furnished with hogs , oxen , rice , maize , poultry , and other necessaries in a more plentiful manner , and at a cheaper rate , than we could expect .
We continued at Guam till the 21st of  March , during which time reciprocal civilities daily passed between the officers on board and the gentlemen of the island  and we parted perfectly satisfied with each other 's behaviour .
We found the variation in these parts only half a point to the eastward , though in our run across the Great South Sea , we had it 12 degrees : the reason I take to be , the unevenness of the globe , and its unequal mixture of much matter differing in itself as to the magnetical quality  as having large and stoney mountains , spacious vallies , deep seas , long continued continents , with mighty scattered rocks of load-stone , iron mines , and other magnetical substances .


The natives of Guam are of a dark complexion , but not so black as the Indians of California .
They are in general the largest and best limbed men I ever saw , and some of them hairy , and very strong .
The women are straight and tall , and in the neighbourhood of the Spaniards go decently cloathed  but in the remote parts of the island they go quite naked .
They are said to be man-eaters , and to have no settled way of worship , but every one pays a kind of adoration to they know not what .
The island is plentifully supplied with cattle , and might be made the garden of the world , if the Spaniards were not as idle as the Indians  but as nature spontaneously produces sufficient for sustenance , they avail themselves but little of cultivation .
Of all the works of art for which the Indians are remarkable , the paroas , or boats , of this island  are certainly the most wonderful , as they exceed in swift sailing every other vessel yet seen throughout the world .
We were assured upon the best authority , that they will sail 20 leagues an hour  and the Captain of the Spanish guard said , he would lose his head if they did not perform it .


On Tuesday , March 21 , 1710 , we were under sail , and steered away W. by S. with moderate gales from the N. N. E. which continued so for some weeks  but about the middle of April the blowing weather came on , and continued till the 27th of that month , during which time most of our main-shrouds , several of our stays , most of our running-ropes , and the mizzen gears , gave way , so that the yard came by the board , and by its fall wounded the first Lieutenant , so that we feared he never would have recovered .
Most of our sails too were split  but , being supplied with new shrouds by Captain Rogers , and with other ropes by Captain Courtney , I bent new sails  but found the ship very leaky .
The Duke and Dutchess too suffered much by the tempestuous weather , and the Batchelor split her sails  but being otherwise stoutly built and rigged , nothing but running against a rock could hurt her .
I had no conception of meeting with such boisterous weather so near the Line , which proved as bad as that we encountered in surrounding Cape Horn , with this difference only , that the one was intensely cold , and the other intolerably hot .
And  being now crossed by variable winds , sometimes lying by , sometimes scudding before the wind , and unable to pursue our direct course , our provisions began to fail , and on board of us rats rose to a very high price .
The ships were besides leaky , and our men began to sicken with excessive labour and hard living .
A general council was therefore called to consider what was best to be done in our present condition , when it was agreed to make the island of Talao , that of Ternate , or , if neither of them could be reached , then to put into some part of Mindanao .


On Tuesday , May the 2d , we observed a ring about the sun , and were apprehensive of more bad weather .
In the night we passed by Talao without seeing it  and Captain Dampier , who had been twice in these seas before , gave out , that , if we could not reach Ternate , it would be impossible for us to get refreshment on the coast of New Guinea , which proved true  yet it was with the greatest difficulty the men could be prevailed upon to submit to short allowance .


Monday the 8th , having had tempestuous weather , we perceived that a strong current had set in to the eastward  and to our astonishment we found the land in sight to be Cape Noba , a promontory at the east end of Gilolo , bearing S. S. E. distant 15 leagues .
Perceiving now that we could not get to the island of Ternate , nor to that of Mindanao , we resolved to make the best of our way through the straits of Gilolo :  but , notwithstanding our utmost efforts , we continued sailing among a cluster of islands , most of them uninhabited , but all capable of producing spices , during the whole month of May , without being able to avail ourselves of any of their refreshments , On the 20th of May we came in sight of the island of Ceram , as we then thought , but afterwards found it to be the island of Bouro .


On the 25th , we came in sight of a low island right-a head of us , and about noon observed an opening , which , when we came near , we found to be a passage between two little islands that almost joined .
They were very full of green trees , and by the sea-side we beheld many groves of cocoa-nut , plantain , and other fruit-trees , that exhibited a very pleasant appearance .


In a capacious bay we likewise took notice of a little town , and saw several inhabitants passing and re-passing along the shore .
We sent in our boats for provisions and pilots , and the Duke and myself turned up towards the village , but on sounding found no ground .
The natives informed us , there was a bank opposite a certain land-mark , on which we might anchor .
Abundance of people came off with Indian wheat , cocoa nuts , yams , potatoes , papas , poultry , and several beautiful birds , which they exchanged for knives , scissars , and other toys , being very civil , and to all appearance honest .
They are Mahometans , of a middle stature , and tawney   but the women are fairer than the men , having very long , lank , black hair  their mouths , lips , and noses remarkably small .
The women were decently covered  but the men in general were naked .
These islands were named Camhava and Wanshut  but , not answering our purpose , we agreed to steer for Bonton , where we arrived on Monday the 29th of May  and , the same day , Captain Dampier , Mr. Connely , and Mr. Vanbrugh , went with a present to the King of Bonton , at the same time requesting him to supply us with provisions , and to send us a pilot to carry us to Batavia .


On the 30th , a paroa came from the King with one of his nobles on board , and a pilot to carry us into harbour .
He put on an air of importance , and asked , How we dared to come to an anchor there , without leave from the Great King of Bonton ?
However , he brought each Commander a piece of his country-cloth , a bottle of arrack , some rice in baskets , as a present from the King  as also a letter from the officers we had sent on shore , giving an account , that they had been well received , and that the town where the King resides was large , walled , fortified , and defended after the European manner with a number of heavy cannon .
Another present was returned , and five guns fired by every ship at the messenger 's going off  at which he seemed very well pleased .
Our people trafficked with the natives for poultry , maize , pompions , papas , lemons , Guinea-corn , c. and gave them in  exchange knives , scissars , old cloaths , and old nails .
The people were civil  but our officers making a longer stay than they intended , we began to suspect that the Moors had detained them  for they are very treacherous .
However , we heard from them every day  and at length the Dutchess 's pinnace came down with Lieutenant Connely , who told us , they had purchased four last of rice , which cost 600 dollars  and that Mr. Vanbrugh was detained for the payment of the money .
The next morning it came , and was equally distributed among the four ships , some great men coming to deliver it , and receive the money .
- The town of Bonton is very populous , and by it runs a fine river , but is barred so that ships of burden can not approach it .
About 50 islands are tributary to this king , who gives audience in a chair of state covered with scarlet-cloth , and is always attended by a guard of nine men , armed , after the European manner , with musquets and scymitars .
He has , besides , four or five slaves , who sit at his feet , and are ready whenever he commands to do the most servile offices .
The petty princes and great men sit on his left hand , and the strangers stand before him .


Wednesday , June the 7th , all the provisions and necessaries which this town could supply being brought on board , and the officers who went to wait upon the King , returned , the signal was given to weigh , and at four in the afternoon we set sail without a pilot , there being none to be  had on this island .
Captain Dampier pretended to be acquainted with the passage , and mentions the same in his book , but now he remembered nothing of it but the story .


On Friday the 9th , we came in sight of Solayo , lying close to the island of Celebes , and inhabited by Malayans , who are tributaries to the Dutch .
Between the south-end of Celebes and the island of Solayo , are three small low islands , and the best passage is between that which lies next to Solayo , and a little one lying to the northward of it .
It is very dangerous going to the southward of Solayo , the Dutch never daring to attempt it .


On the 10th we made prize of a country paroa , and brought the Master on board the Dutchess .
He was a Malayan belonging to Macassar , bound thither , came last from Bonton , and undertook to pilot us to Batavia for a good reward , provided we would promise to keep the matter a secret from the Dutch , to both which conditions we very readily agreed  and the man performed what he undertook with great skill and fidelity .
We passed through the straits of Salango , having always from five to seven fathom water in our passage  then steering to the westward , our pilot 's boat attended us till we were through the last strait , and then bore away towards Macassar .


On Tuesday the 20th of June , 1720 , according to our reckoning , we came to an anchor in Batavia road  but with the Dutch it was Wednesday ,  June 21  for we had lost 18 hours in going round to the westward , and they had gained six in sailing to the eastward , which made a whole day difference between our account and theirs .
The reason is , that a ship sailing to the westward , and so following the course of the sun , makes every day something longer than in any fixed station it would be .
Thus in every 15 degrees she removes to the westward from the meridian from whence she first set out , she gains an hour  in 90 degrees , six hours  and in 360 , which compose the whole circumference of the globe , she will find a whole day short in her reckoning , according to the account of the place she arrives at .
The contrary happens to the ship that sails eastward  for , as she advances against the course of the sun , she loses so much of every day , which is thereby shortened , and becomes less than 24 hours , by consequence losing an hour in every 15 degrees , and consequently will be a day before the account of the place she arrives at .
By this it appears , that the ship which sails round the world westward , loses a whole day , and that which performs the same voyage eastward gains a day .
So we having made the greater part of the circumference , and the Dutch at Batavia the other part the contrary way , our loss and their gain made up the twenty-four hours  and thus we came to differ a day .


When we came to an anchor , the Dutchess fired thirteen guns to salute the Dutch flag  but  it being night , the Commandant did not then answer  but in the morning sent his boat to make an apology , and then fired gun for gun with every ship .
Soon after this friendly salute taken on both sides , the Commanders went on shore  and , after waiting upon the Shebander , were introduced to the Governor , who received us with civility , examined our commission , and enquired much concerning the success of our voyage  but , not being King 's ships , would not permit us to heave down in the States dock at Orerest , but gave us leave to careen at the island of Hern , which is at no great distance from the other , and allowed us some Malayan caulkers to assist in stopping our leaks .


As the Marquis was in the worst condition , she was ordered to be laid down first  but upon examination she was judged unfit to proceed upon the voyage  and therefore was unladen and put up to sale .
We then hove down the Duke and Dutchess , and found their sheathing much worm-eaten  but otherwise not much damaged : the Batchelor wanted no repairs but in her rigging .
The weather was extremely hot during our stay at this city : many of our men and officers fell sick  and I was among the number .
The master of the Duke , the gunner of the Dutchess , and several of the common men , fell a sacrifice to this unfriendly climate .
One Read , a young man belonging to the Dutchess , venturing to swim , had both his legs snapt off by a shark , which at the second bite , before we  could get him on board , cut him in two in the middle , and put an end to his misery .
During our stay , though we had the run of the markets , we found it very difficult to procure salt provisions , to lay in a stock to serve us till we should arrive at the Cape of Good Hope , and therefore were obliged to purchase live cattle , and to kill and pickle them ourselves .
All manner of traffic , except for provisions , was prohibited with the natives or inhabitants of the city , upon the severest penalties , to avoid every occasion of dispute with the East-India Companies of both nations : and , having settled all our affairs in a very amicable manner , new rigged our ships , and disposed of the men belonging to the Marquis among the other ships , we began on the 15th of September to prepare for sailing , when I was appointed second Captain in the Dutchess , and Mr. Ballot , master  Capt. Pope , first Lieutenant of the Duke , and Mr. Selkirk , master  Capt. Dampier , second Captain in the Batchelor , and Mr. Knolman , master .


On the 20th we repaired on board  but before we were ready to sail , it was the 14th of October  when , about six in the morning , we weighed anchor  but in the afternoon the sea-breeze took us , and we were forced to return .


On the 19th we made sail with a fresh breeze , and at two in the afternoon came to an anchor off Java-head , when two English gentlemen came off to us , to demand the release of a man who had concealed himself , unknown to the  officers , on board the Batchelor , and who was given up without opposition .
In the mean time , while the gentlemen were in conversation with the officers , a party from the ship went off with their boat to buy fowls , for which they gave in exchange knives , toys , and other trifles , which the natives value more than money .


On the 23d the gentlemen took their leave  and the party who went off to truck for fowls having reported that there were buffaloes in abundance to be had for shooting , another party were sent off to bring some on board  but they returned without success .
They came in sight of whole herds , but so exceeding wild , that the moment they saw the appearance of a man , they all took the alarm , and fled to the woods with so much swiftness , that it was impossible to come within musket-shot of them .
One of the party , who had ventured to follow them into the woods , was surprized by a tyger , who was within less than a hundred yards of him before he thought proper to make his retreat  and was pursued by the creature so close , that , had he not reached the water , he must have been devoured .
His companions fired more than twenty shot at the tyger before he went off , which he did at last , though sorely wounded .


We staid here till the 26th , when we made sail , and about noon Java-head bore E. by N. distant about seven leagues .
From hence to the Cape of Good Hope we met with nothing remarkable  and , on the 30th of December , came  to an anchor in Table-bay , in seven fathom water .
We saluted the fort with nine guns  and they returned seven .
As soon as the ships were moored , the Captains and principal officers went ashore to pay their compliments to the Governor , by whom they were honourably received .
The place and people have been so often described already , that we shall not disgust the reader with useless repetitions .


During our stay here , we employed the time in victualling , watering , and refitting our ships , for the remaining part of our voyage home .
The Duke , commanded by Captain Rogers , had been leaky ever since her departure from California  and , notwithstanding all that could be done both at Batavia and this place , it could not be stopped  but what was remarkable , in a few days after we left the Cape , it stopt of itself .


Here we had an opportunity of writing to our owners , by means of an East-India ship just ready to sail when we arrived .
In the letter we acquainted them with our having made prize of a small Manilla ship , and of our having her in our possession  and also , that we intended to take the advantage of returning home in company with the Dutch East-India fleet , who were hourly expected , which would occasion us to tarry till the latter end of March , when it was imagined they would be ready to sail .


On February the 22d , the Dutch fleet arrived , being in all 12 sail .
We saluted the Admiral at  his coming with seven guns , as did likewise the fort .
There were at this time in the harbour 17 Dutch ships , and six English .
The town was crowded , and many of our men were ill .
Mr. Vanbrugh , the owners chief agent , died , as did Mr. Appleby , mate of the Duke , and several others .
We began to be impatient  and found it necessary to begin to furnish ourselves with provisions as early as possible , as every thing began to increase in price as the town began to fill .
The Batavia fleet was soon followed by four ships from Ceylon .
Six came from that island  but near Madagascar met with such a violent storm , that some were forced to cut away their main-masts , and throw over some of their lee-guns , having much water at the same time in their holds .
The four came into the Cape much damaged , and believed the other two had foundered at sea .
Several English Indiamen arrived also in the road  as also a Portuguese ship from Rio de Janeiro on the coast of Brasil , bound for Mezambique , to take in slaves .


At length , on April the 6th , all the homeward bound ships being ready to sail , we weighed in the morning , and sailed with a small breeze of wind at E.S.E. and by noon came to an anchor at Penguin island , the east end of the island bearing south-westerly .
At three we sailed again , being in all 25 sail of English and Dutch , all good ships , under the command of Admiral Peter de Vos .
At six the Cape of Good Hope bore S. by W. half W. distant about seven  leagues  and thus , having taken our departure , we proceeded on our voyage April the 23d , which being Sr. .
George 's - day , and the anniversary of her Majesty of Great Britain , the Duke and Dutchess saluted each other with drums , trumpets , and other formalities , in honour of the day  and in the evening the respective Captains gave an entertainment , of which all the officers on board partook .


August 3 , 1711 , we made the island of St. Helena , in lat .
16 deg .
S .
It lies 1000 miles at least from any land , and is not more than 10 leagues in length , and about eight in breadth , surrounded with rocks , and elevated above the sea by towering mountains , that look at a distance like lofty buildings rising to the clouds .
These mountains are covered with wholesome herbs and plants  and the vallies are so fruitful , that they yield an increase of whatever is sown in them an hundred-fold .
The Portuguese first discovered this little spot accidentally , as they were ranging along the coast of Africa , in order to find their way to the East-Indies .
It was then uninhabited  and , according to their custom , they set some live goats and swine on shore , which multiplied to that degree , that ever since there have been enough to supply the ships that touch at that island with seasonable refreshment .
The Dutch first inhabited , and afterwards abandoned it , and removed their settlement to the Cape of Hood Hope .
The English then took possession of it  when the Dutch , who did not  think it worth keeping before , returned , fell upon the English , and drove them out .
The Dutch in their turn were expelled by the English , who have now been long in possession , have erected a very strong fort for their security , and built a town near the little bay , where ships generally anchor in their way to and from the East Indies .
It is of infinite use in relieving the sailors from that dreadful distemper the seascurvy  for , as it naturally produces lemons , oranges , and other fruits , and as greens and roots are planted in abundance , those who are languishing under the last stage of the scurvy are frequently recovered by the use of those refreshments without any other physic .
It would be delightful living in this island , were it larger , or more frequented  but the confinement in so small a place in the middle of a vast ocean so remote from all communication with the rest of the world , renders the residence there so lonely , that it has rather the appearance of living in exile than in a land of freedom .
And indeed , what makes it still more uncomfortable , our own ships find so much better entertainment at the Cape than can be expected in this little spot , that many of them store themselves there so plentifully , and recover their sick men so effectually , as not to be under the necessity of touching at St. Helena , whereby not only the residence of the inhabitants is rendered more dull , but their means of subsistence is very much restrained  for as they have nothing to depend  upon but their traffic with the ships that call to refresh , every one that passes by without touching is a diminution of their profits : so that in fact the people have little or no encouragement to continue there , and many of them make heavy complaints .
Indeed , the surrounding sea , that abounding in fish is a considerable help , and the fertility of the soil , which is sure to reward the pains of the cultivator , exempt them from famine  but for cloaths and all other conveniences , their dependance is upon strangers .


On the first of May we took our departure from this island , and on the 7th made the island of Ascension , which is still uninhabited .
As the springs , which were discovered by Dampier , lie remote from the shore , very few ships attempt to water , or indeed stop at Ascension  some indeed , who are in want of fresh provisions , fish here for turtle , of which there are great plenty all round the coasts .


Nothing remarkable happened in the course of our voyage till May the 27th , when two of our Dutch sailors died , and were decently buried according to the custom of the sea .


About this time all the flag-ships struck their flags , the Admiral hoisted a broad pendant , and all the other ships did the same .
This was done with a view to deceive the enemy , that in case any cruisers should come in sight , they might take us for a squadron of Dutch men of-war .


On the 12th , a mutiny happened among our men  and two Dutchmen who were the ring-leaders  were whipped and put in irons .
For some days we had but little wind , being in the calm latitude , which we reckon from 22 deg .
to 28 deg .
N .


June the 13th , the Dutch Admiral made the signal tor each ship to keep the Line , and we blacked our ship to make her look the more like a Dutchman .


On the 15th , in the morning , the Admiral made the signal for all the English Commanders , and some of the Dutch skippers , to come on board him , where we were sumptuously entertained at Dinner , and the frank humour of the Dutchmen made the company jolly before we parted .


June 23 , a Dutch ship being in distress fired several guns  upon which the whole fleet shortened sail .
Her damage being soon repaired , the signal was given to continue our course , and we took the Batchelor in tow , being a heavy sailor , and forced to croud the canvass to keep company  but , it blowing hard the next day , we were forced to cast her off .


On the 26th , the Batchelor 's pinnace had her back broke , by the ship 's running over her  but the men that were in her were all miraculously saved , by means of the hawser which they were carrying from our ship to take her in tow ?
In the evening the King William Indiaman took her in tow , and next morning cast her off .


On the 28th , being got into the latitude o [ ... ] 51 deg .
N. we had thick foggy weather , with  the wind at south , which [ ... ] several days , and all the white the Adm [ ... ] [ ... ] ept firing two guns every hour , and each ship in the fleet answered with one .
This was done to keep the fleet together , and it answered the purpose very well  for when the fog dispersed , and the weather came clear , there was not one ship missing .
The Dutch convoy , however , took care afterwards to be well paid for his waste of powder .


Nothing remarkable happened till the 12th of July , when the Donnegall Indiaman lost her fore-top mast , and made the signal for the fleet to shorten sail .
Being now in near 60 deg .
N. latitude , we had no might , but cold drizzling weather  yet nothing to compare to the cold in the same latitude in going round Cape Horn southward  for there the cold was so intense that many of our men sickened  and yet we were here and at Cape Horn much about the same time of the year , allowing for the difference of the two climates .


On the 14th , we came in sight of Bera , and spoke with a Danish ship bound to Dublin , who told us the war still continued , and that he had spoke a day or two before with a Dutch squadron of 10 men of war , and three victuallers , lying off Shetland to wait for us  so that by keeping between that and Fair Island , we could not possibly miss seeing them .
Next day we came in sight of them , when all the fleet saluted the Commodore , and he made the signal for all the Commanders to come aboard of him  for failing orde [ ... ] ?
The Captains Courtney and Dover went accordingly , and were courteously received , and given to understand , that they might be supplied with whatever provisions they stood in need of , on paying for the same , he having brought victuallers from Holland for that purpose .
We lay off Shetland some days , and caught ling and cod in abundance , during which time the Shetlanders came off to us , and brought fowls and sheep , which we purchased at much cheaper rates than of our Dutch victuallers .


We were now very sickly , having been more than three months in our passage from the Cape to this place  and we were besides very peevish and quarrelsome among ourselves  now that we came near home , jealousies arose about embezzlements .
The agents had been to the Duke to demand the gold , plate , pearl , and jewels , on board  and they were returned not very well satisfied with their reception .
But , while these disputes were at their height , orders were given to set sail .
In the mean time letters were dispatched to London and Amsterdam , acquainting the owners with our progress , and present situation , and desiring their instructions to regulate our future proceedings .
Before we left Shetland we took four hogsheads of beer on board from the Dutch Commodore , which served us till we arrived on the 23d in sight of Holland , in the evening of which day we came to an anchor in the Texel road .


On the 27th , we received a general letter from  our owners , dated , Bristol , june 6th , 1711 , in which they acquainted us , that the East-India Company were incensed against us , and had appointed a secret committee to inspect their charter as to privileges  and that they were resolved to take all advantages , in case of the least infringement on what they pretended to be their exclusive right of trading to the East-Indies .
This letter likewise recommended the greatest caution on our part with regard to the Dutch East-India Company  or from that Company as well as from our own , they had reason to fear all possible obstruction .
It was therefore most strictly enjoined , that neither officer nor sailor should , on any pretence whatever , be suffered to take any goods on shore  nor were we to allow any stranger to come on board to purchase the least trifle  for that , if any such thing should be proved , the whole cargo would be forfeited .


It was a great relief to us , when , on the 5th of August , Mr. Hollidge , one of our principal owners came on board us  for , though we kept the strictest watch , it was hardly possible to prevent the sailors from running things ashore in the night .
On this gentleman 's arrival , it was judged necessary to draw up a short account of our voyage from the journals of the respective Commanders , and an affidavit was made to the truth of it .
In this memorial we set forth , that we went out as private men-of-war , and not as trading ships  and that no sort of merchandize was shipped on board our ships at any of the  islands or ports we touched at in the East Indies , nor any traffic carried on there , other than for necessaries and provisions for the ships and ships company .
To this all the officers and most of the seamen voluntarily swore and set their hands .
We continued in Holland , without any remarkable event , till the 30th of September , 1711 , when we sailed from the Texel , under convoy of her Majesty 's ships , Essex , Canterbury , Medway , and Dullidge , and anchored in the Downs on the 2d of October .
On the 13th , the Duke and Dutchess came up to Eriff , where the Batchelor had been moored some time before : and here all the ships continued till they were unloaded .
The produce of the cargo , and the treasure brought home in these ships , were supposed to amount to between 3 and 400,000 l. for , after all charges of convoy , agency , law-suits , embezzlements , of which great complaint was made , and of every kind of thievery practised in such cases , the nett profits , that were afterwards fairly divided , amounted to 170,000 l .


Among the disasters that befel the adventurers in this voyage , that of losing Mr. Hatley , with his little crew , near the islands of Gallapagoes , was most to be deplored  yet , though his death was supposed to be certain , having little or no provisions on board , and still less water , after the conclusion of the war , he returned home , to the astonishment of all who knew him .
It then appeared , that , when he parted company with the Duke , having no resource , he made directly  Figure 2 .
illegible but are Saved by a Priest .
 for the main  and , falling in with Cape Passao , his little crew almost famished , and himself in a miserable weak condition , he formed the resolution , with the consent of his people , to surrender themselves prisoners to the enemy  but , unfortunately , the enemy to whom they surrendered were not the civilized Spaniards , but a mixed breed of Indians and Mulattos , who bore an implacable hatred to all white men , from a rooted aversion to the Spanish tyranny .
These wretches used their helpless prisoners barbarously , tied their hands behind them , and lashed them to posts , where they half-fleed them with whips  and most certainly would have tortured them to death , had it not been for the interposition of their priest , to whom these half-heathen converts pay great respect .
Being , by the humanity of this good Padre , rescued out of the hands of those barbarians , and conveyed to a Spanish settlement , Mr. Hatley was received with kindness , and used with much civility  and , when peace was declared , was set at liberty , and assisted to return to his country , where he afterwards engaged in a second expedition to the same seas , and again fell into the hands of the same enemy .
We have not yet been able to learn the future proceedings of the officers who conducted this enterprize .
It is more than probable , that , having enriched themselves by the voyage , they retired and lived private .
We find , indeed , a Mr. Cooke engaged in a succeeding voyage ,  but it does not appear that it was the Captain Cooke of whose voyage we have just given an account .
Mr. Hatley , indeed , who fell into the hands of the Spaniards , was employed as second Captain under Shelvock , and of him we shall have occasion to speak largely hereafter .


2 .
THE VOYAGE OF CAPTAIN CLIPPERTON ROUND THE WORLD .


 CAPTAIN John Clipperton ( or , as some write , Clippington ) was born at Yarmouth , in the county of Norfolk  and his friends being most of them sea-faring people , he was from his infancy bred up a mariner .
His disposition naturally inclining him to ramble , he embraced every opportunity to embark in new voyages , and there was hardly a corner of the earth which he had not visited before he was thirty years of age .
When he was made choice of to take the command of the expedition of which we are now to give an account , he was esteemed , and that perhaps justly , the most experienced seaman of his time .
He had been frequently in the East and West Indies  had been in the Northern and Mediterranean Seas , and had once surrounded the whole globe .
He was that Clippington , who , in 1704 , with a bark , of only 10 tons , two masts , two square-sails , two pattararoes , and 21 men , left Captain  Dampier on the coast of Mexico  and , after insulting Rio Leon , where he took two Spanish ships at anchor , one of which was ransomed for 4000 pieces of eight , and after visiting the gulph of Salinas , where he cleaned and refitted his little bark , undertook to sail in her from that coast round half the globe  a great part of which he performed in a track never before attempted , pursuing his course in the 18th degree of north latitude , which former navigators had pursued after each other in the 13th  and , in that direction , he reached the Philippines in 54 days , without seeing land , or meeting with any cross accident to interrupt his passage .
While he was embarrassed among those islands , there came off a canoe with a friar on board , to enquire concerning so uncommon a vessel , the like of which was never seen before in those seas .
He detained the friar till his crew were furnished with fresh provisions , and then released him .


From the Philippines we steered to Pulo Condore , where he expected to have met with an English settlement  but , to his great mortification , he there learnt , that , some time before his arrival , the English had been all murdered by their Indian guards .
Upon this melancholy news , he bore away for Macao , a port in the possession of the Portuguese , near the mouth of the river Canton , in China , already frequently mentioned , and lately made famous by the arrival of some Russian adventurers from Kampschatka ,  who , by that navigation , have confirmed the reality of a north-east passage to the coasts of China .
At this Port he arrived , where Shelvock affirms that near half his crew were hanged for pirates , that the rest escaped , some to one place , and some to another  that Clipperton himself being deprived of his little boat , found means to get on board an English East Indiaman at Canton , and arrived in England in 1706 .


Clipperton was a blunt , rough , free-spoken sailor , had not much the air of a gentleman , and therefore never affected it  was free and easy among his seamen  and , though he was passionate , he was soon appeased , and , if in the wrong , ever ready to acknowledge his error , and to repair any injury his hasty temper betrayed him to commit .
He had a strict regard to what he thought his duty , and was not to be diverted from the principles of moderation , which ever inclined him to acts of mercy and humanity towards those over whom the chance of war gave him the superiority .
Having returned almost destitute from his first voyage round the world , he settled in the north of Ireland , to which retreat he was traced , after more than twelve years retirement , and persuaded to undertake this second voyage , as a means to repair his broken fortune .


The success that had attended the voyage of the Duke and Dutchess to the South Seas under the command of Captain Rogers , had revived the  spirit of privateering , which , by former miscarriages , had been reduced to a very low ebb .
Dampier , as has already been noticed , was unable , with all his skill and all his experience , to persuade the London merchants to engage in a second expedition into those seas , after having failed in the first , and was obliged to apply to Bristol to raise a new company of adventurers to second his views  but such is the nature of mankind , that emulous , not to say envious , of the success of others , they are ever ready to croud the road that has led to fortune , without considering how unfit they are to undertake the journey .
The owners of the Duke and Dutchess had been particularly careful to make choice of gentlemen , not only of ability , to conduct the voyage which proved so successful , but who also had confidence in , and friendship for , each other  and yet , with all this care and caution , it was with the greatest difficulty in the world that they were persuaded to keep together , and to act in concert .
On the contrary , the Commanders in the present expedition , were gentlemen of opposite tempers , opposite views , and already , before they set out , engaged in opposite parties  it was therefore very unlikely that two such Commanders should unite in one common interest , or that the one should share the danger where the other was to reap the glory .
The event will shew , that the miscarriage of this enterprize was not more owing to the mistakes in the voyage , than in the wrong setting out .


 The impatience of the undertakers was so great , and their confidence of making themselves rich by the plunder of the Spaniards so certain , that , unwilling to trust to an eventual rupture between Great Britain and Spain , they took occasion , from the war that then subsisted between the Emperor and Spain , to apply to the Imperial Court for a commission to carry their plan of hostilities into execution .
With this view , having equipped two stout ships , the Success and the Speedwell , it was thought necessary to find out some gentleman who had served on board the royal navy , that might take upon him the command of the expedition , and be able to act with propriety in a joint commission , wherein Flemish soldiers and English sailors were to be united in the same design .


For this difficult task no man was thought more fit than Captain George Shelvock , who had been bred from his childhood in the royal navy , had been thirty years in the service , and arrived at the rank of First Lieutenant of one of his Majesty 's ships of war , which he had borne with great reputation  was in his person and behaviour a fine gentleman , and was confessedly a very expert and able seaman .
He was , besides , of quick parts , ready speech , and very winning address , but withal rather too sensible of his own accomplishments .
This gentleman the undertakers thought themselves happy in having found  and they accordingly not only invested him with the command , but entrusted to him the  grand business of the commission , and for that purpose he received instructions to repair to Ostend with the Speedwell , and there , as soon as the commission was obtained , to take on board the complement of Flemings that were to give countenance to the undertaking  and to join the Success in the Downs , which there lay ready under the command of Capt. Mitchel .
On this occasion the names of the ships were changed  the Success was called the Prince Eugene , and the Speedwell the Starenberg , in compliment to the Prince and the Imperial Prime Minister .
Capt. Shelvock was , besides , instructed to lay in such a stock of wines and spirituous liquors , as he should judge sufficient for the use of both ships in a voyage where such refreshments would be absolutely necessary , and without which the climate of Cape Horn could hardly be endured .


In this business , however , the Captain gave some disgust .
He was either too extravagant , too ostentatious , or too remiss  and the voyage which the owners had so much at heart , was thought already to have suffered by unnecessary delay .
But , what was still worse , the Flemish soldiers , 90 in number , commanded by their own officers , had hardly arrived in the Downs before they became so insolent , that it was presently discovered , that the scheme of their acting in concert with English sailors was utterly impracticable : so that after all this delay and expence , the commission was returned , the Flemish soldiers discharged , and a new plan formed ,  which gave the first occasion to those dissentions that in the end proved the ruin of the voyage .


Captain Shelvock 's management had much lessened his credit , and his friends were unable to support his interest .
The reason for his advancement no longer existed  and it was found , that the discipline to which he had been accustomed on board the royal navy , was not the discipline to be practised on board privateers .
It was necessary , therefore , as the circumstances of things were changed , war with Spain declared , and no extraordinary accomplishment required , to look out for an officer to take the command , who had experience in the business in which he was to be employed  who knew the western coasts of America , and was acquainted with the genius of the people with whom he was to contend , as well as the tempers of those with whom he was to attack .


On this new regulation , the character of Captain Clipperton was called to mind .
He was known to some of the owners , and strongly recommended by other merchants , as of all men then living the fittest to be entrusted with the conduct of such an expedition .
The owners , who had already expended more than 15,000 l. began to consider their own interest without respect to persons  and , therefore , they sought out and invested Captain Clipperton with the chief command , continuing Captain Shelvock Commander of the Speedwell , and appointing Captain Mitchell second to Captain Clipperton , and  Captain Hatley second Captain to Shelvock .
The ships were restored to their former names , an English commission procured for the Commanders , and every thing prepared while the ships lay in the Downs for their immediate departure .


The instructions given to the respective Commanders were , in substance , the same with those given to the Commanders of the Duke and Dutchess , strongly recommending unanimity .
But this precaution proved wholly useless .
The expedition wore an unfortunate aspect from the beginning .
The ships were obliged to lie three months at Plymouth , waiting for a wind .
Factions were in the mean time formed , in which the crews as well as the Commanders were involved .
Captain Shelvock highly resented the affront that had been offered in depriving him of the chief command  and Captain Clipperton , being a boisterous man , having himself strong passions , and not having art to conceal them , knowing Captain Shelvock 's prejudices , nothing but dissention and discord prevailed .
Every post brought the owners fresh complaints  and every post carried fresh reproofs to the Commanders .
In this humour the parties continued while the ships lay at Plymouth .
At length ,


On the 13th of February , 1719 , the Success , of 36 guns , and 180 men , commanded by Captain Clipperton , and the Speedwell , of 24 guns , and 106 men , of which Captain Shelvock was Commander , sailed with a fair wind  but , by an  unaccountable over-sight , the Speedwell had on board the whole stock of wine and brandy , and the Success the greatest share of other stores .


For several days they had fresh gales , squally , with rain , and the Success was often obliged to shorten sail for the Speedwell .
Captain Shelvock tells us , that he complained to Captain Clipperton of the crankness of his ship , and desired him to send for his wine and brandy , that he might strike down some of his guns into the hold , which would enable him to sail much better than he did : but this , it seems , was neglected  a proof that Clipperton had no intention to desert the Speedwell , though it was a slight , which Shelvock could not but resent .
On the 19th , a violent storm arose , which obliged both ships to take in their top-sails .
The gale increasing , the Success made a signal for the Speedwell to bring to  which Captain Shelvock readily obeyed  and , by eleven at night , both ships were under bare poles .
On the 20th , in the afternoon , the storm abated , and Captain Clipperton made sail , steering S. by E. whereas Captain Shelvock , according to his journal , stood north west  so that from this day they never saw each other , till they met in the South Seas by mere accident .
Here then properly begins the history of Captain Clipperton 's voyage round the world .
He was now at sea without liquors , and without his consort .
The first place of rendezvous appointed by them , was the Canary Islands  and , therefore , he sailed  thither , and arrived at Gomera on the 5th of March .
Having taken in some wine and refreshments , for which he had great occasion , he continued cruising at the Canaries ten days for his consort  but , missing her here , he continued his voyage to the next place of rendezvous , at the Cape de Verd or Green islands .


The former islands , called by the ancients the Fortunate Islands , from their fertility and temperate air , were discovered by the Spaniards in 1402 , who named them the Canaries , or the Islands of Dogs , because no other creatures were found on them .
They are eight in number .
The Great Canary is the largest , is far distant from the others , and contains 9000 inhabitants .
It is the seat of the Bishop , the Inquisition , and of the Council Royal .
There is a mountain on the Teneriff , called the Pike of Teneriff , which , according to the common opinion , is the highest in the world .
It may be distinctly seen at sixty leagues distance .
It is three days journey to the top of it , which , except in the months of July and August , is always covered with snow .
Fero is one of the largest , but so dry , that there is not one drop of fresh water to be found in it , except in a few places by the sea-side : but Providence has furnished a supply to remedy that inconvenience  for there grows all over this island a sort of tree , which is pretty large , and full of leaves , that are always green , and covered with a little cloud that wets the leaves by its dew , so that a fine clear water distills from  them into little pails , which the inhabitants set to catch it .
This water falls in such quantities , that it not only abundantly supplies the necessity of the people , but it is sufficient also to water the cattle .
The Canaries in general are very fertile , and abound with wine that is transported into all parts of the world .
On the right-hand of those islands , about 100 leagues off , the mariners very often perceived an island named St. Baranora , inhabited , they say , by Christians  but no man can tell of what denomination they are , nor what language they speak .
The Spaniards have often attempted to enter it , but could never find the way  which has raised an opinion in the people , that it is an inchanted island .


On the 21st they saw St. Vincent 's , and the next morning anchored in the bay .
Here they spent ten days cruising in hopes of meeting with their consort , but in vain  which so disheartened the crew , that Capt. Clipperton found it difficult to persuade them to continue the voyage for the Straits of Magellan , without wine or brandy to keep up their spirits in that uncomfortable navigation .
Some are of opinion , that these islands were called Green Islands from the Green Cape of Africa , over-against which they lie  others , because the sea that surrounds them is so covered with a green herb , that you can hardly see the water  nor can ships sail through it , but with a stiff gale of wind .
It produces berries , much like white gooseberries   but without taste .
Nobody can tell how it grows  for there is no ground where it stoats upon the water , and it can not come from the bottom , the sea being in many places unfathomable .


On the 1st of April they left St. Vincent 's , and on the 29th of May they had an observation , and found themselves in lat .
52 deg .
15 min .
S. being then off Cape Virgin Mary , the north point of the entrance of the Straits of Magellan .
The next day they entered the Straits , and sent their pinnace on shore on the main , to a fresh-water river , which was at this time frozen up .
They saw large flocks of geese and ducks , but very shy .
The surgeon 's mate , by some accident , was left on shore  and next morning , when brought aboard , was near dead with cold .
They anchored at Queen Elizabeth 's Island , and found great plenty of smallage , which was of infinite service to those sick of the scurvy .
They eat it raw , boiled it in their soups , and kept the juice of it in bottles .
They met with plenty of wild-fowl and shell-fish , filled their casks with water , and continued their course .
On the 22d they anchored in a fine bay , which , from its depth , they called No-bottom Bay .
The trees were high , loaded with snow , and exhibited a most astonishing prospect .
On the 29th came a canoe , with four Indians .
They were of a middle stature , dark complection , their faces broad and round , low foreheads , black hair very lank and short , with no  cloathing , except a piece of skin to cover their middles .
What seemed most remarkable , was a circle round their wrists , of a bright azure .
It seems these savages are extremely jealous of their women  for , notwithstanding all that could be said to them , they would not permit a woman , who was of their party , to come on board .
Bougainville , and the English voyagers who lately passed the Straits , make the same observation .
Capt. Clipperton ordered them bread and cheese , and a dram of brandy , though it was very scarce .
The former they eat very heartily , or rather greedily  but the latter they could not be prevailed upon to taste .
They had bows and arrows , and some fishing-tackle along with them .
After about two hours stay , they rowed ashore , making signs that they would come again .
The next day the pinnace was sent ashore , and returned in the evening with the Indian canoe laden with muscles , which the Indians had exchanged for bread , knives , and other trifles .
In the beginning of the month of July they found the weather moderate .
These natives were a harmless people : one of the crew , being left on shore , lived with them two nights and a day , and was very kindly treated by them  which shews , that , if they are well used , they are not treacherous .
All this time their ship 's company were very sickly , and scarce a day passed but some one or other died .
On July 8 they buried their master-gunner .
They caused a strong plank to be driven at the head of his  grave , on which was the following inscription : ' `` Mr. William Pridham , gunner of the Success , deceased July 7 , 1719 , in this Strait , and lies buried here . '' '
On the 20th Capt. Mitchell and Lieut. Davidson went in the pinnace to Terra del Fuego , in order to make discovery of the passage that a French Tartan is said to have went through into the South Sea , May 1713 , and to see if there was any anchoring beyond Cape Quad .
On the 29th they returned , having found the passage , but so narrow , that it was judged hazardous to go that way .
They found likewise several good bays to the north-west of Cape Quad to anchor in .
The Indians brought them a seal , which they broiled and roasted , and said it eat like venison .


August 1 , they resolved to prosecute their voyage thro ' the Straits , which , with much danger and difficulty , they accomplished .
Aug. 18 , they arrived in the South Seas , but so weak , that it was impossible to undertake any thing immediately  they therefore steered directly for the island of Juan Fernandez , the third and last place of rendezvous , where they arrived Sept. 7 , and searched diligently in hopes of finding some token of the Speedwell , but to to manner of purpose .
According to his instructions , Clipperton continued to cruise a full month , and , before he took his departure , ordered an inscription to be cut on a remarkable tree fronting the landing-place  so that it was impossible for any ship 's crew to come ashore , and not see  it .
The inscription thus : ' `` CAPTAIN JOHN W. MAGEE , 1719 . '' '
This William Magee was surgeon on board the Success , was well-known to Capt. Shelvock , and all the ship 's company , and therefore his name was made choice of rather than the Captain 's , for a blind in case the inscription should be read by the Spaniards .
Here the sick were set ashore , and every means used for their recovery  but the very thoughts of being without any cordial to comfort them , dejected them excessively .
The weather was changeable  abundance of rain fell  and they had also some hard gales of wind .
They took goats in plenty , which not only served them for the present , but likewise increased their sea store , having salted a great number with salt they found on the island ready-made .
They likewise wooded and watered , and cleaned their ship , ready for action in the South-Seas , where it was now visible they were to cruise alone  for Clipperton was of opinion the Speedwell was lost  or at least he gave out so , to pacify his company , who were continually cursing Capt. Shelvock for running away with their liquors .
One thing remarkable was , the beauty and fertility of this island , added to the stories they had heard of others , tempted four of Clipperton 's men , with a view of remaining there , to betake themselves to the mountains , where two of them were made prisoners by the goat-hunters , who were forced to fire at them several times before they would surrender .


 October 7 , they prepared to sail  and , in the mean time , Captain Mitchell went on shore , to set up a cross already cut for that purpose , at the foot of which he buried a bottle , in which was contained a letter for Captain Shelvock , directing another place of rendezvous , and some proper signal to know each other by at sea .
At eight in the morning they weighed from the island of Juan Fernandez , and left their two men in possession of it , of whom more hereafter .


After leaving this island , Captain Clipperton sailed northward , till he was in the parallel of Lima , where he intended to act , though he was now in a very indifferent condition , having lost thirty men since his passing the Equator  and the remaining crew expressing some uneasiness in relation to plunder , he caused a paper to be fixed to the main-mast , which was assented to by the whole ship 's company .


On October 25 , they gave chace to a small vessel , and took her .
Being their first prize , she was an ill omen of their future success .
She was a show of 40 tons , laden with sand and rubbish for manure , had seven Indians and two negroes on board  and all the captors could find worth taking , was two jars of eggs , as much treacle , and a couple of pieces of eight in ready money .
The next day , they met with a ship called the St. Vincent , of 150 tons , laden with wood from Guiaquil , with two friars , sixteen Indians , and four negroes aboard .
On the 30th , they took a large ship called the Trinity , of 400 tons , taken  by Captain Rogers when he plundered Guiaquil ten years before .
She had a great many passengers on board , and a cargo of considerable value .


On Nov. 2 , they took another prize , of 70 tons , with the Countess of Laguna and several other passengers on board , a great deal of money , and upwards of 400 jars of wine and brandy , articles very much wanted .
Captain Clipperton desired the Countess to make her choice , either to stay on board the prize , or accept of the accommodations they were able to afford her on board the Success .
She chose the former  and the Captain sent an officer with strict orders to suffer nobody to enter her cabbin but her own domestics : he likewise appropriated a part of the wine and brandy found on board the prizes for the use of his seamen , to whom , no doubt , it was a welcome refreshment .


He had already detached several officers , and above a third part of his company , to take care of his prizes  and yet was as eager to take more , as if , instead of a privateer weakly manned , he had commanded a squadron of ships of war .
On the 12th he discovered , at some distance , a London-built pink , of 200 tons , laden with wood , named the Rosario , the Master of which being a very cunning fellow , soon saw the error that Clipperton had committed , and resolved to take advantage of it .
He guessed , by the number of prizes , that many men could not be sent on board his ship  and , having about a dozen passengers , he directed them , under the command  of a French boatswain , to hide themselves in the hold , with orders , on his making a certain signal , to seize as many of the English as came down  assuring them , that he , with the ship 's company , would be able to manage the rest .
As soon as the ship struck , Captain Clipperton sent Lieutenant Serjeantson , with eight men , to take possession of her  who , as soon as he came on board , ordered all that appeared into the great cabin , and placed a centinel at the door of it .
Thinking every thing secure , and not in the least apprehensive of danger , he with some of his men went into the hold to see what was in the ship  on which the passengers , who were concealed , sallied out , knocked most of them down , and the French boatswain , coming behind Mr. Serjeantson , knocked him down likewise , and then ordered them to be all bound .
The Spaniards in the great cabin secured the centinel  and , having thus recovered their ship , made instantly for the shore , where their own company and the prisoners were all in equal danger of perishing  which the Captain no sooner perceived , than he ordered the English to be unbound  and , by good fortune every man escaped upon the rocks , against which the Spaniard in his eagerness had run his vessel , and against which she was dashed to pieces .
Lieutenant Serjeantson and his people were secured , and sent prisoners to Lima .
The Viceroy of Peru was no sooner acquainted with this gallant action , than he ordered a new ship to be built at Guiaquil for the Captain , and  taxed the traders towards the expence of her , intending this as a reward for the service he had rendered the public , and hoping thereby to encourage others to behave as nobly .
On the arrival of the prisoners at Lima , they were closely examined  and one of them gave a full account of every thing he knew , particularly of the two men left upon the island of Juan Fernandez , and of the bottle with a letter in it  upon which , the Viceroy ordered a small vessel to be fitted out , to fetch both the one and the other , which was accordingly performed .


It was not till the 20th that Captain Clipperton perceived that his last prize was retaken  when , considering what was best to be done , he prudently determined to set his Spanish prisoners at liberty , as well to save provisions , which , at that time , he could very ill spare , as that their good usage might be speedily known , and returned to such of his men as were in the enemy 's power .


Accordingly , on the 27th , they came to an anchor with all their prizes , at the island of La Plata , and , in his way , took another prize , called the Cayetan , of 200 tons , having on board 40 negroes , and 30 Spaniards , most of them passengers .
Here the Captain began seriously to consider how he should make the most of this expedition for his owners , as well as himself , and his company .
He knew that all the coast was alarmed  and that two men of war , one of fifty , and one of thirty guns , were fitted out on purpose  to take him : he was sensible , that the goods he had on board were not likely to be ransomed in that part of the world  and that they would prove mere drugs , if brought into this  and therefore laid all these things together  and , reflecting on a proposition made by Captain Woods Rogers , to send a cargo of such prize-goods to Brazil , he resolved to try the experiment  and , accordingly , he fitted out the bark in which he took the Countess of Laguna  mounted her with eight guns  and , putting on board of her thirteen Englishmen , and ten negroes , with what provisions and other necessaries he could spare , he sent her with a cargo of European commodities , valued at 10,000 pounds , for Brazil , under the command of Captain Mitchell , his second in command .
As soon as he was gone , the Captain parted with all his other prizes , presenting them to the Spanish prisoners , after taking out of them what he thought valuable , and detaining only the Captain of one of them for his pilot , and all the negroes  after which he sailed from that island , in order to cruize in his former station .


December 12 , they saw a sail about five in the evening , and , at seven , took her .
She was called the Rosary , and laden with provisions .
The launch and pinnace were all the next day employed in bringing on board the cargo , and having got out of her as much as they could stow , they cut her main-mast by the board , lest  she should overset , and so let her go .
The prisoners informed them that the men taken by the Rosario were sent to Lima by land .
On the 27th they looked into Guanchaco bay , and found two ships at anchor .
They fired a shot at each , but they made no return .
Sending then their boats aboard , they found them abandoned , and could discover nothing left , except some bread , and a few jars of water .
They hung out a flag of truce , and fired two guns at half an hour 's interval , hoping they would have come aboard to ransom their ships .
They were answered from shore  but no boat coming , they waited till next day , and then set them on fire .


It was now resolved to bear away for refreshment to the Gallapagos islands , where they might remain unmolested till the alarm of their being in those seas should be over  and , accordingly , put their design in execution .
On January 9 , 1720 , they anchored on the north side of the Duke of York 's island , immediately under the Equinoctial , where they found good water , and cleaned their ship , which confirms the account given by Captain Cowley , though Captain Rogers could not find the place .


On the 21st of January they observed a sail , and about eleven at night came up with her  and , on firing of their first gun , she struck .
She was called the Prince Eugene , and had on board the Marquis de Villa Roche , and all his family , who were going to Lima .


On February 26th , a Spaniard dying of a  wound he had received at the taking this ship , the Marquis desired he might be buried according to their ceremonies  which was granted .
When the office for the dead had been performed , and the corpse thrown over board , with a large bag of ballast tied at his feet , the Spaniards crying thrice , as their custom is on such occasion , Bon Voiage , i. e. a good voyage , the body , to the admiration of every one , presently floated , and continued floating as far as they could see it  which the Marquis concluded to be an ill omen , and declared that some surprising accident would be the consequence .


On March 8 , a priest , who was on board the Prince Eugene , desired leave to go on shore on the island of Velas  which was granted , on his promising to persuade the inhabitants to drive some black cattle to the shore , in order to exchange them for what goods they liked best .
On the 16th , he returned with four head of black cattle , some fowls , and fruit , as a present to the Marquis  but at the same time declared , that the Governor would not suffer the inhabitants to trade .
He said , Captain Mitchell had been ashore there , and had shot some of their cattle  but that 200 men appearing under arms , they had forced him to retire .
The next day some letters from the Marquis were intercepted , very little to his honour , since they tended to stir up the people to surprise , and secure the boat when it came next ashore to water .
Upon this , Captain Clipperton confined him for some  days  yet , on the 20th , he allowed both the Marquis and his lady to go ashore , leaving their only child as an hostage .


On April 14 , the Marquis , his lady , and the Governor , came aboard  and , an agreement being made for their ransom , the lady and child were sent on shore , and the Marquis only remained as an hostage .
In this transaction Clipperton appears to have been outwitted by this nobleman , who basely broke his word , and provoked the crew for trusting him .
On April 20th , they anchored in the gulph of Amapala  and , not being able to water there , repaired to the island of Tigers , where they did it with great ease .
On June 4 , they sailed to Gorgona on the same errand , and were well supplied .
On the 24th , they made prize a second time of the St. Vincent , now commanded by Don Clement de Andrado , laden with timber and cocoa-nuts .
On August 11 , they anchored , with their prize , at the island of Lobos de la Mar , where they set up tents on the shore , scrubbed and cleaned their ship , and where the crew talked over their affairs , till they began to think them desperate .
Sometimes , they reflected on the Captain , for pretending to remain in these seas without their consort  at other times , they blamed him for giving in to the Spanish Marquis 's project for ransoming his ship , which , they believed , would never be performed : and , now-and-then , the ship 's corporal , one James Roch , a bold , busy , [ ... ] ntriguing fellow , threw in some sly insinuations ,  that , if they must go through such hardships , it was better they should do it for their own sakes , than for other peoples  and one Joseph Maynard , the boatswain 's mate , pushing things still further , a plot was at last formed for seizing the Captain , the rest of the officers , and running away with the ship .
They likewise agreed , that , when their design was brought to bear , the officers should be set on shore on the island of Lobos , and all who afterwards opposed them shot without mercy .
This wicked combination , however , was happily discovered , the two ringleaders severely punished , and the rest pardoned  by which wise conduct the conspiracy was suppressed .
On the 17th they took a fishing-boat , with a large quantity of salt-fish well cured  but found the St. Vincent , which they had left at an anchor under the island of Lobos , driven ashore , and sunk : here they put thirty-eight Spanish prisoners on board the fishing-boat , and sent them away .


Nov. 1 , they entered the bay of Conception , where , missing a prize that outsailed them , they bore away for Coquimbo , and took a ship laden with tobacco , sugar , and cloth , in their passage .
On the 6th , in the afternoon , they opened that harbour , where they saw three men of war lying , with their top-sails loose  and these no sooner spied them , than they cut their cables , and stood after them .
The Success hauled close on a wind , and the prize did the same  upon which the Spanish man of-war that sailed best gave  chace to the latter , and took her .
The other two ships crouded all the sail they could to come up with the Success , but she outsailing them , made her escape .
In the Spanish prize they lost their third Lieutenant , Mr. James Milne , and twelve of their best men .
The Captain who took him was the famous Don Blas de Lesso , Governor of Carthagena , when attacked by Admiral Vernon .
Don Blas treated his prisoner a little roughly at first , being enraged to find he had missed the English privateer , and only retaken a Spanish prize  and , in the first transport of his passion , struck Mr. Milne on the head with the flat of his sword  but , when he came to himself , he sent for him , and , finding him stripped by his soldiers , generously asked his pardon , ordered him a new suit of cloaths , and kept him for some time on board his ship .
He afterwards procured his liberty at Lima , paid or his passage to Panama , where he gave him a jar of brandy , and another of wine , for his sea-stores , put 200 pieces of eight in his pocket , and sent him to England .
This unlucky accident of losing their prize revived the ill humours among Clipperton 's men , who did not indeed plot again , but became exceedingly dejected .
On the 16th they saw another sail , and gave chace , which , after a few guns fired on both sides , bore away , being a clean ship , and left them , which proved a lucky escape  for this was likewise a ship of force , fitted out to take Capt. Shelvock , and commanded by one Fitzgerald ,  who , knowing this was not Shelvock 's ship , and doubting what strength she might be of , had no great stomach to engage her .
These repeated disappointments , as they broke the spirits of his crew , so they had a very bad effect on Capt. Clipperton himself , who began now to betake himself to drinking  and , as this vice generally grows upon people under misfortunes , he drank at last to such an excess , that he was hardly ever quite cool or sober .
It was chiefly owing to this unhappy practice , that he fell into many errors in his future conduct .
They were now in want of provisions , and they resolved to continue cruising to the north , to seek a supply .
In this cruise they had but indifferent success  and , therefore , on the 27th , they set ashore their Spanish prisoners , and then determined to go once more to the Gallapagos in order to refresh .
In their passage to these islands , they began to suspect some error in their log-line  and , upon measuring , found it three fathoms too short .


On the 4th of December , they lost their purser  and the same day found themselves very near the Gallapagos islands , but could find no anchoring-place , nor any fresh-water , though they had found a fine road on their first visit , which gave Shelvock occasion to charge Clipperton with want of skill  they therefore made the best way they could to the Isle of Cocoas , where they hoped certainly to get some fish , fowl , and cocoa-nuts , most of their people being very sick  and weak .
On the 17th in the morning they came in sight of it , which filled them with inexpressible joy .
On the 18th , all that could be spared went on shore to build a kind of booth for the reception of their sick , who were all conveniently lodged .
The Captain opened here the last cask of brandy for the use of the ship 's company , and gave every man a dram a day  and , on New-Year 's - day , he allowed a gallon of strong beer to every mess  and , by having here plenty of nourishing food and much ease , the crew began to recover , and were able to wood and water , though with much difficulty .


On the 17th of January , 1721 , the Captain made the necessary dispositions for sailing  but , when they came to muster the men , there were no less than eleven missing , three Englishmen , and eight negroes , who chose rather to remain in this unfrequented island , than continue exposed to dangers and fatigues on board , and to their living constantly at short allowance .


On the 25th , they arrived on the coast of Mexico , where , discovering a sail , they sent their pinnace to give her chace  to whom she instantly struck .
She proved to be Jesu Maria , commanded by Capt. Shelvock  and the account he gave was , That he had no more than forty men alive , the rest being all dead , or dispersed  that he had lost the Speedwell at Juan Fernandez , where they built a bark out of the wreck  that they had coasted along Chili and Peru , till they came to Pisco , near Lima , where they took  this prize  that they had no regular command among them  that they had chosen a quartermaster , carrying every thing by a majority of votes  and that they had quite broken their articles with their owners , and had shared all among themselves .


On the 27th , Captain Shelvock came aboard , being sent for by Captain Clipperton and the agent , to give an account of his transactions .
The boat brought Mr. Dod , Lieutenant of marines , having been used very ill for his attachment to the owners  at least so he asserted , and was firmly believed by Captain Clipperton , and his officers .
The next day Captain Shelvock sent on board them six chests of pitch and dammer , and two barrels of tar , with six slabs of copper : Captain Clipperton spared him twenty-four quarter-deck guns , some great shot , a compass , and a few other necessaries : his people purchased cloaths , shoes , hats , and other necessaries  and Mr. Hendric the purser , and Mr. Dod , continued in the Success , designing never more to sail with Shelvock .


In the beginning of March , both time and place favouring , they determined to attempt the Manilla ship , before she entered Acapulco .


On the 13th , they again met Captain Shelvock , and , at a general consultation , agreed to make the attempt jointly .
But , previous to the signing this agreement , it was proposed by Captain Clipperton to form a joint stock , to bury all former miscarriages in oblivion , and again to  act in concert for the good of the owners .
This proposition was rejected by Captain Shelvock and his people , who did not care to part with what they possessed  upon which Captain Clipperton and his company , perceiving there was nothing to be expected from their consort , and that they were too weak of themselves to effect their purpose , determined to sail directly to the East-Indies , and instantly put their resolution in execution , without waiting for or consulting Captain Shelvock .


The run from the coast of Mexico to the island of Guam , they performed in fifty-three days  and , May the 13th , anchored in the road of Umatta , - from whence they sent their pinnace ashore , with a flag of truce , in order to obtain some provisions , which met at first with a favourable reception , being told that , if they behaved civilly , and paid honestly , they should be furnished with what the island could afford .
Soon after the launch arrived , and brought on board some cattle , bread , sugar , greens , palm-wine , and brandy , from the Governor , with a large quantity of chocolate .
In return for which , his health was drank by the whole ship 's crew , under a salvo of seven guns : this was the last act of civility that passed between them .


On the 18th of May , their prisoner , the Marquis de Ville Roche , went ashore , in company with the agent , the first lieutenant and doctor , having previously agreed with the Governor about his ransom .
Our launch was employed  six days in bringing wood , water , and provision aboard  during which time , the Governor desired he might have some arms and ammunition in exchange : accordingly Captain Clipperton sent him twelve fuzees , three jars of powder , sixty round shot , four pair of pistols , besides cutlasses , long swords , and daggers .
The 25th , they received a letter , in which the Governor demanded the Marquis 's jewels , some consecrated plate , and two negroes , being Christians , and subjects to the King of Spain  as also a certificate , under the Captain and officers hands , that peace was proclaimed , detaining Mr. Godfrey and Mr. Pritty till all this was performed .
The Captain returned for answer , that the Solidad , the last prize taken on the coast of Chili , declared there was peace between England and Spain  but , withal , assured the Governor , that , if he did not , in twenty-four hours , send the ransom with the two gentlemen , he would demolish the houses upon the shore , burn the ship in the harbour , and do all the mischief he could at the Philippine islands .


After this declaration , hostilities commenced on both sides .
The people on shore had raised a battery from whence they fired at the pinnace .
The ship ran a-ground between two fires , one from the battery over their heads , and another from the ship in the harbour .
In endeavouring to get their ship off , they ran foul of the rocks .
The enemy fired so warmly with stones and shot , that they suffered extremely in their hull and  Figure 3 .
The distrest Situation of the Success between the fire of the Spanish Fort at Umata  the Ship in the harbour herself at the Same time Wedged on a Rock  rigging .
They had three men wounded , besides the misfortune of losing Mr. Davidson , their first Lieutenant , who was an honest man , and a good officer .
In this emergency , the Captain being overcome with liquor , the officers signed a paper indemnifying Mr. Cook for taking upon him the command .
They cleared away the hold , ready to start their water , to make the ship lighter  and got their upper and lower-deck guns forward , to bring her by the head , the ship hanging abaft on the rock .


During the last twenty-four hours , they had happily only one man wounded  but the ship was wretchedly torn and mangled between wind and water .
The 30th , at six in the afternoon , the ship floating , they cut away the yawl , she being sunk with the shot  the other boats were much damaged  they hove to their small bower , then cut it away , and the other two hawsers , and sent their pinnace a-head , to tow the ship off .
Just as they got afloat , the enemy fired so smartly from the new battery , that their shot raked them through between wind and water , killing one of their people , and wounding two others .
They lost both their bow-anchors and cables , the stern and kedge anchors , four hawsers , four of their lower-deck guns , and nineteen barrels of powder , two men killed , and six wounded , having stood for no less than fifty hours a fair mark for the enemy to fire at  and , if they had not got clear , it was believed they would have been sunk before  morning .
At ten in the forenoon they brought to , and began to splice their rigging , not a rope of which escaped a shot .
Their carpenters were employed in fixing the masts and yards , and the rest of their people in fixing the rigging .
At six in the afternoon they took their departure , leaving Mr. Godfrey and Mr. Pritty in the hands of the enemy .
This was certainly one of the worst errors committed by Clipperton  for he should never have quitted the Marquis , without having the ransom in his hands .


On the 24th of June , they were in sight of the Bashee Islands  and , on the last day of the month , they saw the island-shoals of Prata .


On the 1st of July , they fell in with other islands , and passed several boats that were fishing , though no such islands are laid down in any chart .
They anchored under one of these islands , and dispatched their pinnace for intelligence  but not being able to learn their course to Macao , nor to get a pilot , they determined to sail for Amoy  before which port they arrived on the 5th in the evening , but were afraid to enter it in the night , and therefore plied off and on till day-light .
They took notice of a great number of snakes in the sea , which were brought down by the rivers that empty themselves on that coast .
In the evening of the 6th of July , they entered the port , and were well pleased to find themselves once more in a place where they might hope to obtain refreshments , and to be able to repair the [ ... ] r ship  but they were no sooner anchored in  this port , than they had 10 custom-house officers put on board them .
The first thing these custom-house officers demanded was , what the ship was reputed to be , and what business she had there .
Captain Clipperton answered , the ship belonged to the King of Great Britain , and that she put in there by stress of weather , in order to obtain provisions and necessaries .
Next morning , the men mutinied , and insisted on being immediately paid their prize-money .
Mr. Taylor , to whom we are indebted for this account , interposing , one Edward Boreman told him , he had best desist , unless he had a mind to have a brace of balls through his head .
Mr. Cook , who commanded in the affair of Guam , and who succeeded Mr. Davidson as First Lieutenant , now demanded thirty shares , in right of his office  in which he was supported by the men .
Captain Clipperton , and the rest of the officers , seeing the turn things were likely to take , were very desirous , that some allowance should be made to the officers that were taken prisoners , and to Mr. Hendry and Mr. Dod , who joined them from the Speedwell : but the men would hear of no such allowances .
Whilst these disputes lasted , some took it into their heads to go ashore , without asking leave  and , when Captain Clipperton would have corrected them , the whole company declared on their side , and prevented it .
After this , all things fell into confusion : the men refused to work till they had their prize-money  and , upon complaint , a guard of  soldiers was sent on board , with a peremptory order from the Mandarin to Captain Clipperton to comply .


On September 16 , the distribution was made  and no allowance being reserved for such as were taken prisoners , the representatives of those who were dead , or the two gentlemen who had served on board the Speedwell , the prize-money of a fore-mast-man was 419 dollars .
According to this distribution , the owners share in ready money , wrought silver , gold , and jewels , amounted to between 6 and 7000 l. sterling , which Captain Clipperton caused to be immediately put on board a Portuguese East-Indiaman , called the Queen of Angels , Don Francisco la Vero Commander , which ship was unfortunately burnt at Rio Janeiro , on the coast of Brasil , June 6 , 1722 .
So that of these effects the owners received no more , the charges of salvage deducted , than 1800 .


On September 30 , they weighed anchor from the bay of Amoy , which lies in the province of Tonkin , after having paid , under the article of port charges , the most exorbitant sum of 1700 dollars  and then proceeded to Macao , in the road of which they anchored , Oct. 4 .
As soon as Capt. Clipperton entered the port , he saluted the fortress  which compliment being returned , he went on shore , and found there the Captain of the Portuguese man-of-war , who had undertaken to carry what belonged to the owners to Brasil .
The mutinous crew found themselves at a loss  here , the Portuguese Captain declaring absolutely in favour of their Commander  and , therefore , Captain Cook , and another officer , took passage to Canton , to consult Mr. Winder , supercargo to an East-Indiaman , and son to one of the principal proprietors , as to the measures which should be taken about carrying the Success home  and , upon their return , the ship was surveyed , condemned , and sold for 4000 dollars : but Capt. Clipperton , to shew his opinion of her , agreed with the persons who bought her , for his passage in her to Batavia  a plain indication , that there was no danger of her foundering at sea .
The ship being sold , every man thought himself at liberty to shift as well as he could , and to use his best endeavour to save what little was left him .
They were , by this time , satisfied , that Captain Mitchell , his crew , and cargo , were all gone to the bottom , or else fallen into the hands of the Spaniards  which was to them pretty much the same thing  and , therefore , what they had now in possession was all they had to expect .
Twenty of them , however , who had agreed to give six dollars a-piece for a passage in a Chinese vessel to Canton , were taken by a pirate , and most of them lost all their effects .
After a short stay at Macao , Mr. Taylor , the chief mate , got safe to Canton in an armed boat , for which he , and the rest of the English seamen that staid with him , paid 20 dollars a-head : and when they arrived , they were well received , and promised all imaginable assistance towards  getting home .
There were , at this time , several ships there ready to sail .
The Captains of these vessels being solicited by the factory to take Captain Clipperton 's men on board , they met , and agreed to carry them to Great Britain for five pounds a man  and accordingly they all paid their money .
Mr. Taylor arrived safely at Batavia in the month of December , sailed from thence to the Cape of Good Hope in February , came to St. Helena in March , and , in May 1722 , arrived in London .
The rest of the ship 's company returned , some sooner , some later , as opportunities offered  but , as for Capt. Mitchell , who was sent to Brasil with a small crew , he was never heard of , and most probably was destroyed on the island of Velas , where he went ashore for the sake of getting fresh provisions .


Captain Clipperton sailed in the Success , after she was sold , as a passenger , from Macao to Batavia  from whence he procured a passage home in a Dutch East-India ship , and arrived , in the beginning of July , 1722 , at Galway , in Ireland , where he died in less than a week of a broken heart .


Thus ended the unfortunate voyage of Captain Clipperton  that of Captain Shelvock remains to be related .


3 .
THE VOYAGE OF CAPTAIN SHELVOCK ROUND THE WORLD .


 WE have already given an account , in the introduction to the preceding voyage , of the motives that influenced the owners to undertake it , and of the difficulties and discouragements that attended the first setting out .
It remains now only to relate the proceedings of Captain Shelvock , the second in command , who has himself been very circumstantial in laying before the public the following particulars .


On the 13th of February , 1719 , we sailed from Plymouth , in company with the Success , of 36 guns , Captain John Clipperton , who , in consideration of his knowledge of the coasts and customs of Chili , Peru , and Mexico , was to act as chief of the expedition .


On the 15th , I came under his lee , complained of the crankness of my ship , and desired him to send for his wine and brandy , which he neglecting , lost his sea stock of liquors  for we never saw any thing of each other till about two years afterwards .


 Thursday 19 , a storm arose , and about midnight a sea drove in our quarter and one of our stern dead lights .
For a considerable time we were under apprehensions of foundering  a succession of prodigious seas drove over us  and in this melancholy state , the chain pump was the only means of our deliverance .


February 20 , we had no sight of the Success , and at midnight set the top-sails and stood to the north-westward .


This storm so terrified my ship 's company , that no less than 70 of them were resolved upon bearing away for England , there to make complaint against the ship .
But , on the 23d , perceiving their discontent , I ordered them all on deck , and used what arguments with them I was master of , to encourage them to proceed  but all I could say was but to little purpose .
They continued in their resolution to clap the helm a weather  and grew to that height of insolence at last , that I was obliged to call upon my officers to assist in bringing the mutineers to reason .
For this end most of them appeared armed  and the sight of this so startled the ringleaders , that they very submissively begged I would forgive them  as I did , upon promise for the future to behave as became them .
After this , seeing them inclined to be tractable , I ordered them some brandy , and they drank to our prosperous voyage .
But the very next evening , Simon Hatley , my second Captain , had like to have thrown every thing into confusion , by telling me upon deck , before  most of the ship 's company , that he had private orders from one of the chief of the gentlemen adventurers , and Captain Clipperton , to take the charge of the ship upon himself .
I asked him , if he had a private commission too ?
but to this he returned nothing but expressions of contempt .
This unseamanlike behaviour , immediately after my separation from my consort , laid me under a necessity of behaving with all possible circumspection , to prevent our being divided into parties , which would infallibly frustrate the ends of our expedition .


We had a very tedious passage to our first place of rendezvous , the Canary Islands  and did not arrive there till the 17th of March , where having finished our cruise without any thing remarkable , except taking an open boat with salt , and wine , hearing nothing of the Success , on March the 29th , we took our departure from the island of Ferro , in hopes of meeting with Captain Clipperton among the islands of Cape de Verd , and we took our prize along with us .
But in our passage , my people began again to murmur  and one Turner Stevens , my gunner , very gravely made a proposal to me , in the hearing of all the other officers , to go a cruising in the Red Sea  for , said he , there can be no harm in robbing those Mahometans  but , as for the poor Spaniards , continued he , they are good Christians , and it would , doubtless , be a sin to injure them .
Upon this , I ordered him under confinement  and the man , after that , having threatened , in a  very outrageous manner , to blow up the ship , I , at his own request , discharged him as soon as we arrived , together with my chief mate , who had likewise been guilty of many and great misdemeanors .


On the 14th of April , we made the Isle of May  and , running along shore , saw a wreck , which we were told was the Vanzittern Indiaman , Captain Hide , who three weeks before had been cast away .
I endeavoured to avail myself of this accident , to supply the necessaries we stood in need of  but could procure nothing but two or three sheathing-boards .
At this place I sold our prize for 150 dollars to the Governor  and filled all our water casks , and gave my ship a very good heel .
Six of my people having deserted , I applied in vain to the officer on shore to deliver them up to me  but , threatening the Master of a Portuguese ship to make reprisals , he brought me off two of them , which happened to be the best .
They fell on their knees , and asked pardon , assuring me the Commander on shore had seduced them , his design being to send the bark I sold him on the Vanzittern 's wreck , where he said they might all make their fortunes  so I lost the other four .


Finding I could neither hear of the Success , nor get what might be serviceable to us in this place , and having read in Frezier 's voyage , that in the island of St. Catherine 's , on the coast of Brasil , in latitude 27 deg .
30 min .
S. every thing might be had that we stood in need of , I  concluded it would be best for me to put in there .


April 20 , we sailed from the Isle of May , having wrenched the drum-head of our capstane in weighing anchor , which took us up the remainder of the day to repair .
We were 55 days in going to St. Catherine 's , during which little remarkable happened  except that on June the 5th we saw a ship stemming with us , and spoke with her .
I ordered the five-oar'd boat to be hoisted out , and sent Captain Hatley in her , to enquire after news , and gave him money to buy us tobacco .
The Success , amongst other things , had got our stock of tobacco , and had made what the seamen call a west-country famine on board of us .
When Hatley returned , he told me she was a Portuguese from Rio Janeiro , and bound to Fernambuco .
Instead of tobacco , which he said the ship had none to dispose of , he had laid out my money in china ware , sweet-meats , and the like  and , upon my expressing my dissatisfaction at his having squandered away my money in so silly a manner , his answer was , that he had laid out his own in the same manner .
My reply was , I did not like his proceedings .


On Friday , June 19 , we made the island of St. Catherine 's  and at ten the next morning anchored in ten fathom water , the island of Gall bearing E. N. E. distant two leagues , and the eastermost point of St. Catherine 's E. and by S. distant four leagues .
The first thing I did , was to send the carpenter on shore , with all the  people that could be useful to him in felling of trees , and sawing them into plank , and to order the cooper and his crew to trim the casks , and fill them with water .
Those who remained on board , I employed in different services .
Mean while the inhabitants came off to us every day with the product of the place , which we purchased with salt .


On July 2 , we were alarmed , at break of day , by the appearance of a large ship at anchor four or five miles below the place where we lay .
I sent an officer in the launch , well manned and armed , to see what he could make of her , and put my ship into the best posture of defence I could .
About noon my launch returned , and brought word that this ship was the Ruby , formerly an English man-of-war , and now one of M. Martinet 's squadron  that she came from the South Seas , and was commanded by M. la Jonquiere  that he , his officers , and seamen , to the number of 420 , were all French  and tho ' in the Spanish service , they had not the least design to molest us .
My Lieutenant became thus punctually informed , by a direct breach of orders in going aboard , and his temerity might have cost me very dear  for , had they been enemies , I should have lost 23 of my best hands  but their return confirmed the truth of his story : yet it was a great misfortune , that I had not , to the best of my knowledge , one man of experience or capacity sufficient to enable him to perform the common duty of an officer .


 The next day , the Ruby turned up towards us , and the Captain sent one of his lieutenants and a priest , to assure me of his friendship , and to desire I would dine with him , which I did , and met with a very handsome reception , with offers of what money I would have upon my bills on London , or in general any thing else his ship afforded .
He informed me that the Spaniards in the South Seas had advice of our two ships , and that they talked of fitting out some men of war to receive us .


About this time there was a report spread , that Hatley had taken a bribe of the Master of the Portuguese we met on the 5th of June , or had robbed him of 80 or 100 moidores , had given ten to his cockswain , and six to each of his boat 's crew , not to divulge it .
I charged him with what had been said against him  his answer was , He had done nothing he was ashamed of , or that he could not justify .
All I could do was to protest against him , and I gave the protest to Captain Clipperton in the South Seas .


July 6 , M. la Jonquiere , accompanied by several of his officers and passengers , came to dine with me  but in the midst of our entertainment , my boatswain took it into his head to create a disturbance , because he had not been invited into the cabbin as a guest .
He first assaulted Betagh the Captain of marines , and then Mr. Adams the surgeon .
This outrage , which was supported by a party he had formed , being , by the help of my officers and the French  gentlemen , pretty well quieted , M. la Jonquiere declared , that , if they persisted in their disobedience , he would see the ringleaders punished by carrying them home in irons  and as they grew a little quieter , he expostulated with them , and appealed to themselves , whether they did not think it monstrous for people to behave themselves in such a manner .


The next morning I was informed , that the authors of the disturbance were most of them sorry for what had happened the night before , attributing the whole blame to the boatswain , and the effect of too much liquor .
I was glad to hear this , and therefore passed it all over with only threatening how I would manage them , if ever they were guilty of the like again .
I had resolved to punish the boatswain in the severest manner  but I was prevailed on not to do it , he , in very humble plight , asking my pardon , and begging I would not use any severity towards him .
He said it was drink that had made him mad , and withal desired I would give him leave to go home in the French ship .
This I willingly agreed to , he being a very odd sort of a fellow , and always incensing the people against the number of officers , whom he termed Bloodsuckers .


July 15 , we saw a great ship plying into the harbour 's mouth  but when she discovered us , she made the best of her way out again .
This possessed M. la Jonquiere with a notion of her being our consort , and put him into a hurry to  be gone .
Accordingly , when night came on , he weighed , and went to sea the next morning , and at his departure saluted me with five guns .
Three Frenchmen , belonging to me , went away with him  but I had two Frenchmen , and one Morphew , an Irishman , in lieu of them .


During all this , our carpenter went on but slowly in the woods  and at last , when we came to case the stern all over with thick plank , we could find , to my great astonishment , no nails fit for that use .
I was now told , that the first carpenter , and his crew , had sold most of the stores before the ship came to Plymouth , which was before I commanded her .


July 25 , a large ship came in , called the Wise Solomon , of St. Malo 's of 40 guns , and about 160 men , commanded by M. Dumain Girard , and bound to the coasts of Chili and Peru to trade .
She was the same ship we saw coming in before , and had spoke with the Ruby at sea .
This gentleman , I soon perceived , notwithstanding a little forced civility at his first arrival , was a designing mercenary man , and full of all the conceit and vanity ascribed to his nation .


Desiring him to spare me some nails , he readily answered he would  but , at the same time , gave me to understand that he could not afford them for less than 32 dollars a hundred , which sum I was fain to give him  I likewise bought of him 60 cheeses , and 300 weight of butter  so that it happened well for me , that I had some money from one of the Ruby 's people .
This  done , I now thought of making a quick dispatch from this place , when there came a letter from my ship 's company to me , with articles annexed to it for the immediate division of prize-money , which they said they were resolved to insist on , alledging that they knew by woeful experience how they were used on board the Duke and Dutchess , that they were never paid one tenth of their due , and that they had been well informed what a paymaster a certain gentleman would make , if ever their fortunes should fall into his hands .
They were so very importunate with me to comply with their articles , that both myself , and all my chief officers , thought it would be best and most adviseable to sign their papers with them , rather than run the risque of their proceeding , when they should get out to sea , to acts of piracy .
As soon as they had gained their point , they expressed great satisfaction , and promised to be always ready to hazard their lives in any undertaking I should think conducive to the ends we were fitted out for .


August 3 , there came in here the St. Francisco Xavier , a Portuguese man-of-war , of 40 guns , and 300 men , from Lisbon , bound to Macao in China , commanded by Captain la Riviere , a Frenchman .
I made no doubt but that Captain Hatley 's affair would be reported to this gentleman , and , therefore , I told Hatley , that I expected he would go and vindicate himself to the Portuguese Captain , to prevent any disturbances  that might arise on his account .
To which he readily replied he would .


Hatley , at his return , told me , the Captain seemed to be angry with him for thinking he could harbour any ill thought of a gentleman bound on a voyage , which , to his knowledge , could hardly fail of answering the largest expectations .


August 6 , three of my men deserted , and the mate and his party went up to the Portuguese plantations in search of them .
It being almost midnight , the inhabitants took the alarm , and planted themselves in ambuscade to destroy them as they came back .
No sooner had they returned into the boat , than they heard them rushing out of the woods , crying , ' `` Kill the dogs , kill all the English dogs . '' '
This outery was instantly followed by a volley of small arms , which wounded three of my men , two through the thigh , and another through the arm .


I sent a letter of complaint , by Hatley , to the Captain of the Portuguese man-of-war in the harbour : but Hatley , at his entrance into the ship , was furiously assaulted by Emanuel Mansa ( the Captain of the island ) , crying out , This was the man who had committed so many insolencies towards them , and that this was he who had burnt one of their houses , and had made it a common practice to abuse and affront him with the opprobrious name of cuckold .
Upon this exclamation , the ship 's company sided with Mansa , and fell upon Hatley , and would certainly have used both him and his boat 's crew very severely ,  had not the Captain and his officers , with much difficulty , prevented it  for the Portuguese seamen were exasperated to that degree , that it is more than likely they would have murdered him , had they not been timely hindered .


The Captain , in his answer to my letter , expressed his sorrow for what had happened , said the people were without law , and that it was out of his power to punish them  that they were wild and lurked in the woods  and that in seeking revenge , it would only expose my men to butchery .
He asked my pardon for the ill usage my officer had met with on board his ship  but withal gave me to understand , there could be no greater provocation to the people of that nation , than that which Hatley was accused of by Mansa .
That his ship 's company had got Hatley amongst them before he knew any thing of the matter , and that he was obliged to call his priest to his assistance , before he could get him out of their hands , and in a very handsome manner touched upon Hatley 's story .
I made no long stay after this disaster , but took our departure from the northernmost point of St. Catherine 's on the 9th of August  and on the 19th , Mr. La Port , my third Lieutenant , broke his leg .


From the time we left St. Catherine 's , till now , we had for the most part squally weather .
As we advanced to the southward , my people 's stomachs increased with the sharpness of the air to that degree , that the allowance which the government gives in the navy was not sufficient to  satisfy their hunger .
Some of my officers , in particular Mr. Betagh , my Captain of marines , who had been formerly a purser of a man-of-war , and a man whom I had a great regard for , was the champion for an addition of allowance at my table  for he told me he had orders from the adventurers to eat with me  and what was my table , if I did not eat better than the cook ?
He did not stop here , but urged by his intemperance , and finding me unwilling to squander away our provisions , without knowing when or where we might get any more , he at length had the insosence to tell me publicly , that the voyage should be short with me , which he often repeated .
I should have had reason to fear it , had he been capable of commanding  but , for his punishment , I excluded him both from my mess and the great cabbin .
Upon this , finding I was in earnest with him , and fearing some heavier punishment , he sent me a letter , asking my pardon for what he had done  upon which I again restored him in a handsomer manner than he afterwards deserved , as will appear by the sequel .


Between St. Catherine 's and the river of Plate , the whales , grampusses , and other fish of monstrous bulk , are in such numbers , that I can not see why a trade for blubber might not be carried on here .
I may venture to affirm , it is a safer navigation than that carried on to the northward , and I am apt to believe here is a greater certainty of success in making up a cargo .


Sept 19 , about midnight I perceived the water to be discoloured all at once , and upon heaving  the lead , we found ourselves in 26 fathom water  this done , I stood off again to sea , but we did not deepen our water in the running of five leagues .
This seems to be a bank very near the entrance of the straits of Magellan .
I had a fine opportunity of going through these straits : but Captain Clipperton in his plan pretended , out of the abundance of his judgment and experience , that the straits of Le Mair would be the best navigation for us , though he himself passed through the straits of Magellan .
From this I might have conjectured , that he , who never was fond of having a consort with him , designed to make use of this as a likely expedient to separate himself  for he was a man that would do any thing , though ever so dishonest or inhuman  - [ a reflection , however , that carries more of malice than of truth on the face of it . ]


Sept. [ ... ] , the fog clearing up , we had a full , but melancholy prospect , of the most desolate country that can be conceived , seeming no other than continued ridges and chains of mountains , one within another , perpetually buried in snow .
Towards noon we were becalmed within three [ ... ] gues of the mountains called the Three Brothers , so named from their equal height , near resemblance , and proximity to one another .
Till now , we had not been sensible of any helps or hindrances by currents  but this afternoon we were hurried with incredible rapidity into the straits , and just as we had gained somewhat more than the mid-passage , the northern tide came rushing  upon us with a violence equal to that of the tide which had brought us in , and , to our great astonishment , drove us out of the straits again at a great and extraordinary rate , notwithstanding we had a fresh and fair gale with us at N. W. Upon the shifting of this tide to windward , there arose such a short , and , while it lasted , so hollow a sea , and so lofty withal , that we alternately dipped our bowsprit end , and poop lanthorns , into the water .
Our ship laboured in the most alarming manner , and became insensible of the guidance of her helm  but at midnight the tide shifted , and we put through the straits without seeing the land on either side , and in the morning had a very good offing to the southward .
We had found it very cold before we came this length , but now we began to feel the extreme of it .
The bleak westerly winds of themselves would have been sufficiently piercing , but they were always attended with drifts either of snow or sleet , which , continually beating on our sails and rigging , cased the masts and every rope with ice , so that there was no handling them .
It was common with us to be two or three days together lying to under bare poles , exposed all the while to the assaults of prodigious seas , much larger than any I had ever observed before .
The winds reigning thus tempestuously , without intermission , in the western board , we had stretched away into lat .
61 deg .
30 min .
S. where we were in continual dread of falling foul of islands of ice , and  where we found the variation to be 22 deg .
6 min .
to the north-eastward .


October 1 , as we were furling the main-sail , one William Camell cried out , that his hands were so benumbed , he could not hold himself  but before those who were next to him could lay hold of him , he fell into the sea , and the ship making fresh way , and the sea running high , we lost sight of him before we could bring to .
Indeed , one would imagine it impossible that any thing could live in so rigid a climate  and , truly , we saw neither fish nor bird , except one solitary albitross , which accompanied us for several days , and hovered about us , till Hatley concluding , in a gloomy fit , that the company of this melancholy bird brought us ill luck , resolved to destroy him , in hopes we might then have better weather .


October 22 , at eight at night , we carried away our fore-top-mast , and rigged another next morning .
We crept by very slow degrees , after we had ventured to tack and stand to the northward , in hopes to weather our way into the Great South Seas  and indeed it may be averred , that from the time we passed the straits of Le Mair , till we had the first sight of the coast of Chili , we had been continually distressed by the winds , and discouraged by bad weather .


Nov. 14 , we saw the coast of Chili , distant 10 leagues , lat .
by observation 47 deg .
28 min .
S .


Being now arrived on the confines of the Spanish settlements , we found ourselves under an  absolute necessity of contriving some means by which we might recruit our wood and water .
We had but seven buts of water remaining , and a much less proportion of wood .
I thought it would be best for us to go first to Narborough 's island , and accordingly directed our course to that place .


Nov. 21 , at seven in the morning , we had soundings in 28 fathom water , of fine grey and black sand .
But here we found a wild road , which could not be deemed fafe for us - [ Here Capt. Shelvock laments it as a great misfortune , that he could not reach Juan Fernandez , in latitude 33 deg .
30 min .
S. without stopping : tho ' at the same time it is plain , that he lost more time in searching for a nearer place of refreshment , than the direct passage to that island would have taken him up .
But the imputation he would throw upon Clipperton is applicable only to himself : he never intended to act under him  and all his excuses are mere shifts . ]


Surrounded with doubts and apprehensions , says he , lest we should be obliged to advance too far on these coasts , without a competent stock of provisions , one Joseph de la Fontaine , a Frenchman , assured me , that , if I would go to the island of Chiloe , which was at that time a little to the northward of us , there was no place for our purpose like it in all the South Seas  that the towns of Chacao and Calibuco , the first on the island itself , and the second on the continent , were rich  places  that the former was the usual place of residence of the Governor , and that at the latter there was a wealthy college of Jesuits  and that there were considerable magazines kept up , which were always well stocked with provisions of all kinds .


On these considerations I formed a resolution of going to Chiloe  and on the 30th of November we entered the channel , with an intent to surprize and attack the towns of Chacao and Calibuco : but , immediately after we had come to , the windward tide made out with prodigious rapidity , which instantly caused a great sea  and the wind increasing at the same time , the channel all about us appeared like one continued breach .
In the midst of this our ship laid a great strain upon her cable , which unfortunately parted , and we lost our anchor .
We passed by two commodious bays  and , at length , we rounded a point of land out of the tide 's way , where we were commodiously sheltered from all inconveniences  and , the next morning , I sent my second Lieutenant to make a discovery of the towns of Chacao and Calibuco , and , at the same time , Captain Hatley , to find out a watering place for us .
He soon returned again , and brought with him an Indian , who gave us hopes of a sufficient supply of all we wanted , but afterwards came in the evening to tell us , the country was forbidden to supply us with any thing The Lieutenant not being yet returned , this information made me  apprehend the enemy had taken him , and by that means had learned who we were .


December 3 , there came to us a Spanish officer , in a piragua rowed by eight Indians , who was sent by the Governor to be informed who we were .
As soon as we had a sight of the piragua , I hoisted French colours , and , when the Spaniard came on board , I told him , we were a homeward-bound French ship , called the St. Rose , and that my name was le Janis le Breton .
Under this notion he staid with us all .
night , and next morning departed , not seeming to suspect us .
I wrote to the Governor by this gentleman , signifying that I wanted a supply of provisions to carry me back to France , desiring him to assist me in what he could  and received for answer a complaint against the violences of our men , in killing their sheep , and driving away their cattle , by which I knew that they had seen my Lieutenant .
But I was in despair of ever seeing him , or the people who were with him , any more .
I therefore sent a message to the Governor , that provisions I wanted , and provisions I must have , and that very speedily  and that all the forces of Chacao , Calibuco , Carelmapo , or Castro , should not frighten or deter me from supplying myself .
Soon after , there came a piragua with a message , signifying , that if I would send an officer to Chacao , he would treat with me .
But I gave him for answer , that I would treat no where but on board my own ship  and farther , that it was now too late , since  I had already dispatched 80 men to take all they could find .


Soon after the pinnace arrived , which I had so long given over for lost , with all her crew  but they were so terrified , that I had no hopes of their being fit for service in any reasonable time .
The officer had no excuse for not returning as soon as he had got a sight of the town , but that the tide hurried him away at unawares , and that in the fright he had forgot he had a graplin in the boat to come to with , till the tide had shifted .
I said but little to him  and only made the officer sensible of his mismanagement , which had been the ruin of the advantageous views I might have had , in taking either Chacao or Calibuco .


December 16 , we had now our decks full of live cattle , such as European sheep , hogs , guanicces , poultry in abundance , and hams , c. as also a good quantity of wheat , barley , potatoes , maize , or Indian corn  and , in short , I computed that I had added four months provisions to what remained of our English stock , and that without the least hindrance or molestation from the enemy .


December 17 , we began to unmoor , and at noon we weighed , and sailed out with the wind at W. S. W .
The night before we departed , one of our men made his escape into the woods .
It was beyond all dispute that this fellow would give a full account of us .
This , added to the ill conduct of my Lieutenant , together with the  contrary execution of all my orders , by those officers whom I had hitherto entrusted in affairs of importance , made me despair of ever having any thing done to the purpose  and on this occasion , I could not forbear reflecting on the mismanagement of some gentlemen in England , who blindly made use of their interest to prefer persons to posts for which they were utterly unfit .


I sailed from Chiloe with a design to go straight to the island of Juan Fernandez , but was prevented by my people , who were possessed with notions of vast advantages to be made by going to the port of Conception .
It was our Frenchman , who had been so instrumental in our Chiloenian attempt , who was the cause of this .
Finding his accounts hitherto tolerably just , they once more listened to him  and every one of my ship 's company , who could say any thing at this juncture , did not fail to speak his mind somewhat insolently  particularly William Morphew , one of the men I had out of the Ruby , and who had been in these seas several years , took upon him to tell me , that it could not signify much whether we arrived two or three days sooner or later at Juan Fernandez  that I was a stranger here , but that the Frenchman and himself were so well acquainted with these seas , that every body hoped I would be advised and go to Conception , and not put a mere punctilio to orders in the balance against a certainty of success , if we were so happy as to arrive at that port in time .
Considering now how easily they might be  brought to throw off command , and how little I should be able to help myself , alone , as I might be said to be , if they came to that extremity , I complied with them , and resolved to spend two or three days in going to Conception  and , on December the 23d , we came abreast of the Teats of Bio Bio , and in the evening arrived in the bay , from whence I ordered the boats , well manned and armed , to go up in the night to surprize what ships or vessels might be in the harbour , and to make what observations they could concerning the place .


About noon , Captain Hatley returned in the pinnace , and informed me he had taken the Solidad d'Anday , of 150 tons , the only ship in the road or port , lately come from Baldivia , laden with timber  had no body on board except the boatswain , an old negroe , and two Indian boys .
He took also a small vessel of about 25 tons , near the island of Quiriquine , which belonged to a priest who had been gathering fruits , and was now made a prisoner in her , together with four or five Indians .
This vessel we found very useful , and called her the Mercury , being well built , and ready upon all occasions to look into port .
There was another small vessel that passed within pistol-shot , but Capt. Hatley never once offered to follow her , or bring her to .
Hatley , truly , said , he did not mind her , though his boat 's crew all agreed she was full of men .
This vessel was bringing advice of us from Chiloe .
I  did not fail to reprimand him for this , but to what effect !


Dec. 26 , the priest being very solicitous to ransom his bark , he left my ship in the morning , and , in my pinnace rowed by Indians , went ashore to get money for that purpose .
At noon , Mr. Brooks , first Lieutenant , brought down the ship we had taken , and anchored her about half a mile short of us .
The boatswain of her had not been on board above two hours before he gave me information of a vessel laden with wine , brandy , and other valuable things , bound to the island of Chiloe , lying at anchor in the bay of Herradura , about two leagues to the northward of us .
Thither I ordered Mr. Randall , our second Lieutenant , with the boatswain of the Solidad , and 25 men , to go  with positive orders not to set a foot on shore , or make any hazardous attempt whatever .
But the next evening they returned with a dismal story , that they went into the bay , and finding the vessel hauled dry on shore , the officer ordered his people to land , and bring away what they could out of her  but their career was soon stopped  for they had no sooner got upon the bank , than they discovered the enemy rushing out furiously upon them .
They all escaped except five , who were overtaken in shoal water , and they all agreed that those five were cut to pieces .
The Spaniards came down upon them , preceded by 20 or 30 horses a-breast , linked to each other .
These were two deep  then came the enemy , mounted , and lying upon  their horses necks , driving the others before them .
They were not once seen to sit upright in their saddles , except when there was no danger , or to fire their musquets .
This new addition to our misfortunes quite dispirited the greatest part of my ship 's company .
Nothing was now heard but murmuring , and damning the South Seas , and declaring that , if this was making their fortune , they had better have staid at home and begged about the streets  but just as I was expostulating with Mr. Randall , who conducted this unfortunate undertaking , I was agreeably surprized with the sight of a large ship , which we saw coming about the northernmost point of the island of Quiriquine .
It was almost dark , and she could not perceive what we were , so that she stood towards us without fear .
As soon as she approached near enough , I hailed her , to which she returned no answer , and I fired into her .
This was no sooner done , than she came to , and called for quarter .
She was called the St. Fermin , came from Callao , burthen about 300 tons , and laden with sugar , melasses , rice , coarse French linnen , and some cloths of Quito , together with a small quantity of chocolate , and about 5 or 6000 dollars in money and wrought plate .
I sent Mr. Hendry ( the agent for prizes ) to inspect her lading , and to order every thing he could find valuable out of her , and the ship 's company sent their agent likewise .
In the afternoon they returned , and brought all the bales , boxes , chests , portmanteaus , c. that were in  her  and also all the rice , with a large quantity of sugar , melasses , and chocolate , and about 7000 weight of good rusk , with all her eatables , and stores .


Don Francisco Larrayn , her Captain , desired to ransom his ship , to which I willingly consented , and suffered him to go in his own launch to raise money for that purpose .


Dec. 30 , there came a boat with an officer and a flag of truce , who brought word , that three only of our people in the skirmish at Harradura were killed , the other two wounded , and in a fair way of recovery , and that the boat had brought advice of us , as I suspected , from that island .
The officer brought me seven jars of very good wine , a present from the Governor , and a letter full of civility , but written with a great deal of craft .
He desired to see my commission , and then he would treat with me according to the laws of arms .


January 1 , Captain Betagh went to Conception with a copy of my commission , the declaration of war , c. and soon after he returned with a Flemish jesuit , a Spanish lawyer , and an Englishman and a Scotchman .
The jesuit assured me he was only come to pay his respects to me , and to do his utmost to promote the affair of the ransom , and bring it to an immediate conclusion .
Therefore the first thing I did , was to shew my commission to the Englishman , who read it in Spanish .
The jesuit then told me , that the Captains of the St. Fermin and Solidad had resolved  to give me 12,000 dollars for the ransom of both the ships , and the Mercury included , instead of 16000 dollars which I had insisted on for the St. Fermin only .
To this I positively answered , that all their persuasions , artifices , and pretences , should never make me agree with them .
We had taken in the St. Fermin , ten large silver candlesticks , each of them weighing above twenty-five pounds sterling .
The holy father , in a suppliant manner , represented to me that they were a legacy to his convent , and hoped I would make no dispute of so noble a charity as it would be to put them into the possession of those for whom they were designed .
I offered to let him have them for their weight in dollars , which , considering the great price they pay in those parts for the fashion of wrought plate , was a very advantageous offer .
But he said they never bought any thing for sacred uses  and that , as the workmen put a great deal of allay into plate , it would be difficult to determine the different values of the dollars and the candlesticks  so , after a deal of needless dispute and entreaties , both about this , and the ransom of the ships , the jesuit and the rest affirming that the Captains of the St. Fermin , c. were not able to raise above 12,000 dollars , there was nothing done .


Two days passing without news from the Governor , I began to be certainly convinced they had something else in view more than the accommodation of the ransoms  but on January the  4th , my two wounded men came on board , and with them brought a letter , importing , that , as he had now sent back the prisoners , he hoped no difficulty would remain to prevent my sending on shore all the prisoners belonging to him .


January 6 , the morning passed away without any news from the town .
I now began to make preparations for sailing , and in those preparations spent the greatest part of the day .
There being no appearance of any boat coming off to us , I ordered the St. Fermin to be set on fire .
Her cotton sails being loosed , made a prodigious blaze .
I had already set fire to the Solidad , to quicken their motions  and now , having concluded the treaty , I immediately got under sail , much chagrined at the loss of so many days without reaping any advantage .
I was afterwards informed , that , if they had thought I would have destroyed the St. Fermin , they would have given even 20 or 30,000 dollars to have saved her  for she was one of the best sailers and the best fitted out ship of any of the Peruvian traders .
I now directed our course to the island of Juan Fernandez , taking the Mercury with us .


January 8 , the sea was all day perfectly red , appearing as if vast quantities of blood had been thrown into it , and curdled by the water .
This , the Spaniards say , is occasioned by the spawn of prawns , which must certainly be a mistake .
In our passage , the plunder was sold before the mast , by the ship 's company 's agent , at very extravagant  prices .
At the same time the account of every thing being taken , and the value of the shares calculated , the ship 's company desired me to let them have their dividend , according to the articles at St. Catherine 's , which request I could not withstand .
The prize-money and plunder amounting to ten pieces of eight per share , was thereupon distributed  and all the bales of coarse cloth , bays , linnen , ribbons , lace , silk , and several other sorts of mercery wares , were equally divided , half to the owners , and half to the ship 's company .


Jan. 11 , at six in the morning , we saw the island of Juan Fernandez , and from that day till the 15th I kept standing off and on the shore for my boats , which were a fishing , who not having hitherto discovered any marks whereby we might conclude that Clipperton had been here , I thought it proper to render my coming hither serviceable in some respect , and therefore sent the Mercury on shore to stop her leaks , while the boats continued catching fish , of which we salted as much as filled five puncheons .
At length , going on shore to make a nicer search , some of my men accidentally saw the word MAGEE , which was the name of Clipperton 's surgeon , and CAPT. JOHN cut out under it upon a tree , but no directions left , as was agreed on by him in his instructions to me .
His actions being thus grosly repugnant to his instructions , it was evident he never meant I should keep him company , or ever join with him again , - [ This  reflection may with great justice be retorted on the writer himself , and can in no shape affect Clipperton who followed his instructions in the most scrupulous manner . ]
- However , being by this confirmed in the certainty of Clipperton 's arrival , I directly made the best of my way , and sailed to the northward .


Jan. 21 , having a design to look into Copiapo as I went along shore , I sent Mr. Dodd , second Lieutenant of Marines , with eight men , as a reinforcement to the Mercury 's crew , and the next evening they left us steering in for the land , whilst I kept a proper offing , to prevent our being discovered .
The next day the officer returned and told me , he had looked into the port , but could see no shipping there , upon which I made him sensible of his error , and sent him to the right place , which was about six leagues to the northward of us , and ordered him to be ready to look into Caldera by day-light the next morning .
They did so , and saw nothing  but , instead of making use of the land wind to come off to me , they kept along shore , till the sea breeze came on , and could not come to me till the morning after , by which means they hindered me almost a whole day and night 's sailing  and in this vexatious manner were my orders always executed !


Feb. 5th , I dispatched Mr. Brooks a-head to discover if there were any shipping at Arica , and next day , I had a sight of the head land of Arica , and the island of Guano , with a ship at anchor  on the northern side of it , and saw the Mercury standing out of the bay , by which I judged the ship was too warm for her , and therefore made all possible haste to get up to her with our ship .
When I came into the port , I found her already taken , and that the Mercury only went accidentally adrift .
This prize was called the Rosario , of about 100 tons , laden with cormorants dung , which the Spaniards call guana , and is brought from the island of Iquique , for the culture of the agi , or cod-pepper , in the vale of Arica .
There was no white face in her but the pilot , whom I sent to see if her owner would ransom her .
At seven o'clock in the morning I received a letter from the owner , expressing his poverty , and declaring his readiness to comply to the utmost of his power : and the honest man was as good as his word .


I agreed upon restoring to him his ship , and six negroes , for 1500 pieces of eight  and he was so punctual and expeditious , that at 10 the next night he brought the sum agreed on .
Soon after the receipt of this , we took a vessel of about 10 tons , as she was coming into the road , with a cargo of dried fish and guana , within a mile of the town .
The master of this bark likewise came off upon a balse , which is an odd sort of an embarkation , made of two large seal-skins separately blown up like bladders , and then made fast and joined together by a frame of wood .
On this he brought off two jars of brandy , and 40 pieces of eight , for his ransom , which , considering  his mean appearance , was as much as I could have expected .
One part of his freight was valuable , which was his dried fish .


Feb. 9 , 1720 , I sailed from Arica , and as I went out , the inhabitants placed themselves round the bay , and made a very good hedge fire after me for about half an hour .
I judged there could not be less than 5 or 600 of them .
I shaped my course for the road of Hilo , which we had a sight of the next day at three in the afternoon , where we saw one large ship and three small ones at anchor .
The great ship immediately hoisted French colours , and in the end proved to be the Sage Solomon , of 40 guns , commanded by Mons .
Dumain , whom I had left at St. Catherine 's , and who was now resolved to protect the vessels that were with him , and obstruct my coming in .
I at first thought of shewing my resentment , but , upon second thoughts , I clapped the helm a-weather , and stood out to sea .


Feb. 12 , in the morning , the ship 's company had their moiety of the money taken at Arica divided amongst them , according to their number of shares .


Feb. 22 , I came a-breast of Callao , the port for Lima , which is the metropolis of Peru  but there being no great prospect of performing much here in our present situation , I had nothing to do but to slip away from hence in the night , by the help of a favourable breeze .


Feb. 26 , the officers in the Mercury desired to be relieved , and it being Capt. Hatley 's turn  to go in her , he proposed to me that he might continue along shore , till we had got the length of Lobos , an island in about seven degrees of south latitude .
I could not but approve of this , considering the probability there was of his meeting with the Panama ships  and every body being well pleased , I added to their complement of men , and gave them a month 's provisions , and mounted two of our quarter-deck guns on the Mercury , and lent Captain Hatley my pinnace .
As soon as every thing was ready for their departure , Captain Betagh , whose duty and turn it was to relieve the marine officer in the Mercury , being unwilling to go on this party , addressed himself to the people , and with a fearful countenance told them , that he , and the rest who were to go with him , were sent for a sacrifice , with many other expressions tending to create a general mutiny .
I now imagined no less than that he was about to act what he had threatened when he told me , it should be a short voyage with me  and , therefore , I addressed myself to the ship 's company , desired to know who amongst them were of Betagh 's opinion ?
Their answer was with one voice , None .
This done , I ordered the Mercury alongside , and Hatley and Betagh went on board of her  and , putting off from us , gave three cheers , and stood right in for the land , in the latitude by observation of 10 deg .
9 min S .


The very next day they took a small bark laden with rice , chocolate , wheat , flour , and the  like .
The day following they took another .
On the fourth day of their absence they became masters of a ship of near 200 tons , worth 150,000 pieces of eight .
Flushed with this success , it seems Betagh prevailed on Hatley , and the greatest part of the people with them , to lay hold of this opportunity and go to India : but they no sooner clapped their helm a-weather , than they saw a sail standing towards them , which , in short , proved to be a Spanish man-of-war , who caught them , and put an end to their Indian voyage .
The English were treated very indifferently  but Betagh , it seems , who was of their religion , and of a nation which the Spaniards affect to be fond of , was made an officer , and used very respectfully .
This he certainly deserved at their hands  for he gave them an account of the whole scheme of our voyage  and not only informed them of what we had done , but also of what I designed to do  so that they did not doubt but I myself should be in their hands very speedily .


Feb. 29 , at six in the morning , we saw a sail at anchor in the road of Guanchaco  at eleven we came up , and anchored along side of her .
There was no body on board of her but two Indiamen and a boy .
They informed us , there was a rich ship in the cove of Payta .


March 21 , at three in the afternoon , we saw the Pena Oradado , or the Hole in the Rock  and in an hour afterwards , we entered the cove of Payta with French colours flying .
There we  found only a small ship at anchor with her foremast out , and her main-top-mast unrigged  but the taking of this town being considered in the scheme of our voyage as a matter of great importance , I consulted with my officers concerning the properest methods of going about it .
At two of the clock the next morning I landed with 46 men , leaving Mr. Coldsea the master , and some others , to bring the ship nearer in , that we might the more expeditiously embark the plunder we might get .
Being now on shore , I marched up to the great church without meeting any opposition  and indeed I found the town entirely deserted by the inhabitants .
At daylight we saw what seemed great bodies of men on the hills , on each side of us , who , I expected , when they had viewed our strength , would have paid us a visit  but I found , that as we marched up towards them , we drove them before us .
The remainder of the day was spent in shipping off what plunder we had got , which consisted of hogs , fowls , brown and white calavances , beans , Indian corn , wheat , flour , sugar , and as much cocoa-nut as we were able to stow away , with pans , and other conveniences for preparing it  so that we were supplied with breakfast-meat for the whole voyage , and full of provisions of one kind or other .
In the afternoon there came to us a messenger , to know what I would take for the ransom of the town and ship  to which I answered , I would have 10,000 pieces of eight , and those to be paid in twenty-four hours , if they  intended to save the town , or ship either .
But the Governor gave me to understand in plain terms , that he neither could nor would ransom the town , and did not care what I did with it , so that I spared the churches .
Having received this negative answer , and got every thing serviceable out of the town , I instantly ordered it to be set on fire  and the houses , being extremely dry , consumed away a-pace .
But no sooner was Payta in a blaze than those on board made signals for me to come off , and kept incessantly firing towards the mouth of the harbour .
Upon which I ordered all hands off , and went first on board myself in a canoe , with three men only  but , before I had got half way , saw a large ship lying with her fore-top sail aback , and with a Spanish flag flying at her fore-top-mast-head .
At this prospect two of my three people were ready to sink  and when I looked back on the town , I could not forbear wishing that I had not been so hasty .
As the Admiral was coming in with all his sails spread , Mr. Coldsea , by the assistance of the few on board , fired at him so smartly , that he stopped the enemy 's career .
The Spaniard apprehending he should have hot work with us , brought his ship to , that he might put himself into a condition of making a vigorous attack upon us .
This inactivity of the enemy gave me an opportunity of getting on board , and suffered my men to come off , about 50 in number , but the Spaniard was within pistol-shot before they had all got  into the ship  upon which , we cut our cable , and our ship falling the wrong way , I had but just room enough to fill clear of him .
Being now close by one another , his formidable appearance struck an universal damp on every one 's spirits  and I myself could foresee nothing but that we should be torn to pieces by him , and longed for an opportunity to try our heels with him , while our masts were standing .
I expected every minute that he would board us , and , upon hearing a shouting amongst them , and seeing their forecastle full of men , I concluded they had now come to that resolution  but I presently saw that the occasion of this joy was their having shot down our ensign-staff  upon which , they , seeing our ensign trailing in the water , were in hopes we had struck : but I soon undeceived them , by spreading a new ensign in the mizzen-shrouds .
Upon sight of this they lay snug , and held their way close upon our quarter  at last , designing to do our business at once , they clapped their helm well a starboard , to bring their whole broadside to point at us  but their fire had little or no effect .
All stood fast with us , and they muzzled themselves  which gave me time both to get a-head , and to windward of him , before he could fill his sails again  and now I found , that , if our masts , which were by this time but slenderly supported , would bear what sail we had abroad , we should soon steal away from him .
After this he was in a great hurry to get his spritsail-yard  fore and aft , threatening us very hard , and plying us with his fore-chace : but we soon were out of his reach , and all hands were immediately employed in repairing our damages .
This ship was called the Peregrine , of 56 guns , with upwards of 450 men on board of her .


During this action , we had not a man killed or wounded , although the enemy often hulled us , and once , in particular , a shot coming into one of our ports , dismounted one of our guns between decks , tearing off the nut of the gun , and breaking itself into a great many pieces , which flew fore and aft in the midst of a crowd of people , without hurting any one of them .
Our stern was also much shattered , and our rigging much disabled .
Our main mast was a little wounded , yet stood a long while with only-one good shroud to support it  our fore-mast fared little better , yet I kept all the canvass , except the main-top-gallant-sail , at hard bats end .
An unlucky shot took the bow of our launch , as she lay upon the quarter , and set fire to some cartridges of powder , which were negligently left in her , and which blew away her moorings , and we lost her .
Seeing a great smoke arise on the quarter , I at first imagined some accident had happened within board .
In short , in about three glasses we got quite clear of the Admiral , who tacked , and stood in for Payta , and we shortened sail .
A narrower escape from an enemy could not well have been made , considering the vast difference between us , as to force .
 The Spaniard had 56 guns  we , on the contrary , had but 20 mounted : they had 450 men  we , on our part , did not exceed 73  and 11 negroes and two Indians were included in that number .
He had farther this great odds over us , of being in a settled readiness , whilst we were in the utmost confusion .
As for our small arms they were wet and useless to us  and , what is more , in the midst of the engagement , one third of my people , instead of fighting , were hard at work , to make farther preparation for an obstinate resistance , if we had been pushed to extremities  and particularly the carpenter and his crew were busied in making ports for stern-chace-guns , which , as it happened , we made no use of .
Upon the whole , we had the good fortune to escape this danger , which was the more to be dreaded , because , as we had set fire to the town , they were probably exasperated upon the account of the churches , which I never intended to destroy  and , if I had fallen into their hands , they might have given us but uncomfortable quarters .
At the best , however , it can not but be allowed to have been a most unfortunate disaster .
The loss of my boat and anchor was irreparable , and may be said to be the cause of that scene of trouble which will take up the remainder of this narrative  for we had now but one anchor , that at Payta being the third we had lost , and were besides entirely destitute of a boat of any kind .


At five , the same evening , we saw a sail under our lee-bow , which I took to be the prize we  had left to cruise for us near the Saddle of Payta  and we , therefore , stood to the westward all night , and the next morning we saw two sail a-stern of us .
I tacked , and stood towards them , and in a little time could see that one of them was standing in for Payta , while the other kept stemming with us  but the nearer I approached her , the less I liked her , and could not but think it adviseable to put my ship about , and crowd sail from her .
However , she gained upon us , and advanced near enough to shew us she was the Brilliant , the Admiral 's consort .
She was a French built ship , of 36 guns , manned with people of that nation , and other Europeans .
She was handsomely rigged , which is rare to be seen in those parts , and sailed almost two foot for our one  so that , notwithstanding we had almost a calm all the heat of the day , she neared us apace .
But , night coming on , I made use of the old stratagem ( I thought it might be new here ) , of turning a light adrift in a half tub , instead of a boat , darkening one part of the lanthorn , that it might the more appear to be a ship 's light , and then immediately altered my course .
As the day broke I hauled all my sails , and in full day-light could perceive nothing of the enemy .
This was the ship wherein Betagh , my late Captain of marines , was so much respected  and by his advice it was , as I have been told , that the Admiral ordered his consort to ply up to windward to Lobos , our first place of rendezvous , whilst he himself came to Payta  in search of us .
This separation , though intended as a sure means to catch us , proved to be very fortunately the means of our preservation .


Being thus closely pursued , I took an offing of thirty leagues from the shore , and then brought to , to consider what I had best to do .
I was still in the dark , as to my consort  an embargo , as I was told at Payta , was laid on aft shipping to leeward for the term of six months  and our prize , which I designed to make a fireship of , was taken by the Brilliant  I had but one anchor , and no boat at all  and I was as yet ignorant of what had become of the Mercury .


In the midst of all this peril and perplexity , I called my officers together , to let them know , it was my opinion , we had , as we were thus circumstanced , a much better prospect to the windward than to the leeward  that on the coast of Chili we should not be in the least suspected , and should , at the same time , in the most effectual manner , escape the enemy 's men-of-war  that , after taking in water at Juan Fernandez , we might cruise out the whole season off the ports of Conception , Valparaiso , and Coquimbo , where among the shipping we might be stocked with anchors , cables , boats , and a vessel to make a fire-ship of , on which I mightily depended .
All this being universally approved of , we got our tacks on board , and stretched away to windward .


My intentions after this were fixed upon the  coast of Mexico .
There I proposed to run the height of Tres Marias and California , as the most likely places to meet with the Success .
These two places would have been commodious  the first for salting of turtle , and the last for wooding and watering at , and for laying myself in the track of the Manilla ship , which , if I should have had the fortune to meet with , and , having a fire-ship with me , I would have tried what I could have done with her .


March 26 , having well secured our mast , and bent a new suit of sails , we stood to the southward , expecting to gain our passage to windward in about five weeks .


March 31 , as they were pumping the ship , the water which came out of the well , was not only in greater quantity than usual , but was also as black as ink .
This made me judge that some water had got to our powder  and accordingly going into the powder-room , we heard the water come in like a little sluice .
This had quite spoiled the greatest part of our powder  so that we only saved the quantity of six barrels .
We found upon search a leak to be on the bow , under the lower cheek of the head , occasioned by a shot which had been lodged there in our late engagement , and which falling out by the working of the ship in an head sea , had left room for a stream of water  but we brought the ship by the stern , and , with great difficulty , stopped it securely .


May 11 , we saw the great island of Juan  Fernandez , bearing east half south .
Here I plied on and off till the 21st , but could not get off as much water as we daily expended .


May 21 , a hard gale of wind came out of the sea upon us , and brought in with it a tumbling swell  so that in a few hours , our cable , which was never wet before , parted , and inevitable shipwreck appeared before our eyes .
But Providence so far interposed in our behalf , that , if we had struck but a cable 's length farther to the eastward or westward of the place where we did strike , we must certainly all have perished .
Our main-mast , fore-mast , and mizzen-top-mast , went all away together  and happy it was for us that they did so  for , by making them serve by way of raft , and by the help of those who were ashore before the wind came on , we were all saved , except one man .
In the midst of this surprize , the first thing I took care of , was my commission  and , remembering the powder to be uppermost in the bread-room , I got most of it up , with about seven or eight bags of bread : these we saved , as the ship did not come to pieces immediately .
In a few minutes , however , after she first struck , she was full of water .
We saved , notwithstanding , two or three compasses , some of our mathematical instruments , and books .


When we first got on shore , we were without any one thing necessary for our relief  not so much as a seat whereon to rest our harrassed limbs , except the wet ground , which , as far as  we could see , was also like to be our bed and pillow , and indeed it proved to be so .


In the evening , all the officers came to consult with me , how we should get some necessaries out of the wreck  and , having by this time lighted a fire , we wrapt ourselves in what we could get , laid ourselves round it , and , notwithstanding the badness of the weather , we slept very soundly  but , the next morning , getting up with the first glimpse of day-light , we looked at each other like men awakened out of a dream  so great and so sudden was the melancholy change in our condition , that we could scarce trust to our senses .


I went immediately among the people to set them about the work we had resolved upon the night before  but they were so scattered , there was no getting them together , or we might , probably , have regained all our beef and pork .
This opportunity , however , was lost , by their eagerness to build huts and tents , in order to settle themselves for good  for , while they were thus employed , a furious gale of wind came on , which destroyed all the provisions in the ship , except one cask of beef , and one of farina de pao , which were washed whole on the strand .
I had saved 1100 dollars belonging to the gentlemen adventurers , which were kept in my chest in the great cabbin  the rest , being in the bottom of the bread-room for security , could not possibly be come at .
I need not say how disconsolate my reflections were on the sad accident that had  happened .
My first thoughts were on the means whereby to preserve our lives , and on some scheme of oeconomy to be observed amongst the people , in relation to the distribution of such quantities of provisions as should from time to time be obtained .


I found a very commodious spot of ground about half a mile from the sea , on which I set up my tent .
There was a fine run of water within a stone 's cast of it on each side , with firing near at hand , and trees proper for our use .
The people settled within call about me , in as good a manner as they could : and having all secured ourselves against the inclemency of the weather , we used to pass our time in the evening round a great fire , roasting craw-fish in the embers .


I now began to think of building such a vessel from the wreck as might carry us all off at once from this island  and for that purpose consulted with the carpenter  but was astonished at his answer , '' he could not make brick , he said , without straw , '' and walked away from me in a surly humour .
From him I went to the armourer , and asked him what he could do towards building a small vessel for us  to which he answered , that he hoped he could do all the iron work  that he had , with much labour , got his bestows out of the wreck , and that he did not doubt but we should find a great many other useful things , when we came to set about a search for them in good earnest .


 June 8 , we laid the blocks , and got the bowsprit ready to make a keel .
The carpenter for a little while went on with seeming good temper , but suddenly turning short upon me as I stood by him , he swore a great oath , he would not strike another stroke , '' he truly would be no body 's slave , and thought himself now upon a footing with myself . ''
This provoked me to use him a little roughly with my cane  but afterwards came to an agreement with him to give him a four-pistole piece as soon as the stem and stern-post were up , and 100 pieces of eight when the bark was finished .
He then went to work on the keel , and in two months time we made a tolerable show , owing to the diligence and ingenuity of Popplestone , the armourer , who made us hammers , chissels , files , gimlets , bullet-moulds , and an instrument to bore our cartouch boxes .
These last we covered with seals skins , and contrived them so as to be both handy and neat .
He , besides all this , began and finished with his own hands , a large serviceable boat , which was what we very much stood in need of .


For a few days the people behaved themselves very regularly and diligently , half of them working one day , and half another .
But the time soon arrived when we fell into such confusion and outrageous disorder , that it was a miracle we ever got off from this place by any assistance of our own  for , one afternoon , I missed all the people , and could see no body but Mr. Adams ,  our surgeon , Mr. Hendry the agent , my son , and Mr. Dodd , lieutenant of marines , who , for some reasons best known to himself , had a mind to act the madman .
At night I was informed , they had assembled together at a great tree , had formed a new regulation and new articles , had excluded the gentlemen adventurers in England from having any part of what we should take for the future , and had divested me of the authority of their Captain , having regulated themselves according to the discipline of Jamaica .
They had chosen Morphew to be their champion and speaker .
This man addressed himself to me , and told me , '' that , as the Speedwell was cast away , they were now of consequence at their own disposal , so that their obligations to the owners and me were of no validity , the ship being now no more  they therefore , he said , had now thought fit to frame such articles as would be most conducive to their own interest  and , if I would sign them , well  if not , they would not trust themselves under my conduct , as they should always be apprehensive that I should serve them as Clipperton had served some of his men , who ( they heard ) happening to be taken separately , he denied them , and suffered eight of them to be hanged as pirates before his race . ''


In these articles , besides casting off the owners , I found myself reduced from sixty shares to six .
I was at a loss what to do in this dilemma  but at last I found myself under an indispensible  necessity of signing the articles , in order to get off from the island , where otherwise I might have been forcibly left behind .


And now , having very unwillingly satisfied them in all I thought they could ask , I recommended to them the vessel we had begun , not doubting , but after this they would have used their constant endeavours to fin [ ... ] sh her , that they might have an opportunity of putting their project in execution  and they said they would .


But early the next morning , going down to the beach as usual , and expecting to find every one employed , I saw none of them , except the carpenter , and two or three more  for , notwithstanding they were abettors of the designs that were carrying on , yet the hopes of a little money from me had made them work pretty diligently , though I can not say they fatigued themselves .
Upon enquiry , I was informed , that the rest of the people were again adjourned to the great tree  and it was not long before I was made acquainted with the result of their meeting  for , betimes the next morning , they surrounded my tent , while Morphew , and Stewart , their agent , came in to me , and told me .
They came in the name of all the people to demand every thing belonging to the gentlemen adventurers out of my possession , and particularly 750 weight in Pinna or virgin silver , a silver dish weighing 75 ounces , and 250 dollars in money , I did not easily part with all this : but they desired I would make no dispute  for , as all this came out of the wreck ,  they insisted , the owners could have nothing to do with it , and they were determined to have it .
In short , I was obliged to give it all up , and they shared it amongst them that very moment , according to their new regulation .


After this , they entirely destroyed what little power they had allowed me over them  and the meanest of them were taught they were as good as I .
They sometimes denied me a quota of the fish , and wondered I could not go out to catch it as well as they  at best , they would give my servant who used to fetch it but the leavings , after they had chosen the prime : and , to complete their insults , my first lieutenant , who used sometimes to eat with me , entirely deserted my mess to join Morphew , to partake of his better fare .


Quite tired out with their incessant mutinies , I became at length so desperate , that I began to think of preferring the dangers of the sea , in a small open boat , to what I thought myself exposed to on this place from my ship 's company .
I apprehended , they would never rest till they had made themselves entirely their own masters , by privately making away with me  and this made me melancholy and pensive , preparing myself for the worst that could happen .
They perceiving this change in me , grew suspicious that I was now contriving some means to reduce them  and , therefore , they determined to get the arms out of my possession .
To this purpose they all came in a body , headed by Brooks and Morphew , who , in the presence of all the  people , used me with insupportable impudence  and even went so far as to threaten the life of my son , for only telling Morphew , that every one present had not chosen him for his speaker .


Having gained that point also , they had the pleasure of squandering away their time , and powder and shot , in firing at cats , or any thing else , to waste the ammunition .


What I hare now related , is the substance of what occurred from May 24 till August 15 , when we had sight of a large ship , which put us into a great hurry , and gave us a considerable alarm .
Before she crossed the bay , I ordered all the fires to be put out , and confined the negroes and Indians , lest the ship should be becalmed under the land , and any of them should attempt to swim off to her .
However , I was not long in fear , for she kept away large , and at too great a distance to perceive any thing distinctly of us .


On this occasion I got most of the people under arms , and was glad to see so many of them , in some measure , obedient to command .
I told them , I was pleased to see their arms in such good order  to which they answered impertinently , that it was for their own sakes .
But this alarm was scarce subsided before they became divided among themselves .
The question started was , whether or no the bark should be carried on , or , whether they should not build two large shallops , and set what was done of the bark on fire .
The workmen , and a considerable majority of the rest , sided with me in behalf  half of the bark : but at night the carpenter sent me word , that , if I did not deliver him the money agreed on at the beginning , notwithstanding the terms of the payment of it were not yet fulfilled , I should not see his face again  so I was obliged to treat this gentleman as he pleased to have me , and raise the money for him .


To complete the number of our divisions and dissentions , there arose a third party , who were resolved to have nothing to do with the other two , they purposing to stay on the island .
These were to the number of 12 , who accordingly separated themselves from the rest , and never appeared amongst us , except in the night , when they used to come about our tents , and the bark we were building , to steal powder , lead , and axes , and in short , whatever else they could lay their hands on .
These , however , I found means to manage , and took from them all their arms , ammunition , and the rest of their plunder , and threatened , that , if they were found within musquet-shot of our tents , they should be treated as enemies .


In a little time these divisions had so far weakened the whole body , that , by degrees , they began to listen a little to what I said to them  and I prevailed so far as to get most of them into a working humour .
Mr. Brooks now came with a feigned submission , and desired he might eat with me again  but this , in the main , abated nothing of his esteem for Morphew .
His dissimulation , however , proved of signal service ,  as it contributed to the speedy finishing of the bark .
This claimed the assistance of all our heads and hands  for when we came to plank her bottom , we had most disheartening difficulties to encounter  for , having no plank but pieces of the wreck 's deck , we found it so dry and stubborn , that fire and water had scarce any effect in making it pliable and fit for use .
It rent and split , and flew like glass  so that now I had sufficient reasons to believe , after all our labour , that we must patiently wait to be taken off from hence by some Spanish ship , and , after all our troubles , be led to a prison , to reflect on our misfortunes past .
However , by constant labour , and a variety of contrivances , we , in the end , patched our bark up in such a manner , that I dare say the like was never seen , and I may venture to affirm , that such a bottom never swam on the surface of the sea before .


Sept. 9 , the boat , which I have already mentioned to be begun by the armourer , was launched  and , being now in a fair way of compleating our bark , there yet remained , unconsidered and undetermined , what provisions we should get to support us in our present voyage .
All the stock we had consisted of but one cask of beef , five or six bushels of farina or Cassader flour , together with four or five live hogs .


I made several experiments to cure both fish and seal , but found it impossible .
At length , we luckily thought on a method of curing the conger-eel , by splitting it , and taking out the  back-bone , then dipping it in salt-water , and afterwards hanging it up to dry in a great smoke .
As no other fish could be preserved after this manner , the fishermen were ordered to catch what congers they could .
And now several of the people , who had not yet struck a stroke , began to repent of their folly , as they grew weary of living on this place , and offered their service to go a fishing , every one making some foolish excuse or other , for having been so long idle .
The new boat being sent to try her fortune , returned at night , and brought in a great parcel of fish of several sorts , amongst which were 200 conger-eels .
This was a good beginning , and every tent took a proportion of them to cure .


Having this conveniency of a large boat , I desired Mr. Brooks , our only diver , to try what he could recover from that part of the wreck which lay under water .
He accordingly undertook it , and could find but one small gun , which he weighed and brought on shore , together with two pieces of a large church candlestick , which was a part of the plate which belonged to the gentlemen adventurers .


Our boat was now daily employed in fishing .
The armourer constantly supplied them with hooks , and there was no want of lines , which were made of twisted ribbon .
In the mean time , those who were ashore , made twice layed stuff for rigging and other uses .
We patched up the canvas for sails  the cooper completed  his casks  and , in a short time , we had masts an-end tolerably well rigged , and thought we made a comfortable figure .


And now , having done all we could , when we came to put in water , to try the tightness of our work , it was followed by an universal outcry , A sieve !
a sieve !
I was afraid the people would have despaired , and desisted from using any farther means : but , in a little time , and by incessant labour , we repaired the ship 's pumps , and fitted them to our bark .
The next spring-tide we found means to launch her , which fell out on the 5th of October , by which time we had saved about 2300 conger-eels , weighing , one with another , about one pound each , and made about 60 gallons of seals oil to fry them in .
This , with what I mentioned before , was all our sea-stock .
As she went off the blocks , I named her the Recovery , though I was sadly afraid of hearing ill news from those afloat in her  but all proved indifferently well  and , knowing it to be dangerous for her to lie here long , especially having no other anchor than a great stone , and a slight rope to hold her with , and that the least puff of wind might have driven and destroyed her upon the rocks , we got all the water off that day , which we did so much easier and quicker , because the casks were ready stowed in the hold .
She had two masts , and was of about the burthen of twenty tons  and , to my great satisfaction , I found , that one pump , constantly working , kept her free .
The next day , October the 6th , we  got every one on board and embarked , leaving behind us eleven or twelve of those who had deserted us .
They were deaf to all persuasions  and , in short , sent me word , '' They were not yet prepared for the other world  '' so they , with the like number of blacks and Indians , remained behind on the island .


This island enjoys a fine wholesome air , insomuch that , out of 70 of us that were on it for the space of five months and eleven days , not one of us had an hour 's sickness , notwithstanding we fed on foul diet , without bread or salt .
For my own part , I must acknowledge the bounty of Providence  for , although I lost much of my flesh , I became one of the strongest and most active men on the island , from being before very corpulent , and almost crippled with the gout .
On the tops of some of the mountains of this island , are plains covered with groves of the Italian laurel .
Palm-trees are likewise found in most parts , growing in smooth joints like a cane , some 30 , some 40 feet high .
What seamen call palm-cabbage is the very substance of the head of this tree , which being cut off , you find inclosed a white and tender young cabbage : but , for every one we got , we were obliged to cut down a fine lofty tree .


The northern part of this island is very well watered , and the water keeps well at sea , and is , I dare say , as good as any in the world .
Down the western peak descend two cascades , to appearance , at least 300 feet perpendicular  which ,  Figure 4 .
illegible disturbd a illegible asleep by illegible  with the palm-trees that grow up close by the edges of them , exhibit a very grand and romantic prospect .
We might have found goats enough in the mountains , if we had been able to follow them  and cats are so numerous , that there is hardly taking a step without starting one .
Those whose stomachs could bear their flesh for food , found a more substantial relief from hunger by one meal of it , than from four or five of fish .


The Spaniards , who first stocked this island with goats , have since endeavoured to destroy these goats by dogs , which are likewise very numerous  but the goats have many inaccessible places of refuge , where no dogs can follow them  and they still continue to afford a plentiful supply to strangers .


While we were here , it was the season for the sea-lionesses to come to land , to bring forth their young .
These have bodies of a monstrous bulk , being from 10 to 12 feet long , and near as much in circumference .
I may venture to affirm , that , one with another , they would yield each a butt of train oil .
They are so indolent , that , as soon as they have gained the land , they fall asleep , and in that condition remain a month together so torpid , that you might fire a pistol at their heads without disturbing them  but where the sea-lionesses lie , as they do in companies after they have yeaned , to give suck to their young , there is always an old lion , of the largest size , incessantly on the watch , and at the approach of  an enemy makes a hideous roaring , threatening death to him who should be so hardy as to molest his charge  and , in truth , were they not so unweildy , they would be a desperate creature to encounter .
We were accustomed to walk amongst them without dread  for all , but those who were to take care of the young , were lost in the profoundest slumbers .
On the land they ingender , and bring forth their young , who ingender also before they go off , against the next season  so quick and suddenly do they increase and propagate .


The seals here may properly be called sea-wolves , from the resemblance of their heads to the heads of wolves , differing in that particular from the seals in the northern hemisphere , where their heads are more like the dog 's .
They are naturally surly , and snarl in an angry manner , on the approach of any body .
Two fins compose their tails , and with the help of these they get along much faster than the lions .


Every thing one sees or hears in this island is different from what is elsewhere to be found .
The very structure of the island , in all its parts , appears with a certain savage , irregular beauty , nor easy to be expressed .
The several prospects of lofty inaccessible hills in the day , and the solitariness of the gloomy narrow vallies in the night , added to the mixed , confused noise of the surge continually beating against the shore , the tumbling of the waters from an immense precipice , the roaring of sea lions and sea-wolves ,  whose voices are more or less shrill or hoarse according to their youth or age , compose so wild and horrible a medley , that the stoutest man must long be accustomed to it , before he can taste the sweets of refreshing sleep , or wholly divest himself of terror .


October 6 , we set sail , with nothing to subsist on at sea but the before-mentioned smoked congers , one cask of beef , and four live hogs , together with three or four bushels of farina .
We were upwards of forty of us crowded together , and lying upon bundles of eels , with no convenience of keeping the men clean , nor any thing to defend us from their abominable stench  not a drop of water to be had without sucking it out of the cask through a pipe , which being used promiscuously , became intolerably nauseous .
The unsavoury morsels we daily ate created perpetual quarrels amongst us , every one contending for the frying-pan .
All the conveniency we had for firing , was an half tub filled with earth , which made our cooking so tedious , that we had a continual noise of frying from morning till night .


Thus we traversed the ocean : happy , however , in the thought of being once more afloat , and cherishing the hope that something would speedily fall into our hands .
Every day , while the sea-breeze continued , we were hard put to it , for not having above 16 inches free board , and our bark tumbling prodigiously , the water continually ran over us  and , having only a grating  deck , and no tarpaulin to cover it , our pumps would but just keep us free .


October 10 , being the fourth day of our new expedition , we fell in with a large ship , which I could plainly see was Europe built .
This struck me with the dread of her being a man-of-war  however , our case being desperate , I stood for her , and , before we could get quite up with her , the enemy discovered the brownness of our canvas , and , suspecting us , wore ship , and hauled close on a wind to the westward .
This done , they hoisted their colours , fired a gun , and crouded away from us at a great rate  but , in about two hours it fell calm , and we had recourse to our oars .
In the mean time we overhauled our arms , which we found to be in very bad condition , one-third of them being without flints , and we had but three cutlasses  so that we were but ill prepared for boarding , which was the only means we could have of taking any ship .
We had but one small cannon , which we could not mount , and therefore were obliged to fire it as it lay along upon the deck  and to supply it we had no more ammunition than two round shot , a few chain-bolts and bolt-heads , the clapper of the Speedwell 's bell , and some bags of beach-stones to serve for partridge .
In about four hours we came up with this ship , and every one seemed as easy in his mind as if actually in possession of her .
But , as we advanced nearer , I saw her guns and patararoes , and a considerable number of men upon deck , with their arms glittering  in the sun , who called out to us by the name of English dogs , defying us , in a scornful way , to come on board of them , and at the same time gave us a volley of great and small shot , which killed our gunner , and almost brought our fore-mast by the board .
This warm reception staggered a great many of my men who before seemed the forwardest , insomuch that they lay upon their oars for some time , in spite of all I could do to make them keep their way .
We recovered ourselves again , and rowed close up with the enemy , and engaged them till all our small shot was expended , which obliged us to fall astern to make some slugs .
In this manner we made three attempts , but with no better success .


All the night it was calm , and we were busied in making slugs , and had provided a large quantity by the next morning , when we came to a final determination of either carrying the ship , or of submitting to her  and accordingly , at day-break , I ordered twenty men in our yaul , to lay her athwart the hawse , whilst I boarded her in the bark .
The people in the boat put off , giving me repeated assurances of their good behaviour  but , at the very juncture we were coming to action , a gale sprang up , and she went away from us .


This ship was called the Margarita , and was the same which had been a privateer belonging to St. Malo 's , and mounted forty guns , all the last war .
In the skirmishes we had with her ,  we had none killed , except Gilbert Henderson , our gunner  and only three were wounded , viz .
Mr. Brooks , First Lieutenant , through the thigh , Mr. Coldsea , the Master , through the groin , and one of the fore-mast-men through the small of his back .
Two of these did very well , and I think there was something extraordinary in their cure  for the surgeon had nothing to apply to their wounds , but what he himself had prepared with seals-oil , and other matters he had found on the island .
Mr. Coldsea , indeed , lingered in a miserable manner for nine or ten months  but at length recovered .


Our condition now grew worse and worse  for soon after we had parted from this ship , a bard gale came on , which lasted four days without ceasing , during all which time we had not an hour 's hope of living a minute .
We were obliged to scud away under bare poles , with our yaul in tow  and , having but a short scope of boat-rope , we were , on the descent of every sea , in the greatest danger of having the bark 's stern beat in by the violence of the boat 's precipitate fail after us  and , once in particular , a great hollow sea had like to have thrown her upon our deck , which would have put an end to our voyage immediately .
The excessive fright of this storm made many of our people form a resolution of going on shore the very first opportunity .


In this extremity , calling to mind M. Frezier 's account of Iquique , I mentioned the surprizal  of that place to the crew , which being universally approved of , we directed our course to that island .


It was three weeks before we got this length  and having nothing to ride the bark with , we were obliged to keep the sea with her , whilst the boat went in between the rocks , and was received by some Indians on the strand with a sort of welcome .
The men , being landed , went to the Lieutenant 's house , broke it open , and rummaged the whole village , where they found a booty more valuable to us at that time than gold and silver .
It consisted of about sixty bushels of wheat-flour , 120 of Calavances and corn , some jerked beef , pork and mutton , some thousand weight of well-cured fish , a good number of fowls , some rusk , and four or five days eating of soft bread , together with five or six jars of Peruvian wine and brandy  and , to crown all , they had the good fortune to find a large boat near the shore , to bring off the booty with , which otherwise would have been of little use to us , our own boat being already sufficiently laden with the men .


Words can not express the joy that reigned among us when they came on board : the scene was now changed from famine to plenty  the loaves of soft bread were distributed to every one , and the jars of wine were broached  but I took care they should drink but moderately of it , each man having no more than half a pint to his share : and , after a day or two 's  living on wholesome diet , we wondered how our stomachs had been able to digest our rank and nauseous eels fried in train oil , and could scarcely believe we had lived upon nothing else for a month past .


Mr. Randall , our Second Lieutenant , who commanded in this enterprize , told me , they did not meet with the least opposition , and that the few Indians they found seemed to be as glad of this opportunity of pillaging the Spaniards as we were .


The settlement at Iquique consists of about 60 scattered ill-built houses , which hardly deserve that name , and a small church .
There is not the least verdure to be seen in or about it , nor does it afford the least necessary of life , of its own product , not even water , which they are obliged to fetch in boats from Pisagua , ten leagues to the northward .


By two Indian prisoners we took here , we were informed , that the Lieutenant 's boat was then at Pisagua , and that it would not be long before her return  however , being determined to make some attempt in the road of le Nasco , in lat 16 deg .
S. and at Pisco , in lat .
13 deg .
45 min .
S. we set sail , and the very morning we came off the Sierra or high-land of le Nasco , two hours before day-light , we fell in with a large ship .
The circumstances of our meeting and engaging her were , in some measure , the same with those we had with the Margarita .
We met with both at the same time in the  morning , and , whilst in pursuit of both , had the misfortune of being becalmed .
We struggled with this last for six or seven hours , and were at length obliged to leave her , because the sea-breeze came in so strong , and the sea ran so high , that , had she been of no force , our slight bark must have been in pieces before a third part of us could have entered her .
This ship was called the St. Francisco Palacio ?
of 700 tons , eight guns and ten pete [ ... ] aroes , and was well manned and provided with small arms .


It happened very unfortunately , that we should thus miss two of the best equipped ships in the private trade at that time in the South Seas .
This last repulse was made a pretence for much murmuring  many , despairing of ever being able to take any thing as our condition was , were for surrendering to the enemy , who was all the night becalmed near us .
To prevent their design , I took care to remove the two boats out of their power , by ordering two men in each of them , such as I thought I could trust , and to cast off from us at a little distance , that none might escape in them .
But , notwithstanding the confidence I had in these four , the two in the best boat ran away with her  and the next day I was informed , that the First Lieutenant and Morphew had made a party , too strong for me to oppose , to go away with the boat that was left  but , it blowing fresh the next night , they were prevented from executing their design .


 The next day we stood into the road of Pisco , as we had designed , where we discovered what appeared to be a large ship .
We bore down to her with a resolute despair , and laid her athwart the hawse  but , to our great satisfaction , we met with no resistance , and were received by the Captain and his Officers with their hats off , in the most submissive manner asking for quarter .
Before we came up , I had ordered our boat to intercept theirs , which was going on shore .
They clapped her on board , but , not holding fast , they fell astern , and could not fetch up with her again  so that in this boat was conveyed away every thing that might have been valuable in the prize .
She was a good ship , of about 200 tons , called the Jesus-Maria , almost laden with pitch , tar , copper , and plank , but nothing else .
The Captain offered 1600 dollars for her ransom , but I could not give ear to it in the condition which I was then in .


The Spanish Captain informed me , that the Margarita had been arrived some time at Callao , where she had given a full account of us  that the Captain of her , and three more , were killed in the action with us , and that the Priest and several others were wounded  and that she was now ready to put to sea again , with an addition of ten guns and fifty men  to cruise for us : and , moreover , that the Flying fish , a frigate of 28 guns , was already out with the same intent .
Upon this advice , having cleared our  bark , we gave her to the Spanish Captain , and as soon as the breeze sprang up , we weighed , and went to sea , and in going out met with our boat , which I have mentioned to have left us in the night  they edged towards us , imagining we were Spaniards , by which means we got them again .
The two fellows in her were almost dead , having ate or drank nothing for three days , and had just been ashore on a small island , to kill seals to drink their blood .
They had no excuse for themselves , but that they fell asleep , and the faint breezes of the night had wafted us in the bark away from them .


Pisco being 40 leagues to the windward of Callao , I kept close hauled till I had gained a two degrees offing , and kept that distance till we had got well to the northward of Callao , and hauled in again for the land , a little to the southward of Truxillo , and looked into the roads of Guanchaco , Malabriga , and Cheripe  but , seeing no ship at those places , I passed between the island of Lobos de Tierra and the continent  and , Nov. 25 , found ourselves near the Saddle of Payta , where having made some prisoners , I examined them concerning the condition of the town , which they answered was very poor at present , there being neither money nor provisions in it , and shewed me a small bark on the shore , which Captain Clipperton had sent in here a little while before with some of his prisoners , which had given them such an alarm , that every thing had been again removed into the country .
This  unwelcome news did not hinder us from keeping on our way , with our Spanish colours flying , till we came to the place of anchorage .


No sooner was our anchor down than I sent away Mr. Brooks , with both the boats , armed with 24 men  no more of them , however , appeared than those who rowed , and two or three sitters in each , the rest , with their arms , lying in the bottom of the boat .
Thus they advanced towards the town , without giving the least umbrage to the inhabitants , who were so thoroughly persuaded of our being Spaniards , that , when the people landed , they found the children playing on the beach , who were the first that took the alarm , and ran away at the sight of armed men .
In an instant the whole place was in confusion  the town was deserted , and nothing left in it but a few bales of coarse cloth , about 500 of dried tole or dog-fish , two or three pedlars packs , and an inconsiderable quantity of bread and sweetmeats  so that we unluckily had but little employment for our boats .


As we lay at an anchor in the ship , we took a boat with about fifty jars of Peruvian wine and brandy , the master of which told us , he was come by stealth from Callao , there being orders that none but ships of some force should stir out .
This man was the first who acquainted me with Captain Hatley 's being taken , and the value of his prizes  and likewise assured me , that , if Captain Clipperton had landed the first time he was here , there were 400,000 pieces of eight in  it , besides a great quantity of jesuits bark , and other valuable commodities , of all which he might easily have made himself master  but he wanted courage .
Some of the King of Spain 's treasure is frequently lodged under the Governor 's care  and , if he had made an attempt , even the second time , it would have been worth his while .
As for Collan , which is two miles to the northward of this , situated near the mouth of a little river , it is a mean place , being entirely inhabited by Indians .


From this place we directed our course for the island of Gorgona , in the bay of Panama , and in our passage thither built a tank , or wooden cistern , big enough to hold 10 tons of water , wherewith to supply our want of casks , as without the help of some such contrivance we should have but little hopes of being ever able to return home .
In our way we made the island of Plate , Cape St. Francis , and Gorgonella  and on Dec. 2 , we came to anchor to the leeward of the northernmost point of Gorgona , within less than a quarter of a mile of the shore .
Here we had the advantage of filling our water-casks in the boat , the water running in small streams into the sea , and cut down our wood at high water mark  so that in less than 48 hours we had done our business here , and hurried away to sea , for fear of those who might be in quest of us .


Having got out of the track of the enemies ships , we consulted on the best methods of proceeding , when the majority were for going directly  over to the coasts of Asia .
Upon this we changed our ship 's name from the Jesus Maria to the Happy Return , and applied all our endeavours towards abandoning these coasts  but the winds and currents were averse to it  and some of those who opposed our departure , did so much damage clandestinely to our tank , that the greatest part of our water leaked out .
This , together with continual contrary winds and dead calms , which detained us till our provisions were much exhausted , rendered us incapable to undertake so long a run  and therefore , to furnish ourselves with what we wanted , I proposed a descent on the island of Quibo , in lat .
7 deg .
40 min .
N. where , by Captain Rogers 's account , I guessed there must be inhabitants who lived in a plentiful manner on the product of the country .


On January 13 , 1721 , we anchored between Quibo and the isle of Quivetta , in a sandy bay , commodious for wooding and watering .
The morning after our arrival , we saw two large piraguas rowing in for the isle of Quivetta , one of them with Spanish colours flying  and , after a little debate , whether it would be prudent for us to attack them in our boat or not , it was resolved , at all hazards , to go after them in our yaul .
This enterprize was commanded by Mr. Brooks , our First Lieutenant , who found the men on shore , brought away their piraguas , and two prisoners , the one a Mulatto , and the other a Negro  the rest sought for refuge in the woods .
The Mulatto mortified us very much , by telling  us , that a vessel laden with provisions had passed by very near us in the night  but , to make amends , promised to conduct us to a place where we might supply ourselves without any hazard , provided we were not above two or three days about it .
No news could be more welcome to us than this , wherefore we were very brisk in getting off our wood and water  and , on January the 19th , we got safe in between Mariato and the island of Sebaco , and anchored in six fathom water , over against a green field , which is instruction sufficient , there being but that clear spot hereabouts .
Our guide desired we might be going at least three hours before day-light , and that then we should be in good time at the plantations .
Accordingly I embarked at two the next morning in our own boat , and ordered the two lieutenants in the two piraguas , leaving my son and a few men with him , to take care of the ship .
Our guide carried us up some part of the river St. Martin , and out of that into several branches of very narrow creeks amongst mangroves , where we had not room to row , which made me suspect he had no good design in his head  but we landed just at day-break on a fine savannah , or plain  and , after a march of about three miles , came to two farm-houses , whose owners had made their escape , except the wife and children of one house .


The place answered the man 's description , being surrounded by numerous herds of black cattle , hogs , and plenty of fowls of all sorts   and here we found some dried beef , plantains , and Indian corn  and , for present use , were entertained with a wholsome breakfast of hot cake and milk , a diet we had been long unacquainted with When it came to be broad day , I saw our ship close by us , upon which I asked our Mulatto , How he came to bring us so far about ?
He answered , There was a river between us , and he did not know whether it was fordable or not .
I therefore sent some to try , who found it was not above knee deep .
Wherefore , to avoid the trouble of carrying our plunder so far as we had been led , I ordered our boats to row out of the river St. Martin , and to come to the beach over against the ship .
We had not been long here before the master of the family we were with , being anxious for their safety , returned , and made an offer of as many of his black cattle as we should think sit to require  which offer we kindly received : and he brought us the number we thought we could save  for , having but little salt , and not being able to spare water to keep them alive when at sea , our demands were moderate  and the few we required , as soon as they were carried on board , were k [ ... ] ed .
Their flesh we preserved by cutting it into long slips of the thickness of a finger , and then sprinkling it with so small a quantity of salt , that we did not use above four or five pounds to a hundred weight  then letting it he together two or three hours , we hung it up to dry in the sun , which perfectly cured it , and  that better than it could have been done by any other way .


Having done all we proposed in coming here , we departed with our decks full of fowls and hogs , amongst which there was one with its navel , or something like it , on its back .
The Spaniards say , that this , when wild in the woods , is a terrible animal to meet with , although at full growth it be but small .


January 25 , we made a sail about two leagues to the leeward of us : we gave her chace till we found she was of European structure  and fearing she might be one of the enemy 's ships of war , I clapped on a wind , and in half an hour 's time it fell calm .
Soon after , we saw a boat rowing towards us , which proved to be the Success 's pinnace , commanded by Mr. Davidson , their First Lieutenant .
My first interview with him was attended by an astonishment equal on both sides  he could hardly believe that he saw us in so mean and forlorn a condition  and I could scarce believe that the Success ( if in being ) had been all this while wandering up and down these seas .


I entertained him with a rehearsal of the constant run of misfortunes which had befallen us in the long interval since we separated near the coast of England , till our present meeting that day  and he , on his part , entertained me with several remarkable incidents , which had happened to them in the course of their voyage .
Particularly , he told me , that , about a twelve-month  before , they had taken a new French-built brigantine , and put their officers and ship 's company 's plunder on board of her , which they valued at ten thousand pounds sterling  that their second Captain , Mr. Mitchel , was intrusted with the command of her , and was ordered to go to some island on the coast of Mexico , and to stay there till Captain Clipperton should join him with his ship  but that they never could find the island since , and , therefore , judged that poor Mitchel , and his men , were either starved , or murdered by the Spaniards or Indians , or that he had perished with the island , such submersions being frequent on those coasts .
The story of Captain Mitchel , who was a very worthy man , and an expert sailor , is , in all its circumstances , a very tragical one .
There was always a jealousy between him and his Captain , who ordered him to a place , and pretended to give him infallible directions to find it , which never could be found afterwards , and , tis my opinion , never was above water  and the unfortunate gentleman , without doubt , perished in some obscure , miserable manner , in quest of a place that was never yet , and perhaps never may be discovered .
In our discourse , I asked Mr. Davidson the value of the booty they had made , and he assured me it did not exceed 70,000 dollars - but that they had lost great opportunities - that in October , 1720 , they were in the bay of Conception , and had the misfortune to leave three laden ships  behind them , and missed a fourth , which was coming into the bay , and which was so near as to hail and talk to them , besides being becalmed by them  - that though it was probable their launch could have taken them all four , yet , through their Captain 's deafness to advice , they took none of them : - that , moreover , they had never yet cleaned their bottom , notwithstanding they had had it in their power to do it  and that this negligence had like to have cost them dear  for that , in their return from Conception , they looked into Coquimbo , where they saw five ships at anchor , three of which let slip after them , and overtook them apace , but by the favour of thick weather , and a hard gale of wind , they got clear of them  and further , that , off the port of Callao , they fell in with the Flying-fish frigate , which was cruising for me in the bark , and which , by unpardonable mismanagement on the part of Clipperton , got safe from them , although deeply laden with a valuable cargo designed for Cadiz .
I have been since informed of this by one of my surgeon 's mates , who was taken in the Mercury , and was surgeon of the Flying-fish at that time .


This was the substance of my discourse with Mr. Davidson , when , in the mean time , a gale sprung up , which interrupted us , and I bore down to the Success , and went on board of her .
I gave Captain Clipperton , and Mr. Godfrey , the agent-general , the whole history of my voyage hitherto , and expected that I should  have been treated by them as one belonging to the same interest , but found I was mistaken  for they were unwilling to have any thing to do with me since my ship was lost .
However , I conceived , that he could not be so inhuman , as to deny me the supply of such necessaries as I wanted , and he could conveniently spare .
The answer I had to this was , that I should know more of his mind the next day .
Amongst the rest of the discourse I had with him , he told me he was just come from the island of Cocos , that his people were sickly , and at very short allowance .
Upon this , I offered my service to pilot him to Mariato , which was not above thirty leagues distant from us , where he might have refreshed his people , and supplied himself with what he would .
But this was not accepted , he being resolved to make the best of his way to the Tres Marias , where , he said , there was turtle enough to be had  so I left him for that night .


The next morning , as I was going on board of him again , with some of my officers , he suddenly spread all his canvas , and crouded away from us , who were in the boat : upon which I returned to our ship again , and made signals of distress , and fired our gun several times , which was not regarded by him , till his very officers cried out on his barbarity , and , at last , he brought to .
When I had sailed up with him , ( being exasperated at such inhuman treatment ) I sent Mr. Brooks , our First Lieutenant ,  to know the reason of his abrupt departure , and to tell him that we stood in need of several necessaries , which , if he was not inclined to give , I would purchase of him .
Upon these terms he spared me two of his quarter-deck guns , sixty round shot , some musquet-balls and flints , and a Spanish chart of the coast of Mexico and part of India and China , a half-hour , and a half-minute glass , a compass , and about 300 weight of salt  but with all the arguments I could use , I could not prevail on him to spare us the least thing out of his surgeon 's chest for the relief of Mr. Coldsea , our master , who had been ready to die of his wounds received in the engagement with the Margarita , for above three months past .
When this was concluded , I again asked him , if I could be of any service to him , and assured him , I had a pretty good ship under foot , though she made but a poor figure , and believed I could hold him way , and that he knew our cargo was pretty valuable .
To all this he answered , that , if I had a cargo of gold , he had no business with me , and that I must take care of myself .
Mr. Hendry , the agent , and Mr. Rainer and Mr. Dodd , Lieutenants of marines , seeing but little prospect that we should ever get home , and being weary of the work that was imposed upon them , desired I would let them go on board the Success , for a passage to England  which I consenting to , they went on board accordingly , and Clipperton left us to shift for ourselves , near the island of Cano .
Having purchased this supply , I was for going to  the southward into the bay of Panama , to try our fortune there  but the majority opposed me through fear , and were for going to the Tres Mar [ ... ] as , to salt turtle there , and then stretch over for India .
We directed our course thither  and , a few days after , met with the Success in quest of Sonsonnate , where they expected to receive the Marquis of Villa Roche 's ransom .
That nobleman had been some time a prisoner with them , and his wife was now at Guatimali , a city within 30 leagues of that port .
We ranged close under their stern , and asked how Captain Clipperton and the rest of the gentlemen did , but it was not thought proper to return any answer  so without any concern , he steered one way , and we another .
After this , calms , and contrary winds , and unaccountable currents , reduced us to a very small allowance , which we were obliged to diminish daily , and should have been in deeper distress than ever , had it not been for the turtle which we took on the surface of the water .
We had a continual look-out for them , and they were easily known , at a great distance , by the number of sea-birds that perched on their backs .
Upon sight of these , we used to lay aside the advantages we might have made of the wind , to embrace the opportunity of prolonging our provisions .
Upon the whole , though we lost some of our way in pursuit of turtle after this manner , it was not the greatest inconvenience that [ ... ] tended us  the dressing it made a great consumption of our water , the quantity of which  decreased upon us very suddenly , by the continual use of it in boiling the turtle with plantain flower .
This relapse into a state of famine , threatening us with speedy and certain perdition , if means were not used to avert it , made me propose the plundering of some small town as we coasted along the shore .
Guatulco was the nearest to us : but the very morning we were steering in for this place , at sun-rising we saw a sail a considerable way to leeward of us .
We thought it would be better to take this ship than to venture on shore , and therefore we bore down to her , who in the end proved to be the Success .
We now met with a double baulk , both as to our hopes of Guatulco and the ship  for we were by this accident got so far to the leeward of Guatulco , that it was needless to beat up so far against the wind for an uncertainty , when we had a gale , that , had it continued , would have carried us to some better port .


But the winds were but a few hours propitious , and were succeeded by perpetual contrary gales , which destroyed all our hopes , and brought us down to a small earthen plate of calavances , a kind of small bean , for 24 hours , which not being sufficient to keep us alive , we had recourse to the remainder of our smoked congers , which had for some months been neglected , and lain soaking and rotting in the bulge water .
They were certainly as disagreeable food as ever men eat .


Under these calamitous circumstances did we  meet with the Success a fourth time , near the port of Angels  and , after having made the appointed signal , we stood so near to one another , that , to use the sea phrase , a bisket might have been tossed from ship to ship , but we did not change a word with each other  for , Captain Clipperton , as I have since been informed , had ordered all his officers and ship 's company to take no notice of us : and , though he was so truly sensible of the difficulties and hazards we had to cope with , if our design was to go for India , that he said , The child that was born the day before would be grey headed with age before we should arrive there ( intimating by that expression , that it was impossible for us to do it ) , yet , notwithstanding , he , without any remorse , could see us on the brink of suffering the greatest severities our ill fortune could load us with , and not lend us a helping hand to deliver us from the impending ruin .


Thus surrounded on all sides by present want and threatening disasters , we , on the 12th of March , being off the port of Acapulco , saw a ship between us and the shore .
I bore down to her , till perceiving her to be a large Europe-built ship , with Spanish colours flying , I concluded she was the Peregrine , who , as I had been informed , had carried the Prince of St. Bueno , who had been Viceroy of Peru , to this port in his way to Spain .
With these suspicions , being as yet unwilling to run ourselves so immediately into the enemy 's clutches , I hauled again  on a wind , which he seeing , he pulled down his Spanish , and hoisted an English ensign , and made the signal agred on between Clipperton and me for knowing one another .
Had they been in any other part , I should have been so far from entertaining any thoughts of such a change in him , that I should have looked on all his signals as the artifices of the enemy , who might have acquainted themselves with them by the information of such of our men as they might have taken prisoners .
But now , making no doubt that it was he , I bore down to him , and being come along his side , he sent Captain Cook , his second Lieutenant , in his yaul , with an obliging letter to me , to inform me , he was cruising for the homeward-bound Manilla ship , and desiring I would assist him in the enterprize , and come on board of him the next morning , proposing a union of our two ship 's companies .
I was very well pleased with this offer , and , without hesitation , returned him word that I would be with him early .


In the mean time , I read over his letter publicly to my people , and exhorted them seriously to consider of the great benefits that would accrue to us on all sides from it .
Upon which they all expressed the most resigned willingness to join in the undertaking .
But , as Clipperton had used us so unhandsomely before , they desired I would get some security for their shares , signed by Captain Clipperton , Mr. Godfrey the agent , and the rest of their officers .
I went on board , and , according  to their request , Capt. Clipperton , and Mr. Godfrey , the owners agent , immediately drew up an instrument fully worded for the purpose , and they and all the other officers signed it .
This was all my people wanted to make them easy .


We then proceeded upon our main business  and , after mature deliberation , it was thought most adviseable , that I should send the greatest part of my men on board the Success , as soon as we saw the Manilla ship come out of Acapulco , and leave only a boat 's crew with me to bring me away , in case I should have occasion to make use of my ship as a fire-ship , or a smoaker , which we jointly proposed to do , if we found the enemy too hard for us  and it was determined to board her at once , as we should otherwise have much the worst of it , on account of their superior weight of metal , and the better capacity of their ships , which are built very strong , to bear a cannonading .
Clipperton assured me , he was certain of the time when she would sail from this port , which the Spaniards say is always within a day or two after Passion-week , of which we had a fortnight yet to come .


Before I returned to my own ship , I acquainted Captain Clipperton with our slender stock of provisions , but particularly with our shortness of water  and he told me he had 80 tons of it on board , and he would spare me as much of it as I would have , or any thing else his ship afforded .


 I had now the pleasure of being restored to my command in as regular a manner as ever  every one , from the highest to the lowest , expressing the satisfaction he had in the prospect before us .
But Morphew , that ringleader of all our disorders , fearing my resentment , thought it was his best way , to insinuate himself into the favour of the Captain and Officers of the Success , which he did effectually , by an humble , submissive , outward deportment , and prevailing presents .
In short , he had his end , and left me  but , the next morning , Mr. Rainer , who acted with us afterwards as Captain of marines , came on board of us to visit his old shipmates , and so continued .


Thus we cruised in good order , and with a great deal of hope , until March 17 , when , towards evening , Clipperton , contrary to his usual custom , stretched a-head of us about two leagues , without lowering so much as a top-gallant-sail for us to come up with him .
I could not but be a little startled at this , as being quite contrary to his usual method .
However , I kept standing after him , as I thought , in the night , till we were almost in the breakers on the shore , which of course obliged us to tack , and stand out to sea again , admiring all the time that we had had no signal for going about .
The next morning we had no sight of any ship near us , which laid me under the most terrible apprehensions , considering the bad condition we were in for want of water , and the vast distance we were at  from any place where we could expect to get a recruit of any , having now no choice left , but either to beat up 220 leagues against the wind , to go to the Tres Marias , or bear away a much more considerable distance for the gulph of Amapala , or the island of Cocos .


But , notwithstanding our distress , I kept our cruising station for him two or three days .
At last it was resolved to bear away to the first convenient place to water at  and , in truth , it was time , for we were now 40 odd men , who had but three buts of water for a run of 300 leagues and upwards , on a coast subject to long calms , variable winds , and uncertain currents .


It was afterwards told me , that the night Clipperton left us , he assembled all his officers , and told them it was his intention immediately to quit the coast .
His officers remonstrated to him on the barbarity of doing this without acquainting Captain Shelvock with his intention , and sparing us some water .
But he put off their serious expostulations with an inhuman sneer , saying , That , if I should , through want , be obliged to surrender to the enemy , I should only share the same fate , that , perhaps , some others had met with before me .


Thus this man , perhaps , through an excess of mean-spiritedness , and dreading the engagement with a ship that was always known to defend itself with some obstinacy , neglected as fine an opportunity as most of our nation have ever had of taking this ship , which , as I was informed ,  by some Spaniards from Manilla , when I was in China , came out of Acapulco about a week after we left the cruize - [ For Capt. Clipperton 's account of this transaction we refer the reader to the preceding voyage . ]


On March 30 , in the evening , we entered the road of Sonsonnate , and , as the sun set , saw a ship at anchor there .
It being a moon-light night , I sent the first Lieutenant , with some of the best hands , to discover what this ship might be .
On his return he informed me , the ship was a large one , of one tier of guns at least .
I nevertheless continued to ply in all the night , and prepared for action .
At day-light we found they had hoisted a jar of powder , containing about ten gallons , with lighted match , at each main and fore yard arm , and at the bowsprit end , with design to let them fall on our decks if we boarded them .
This contrivance , if it had taken effect , would have soon made an end of both ships , and of all that were in them .
Seeing them so desperate in their preparations , I expected a warm dispute with them  and , by what I could see , they were , in all points , superior by much to us in strength .


At eleven in the morning , the sea-breeze came in , and ran us upon them very fast , whilst our small arms were briskly and effectually employed to break their powder jars , before we came to board them , which we did without delay , and , after the exchange of a few shot when on board of each other , they submitted .


 This ship was called the Sacra Familia , of 300 tons , six guns , and 70 men  besides a great number of small arms , with some grenade shells and shot .
She had been , for some time before , arrived from Callao , with wine and brandy  but had now nothing in her but fifty jars of gunpowder , and a small parcel of rusk and jerked beef .
In short , she could hardly be said to be worth the trouble we took , and the risques we ran for her : but she was reputed to be a better sailor , and was visibly better fitted out than our own  wherefore I changed ships , and we all went on board our prize , which was equipped in the warlike manner we found her , and commissioned , on purpose to take us .


A merchant , the escrivan of the ship , being On board , desired we would sell him the Jesus Maria , which we agreed to , and sent him on shore to raise the money for that purpose  and at night he came off with another Spanish gentleman , and brought us a letter of advice from the Governor on shore , signifying that there was a treaty of peace on foot between their Britannic and Catholic Majesties , which was what we had not before heard of .
However , I sent to the Governor , signifying that I should be very glad to see the proclamation and articles  and that thereupon , I should be ready to obey the commands of my Sovereign  so we came to an agreement with the Governor to lye in the road till he sent to Guatimala , 50 leagues distant , for those papers , provided he would supply  us with water and provisions .
On the 5th of April , the Governor sent on board two papers , which , by the best interpretation we could get of them , did not appear to us to be in the form of proclamations .
We told those who brought the papers aboard , that we were in great want of an interpreter  upon which they said , there were some Englishmen at Guatimala , whom they would send for , if we would stay three days for them , and that they would supply us with water and provisions till that time  which we agreed to , and they desired we would send our boat on shore every morning for the supply .
Accordingly , on the 7th of April , we sent our boat on shore with Mr. Brooks , our first Lieutenant , and five men .
This officer , men , and boat , the Governor detained under a flag of truce , and , at night , sent off a small boat , with two of our men , with a letter from himself , and another from Mr. Brooks .
His letter signified , that , if we did not deliver up our ship to him , he would declare us pirates .
And Mr. Brooks , by his , informed me , that it was his opinion , that the Governor was endeavouring to bully me into a surrender , having spoken very ambiguously of a cessation of arms : notwithstanding which , I sent the Governor a letter , signifying , that , if we could be secured of a safe and sure conduct for ourselves and effects to Panama , and from thence , by the way of Porto Bello , be conveyed to any of our British plantations , we would come to a farther  treaty  which if he intended , he was desired to signify it by firing two guns as soon as he had received this advice , and by sending back my officer and men  if not , necessity would oblige us to sail .
At three in the morning , ( the Governor having shewn no signal , nor sent any word ) we weighed our anchor , yet lay to in the bay till ten , but then made sail , being forced thereto for want of water  having , however , no other intent , in case of the certainty of a peace , than to deliver up the ship we were now in at the first convenient port , as was signified to the Governor by letter .


Being now got out to sea , we reduced ourselves to a pint of water for 24 hours each man , and directed our course for the gulph of Amapala , which was about 35 leagues to the E.S.E. of this place , in order to get a fresh supply .
The loss of my officer and boat 's crew , sensibly diminished the number of white faces , and we should have been so much weakened by it , that we should never have been able to manage this great ship , with her heavy cotton sails , if we had not taken with us our negro prisoners , who proved to be very good sailors .
The loss of our boat was also a very great inconvenience to us  but as I only thought of taking water enough to carry us to Panama , where we were fully resolved to surrender , if it was really peace , I imagined we might make shift without her , and get such a quantity as we might want in two or three days time .


 The winds were favourable , and we arrived there on the tenth following in the evening .
As soon as we had entered the gulph we found ourselves in the midst of several small islands , one of which was the island of Tygers , where we expected to find water  but our expectations proved vain , for , after a hazardous and fruitless search not only on that , but on some of the greenest of the other isles , there was not the least drop of fresh water to be found , by us , on any of them .


In this miserable condition , threatened on all sides with inevitable destruction , unfit for the sea , fearful of trusting ourselves in the cruel hands of the inhabitants on the shore , quite dispirited by the continued course of misfortunes which had hitherto been our constant attendants  but , above all , lamenting this unhappy baulk in not finding water where we so much expected it , which had reduced us to such extremities as we had never known before  in short , ready to sink under the burden of our calamities , we weighed our anchor on the 13th of April before day-break , and stood out from this gulph .
And now having the open sea before us , I brought my people in general to an obstinate resolution not to surrender on this part of the coast , let the consequences be ever so miserable .
Upon this unanimous agreement , with not 40 gallons of water in the ship , and no other liquids to supply the want of it , we came to so small an allowance as half a pint of  water for 24 hours  and even this allowance was rather too large , there being no place , that we knew of , where we could get any more , nearer than Quibo , to which island , about 200 leagues distant from us , we shaped our course , but having very uncertain winds and weather , we were 13 days at this allowance .
Our sufferings from the extremity of thirst are hardly to be conceived  some drank their own water to allay the burning heat within them , but though this moistened their mouths , it increased their misery  some drank large draughts of sea-water , which was near putting a period to their lives  while others eat just enough of the calavances moistened with water to sustain life , and these suffered the least .


At length we were fortunately relieved , by falling in unexpectedly with the island of Cano , in lat .
9 deg .
N. where seeing a run of water , Mr. Randall , without dreading the dangerous surf , passed through the breakers , and , to the unspeakable joy of all the company , soon returned on board with his jars filled  but as he could not bring off more than 60 or 70 gallons , I took care to restrain our people in the use of it , allowing to each man only a quart for their immediate use : and I was the more strict in this distribution , because Mr. Randall assured me , the breakers were so dangerous , that he believed we should not be able to get at any more .


Being willing , however , to make another trial , I next day sent the boatswain , to endeavour to  procure a further supply  but , after wasting the whole day in search of a smooth beach to land upon , he could not see one spot where he durst venture on shore .
Therefore , thinking we had a stock sufficient to carry us to Quibo , I weighed anchor , and in ranging the island I accidentally discovered a smooth beach , where the little boat getting on shore , the crew filled nine jars , which lasted till we arrived at Quibo , where we anchored at the same place we had twice anchored at before .
Here we consulted about surrendering ourselves to the Spaniards , being within 80 leagues of Panama , a place of little or no strength towards the sea , and but little frequented by the enemy 's ships of war , where we could treat with them at a distance , and be truly informed how affairs stood in Europe .
During our deliberations we wooded and watered at leisure  and some searched the woods for fruits to refresh us , by way of prevention against the scurvy , which we had been all along less subject to than any ship I ever saw or heard of in such long runs .
Those who were thus usefully employed brought us papas , guayavas , cassia , limes , and a small kind of white sour plumb , which was much eaten and admired by most of us  but , by its violent operation , it put a stop to our proceedings for some days .
However , we soon recovered , without any bad symptoms , and made an end of wooding and watering , and set sail , fully determined to surrender at Panama .
In our way we passed by a great many  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  small islands , but the most remarkable are , Montuosa , Sebaco , and the isle of Picara , which lies on the western side of Quibo .


May 15 , a small bark , taking us for Spaniards , bore down to us , the master of which was in the greatest consternation when he found his mistake , but recovered when he heard we were bound for Panama to surrender , and readily offered his pilot thither , his vessel , called the Holy Sacrament , being bound to that port , laden with dried beef , pork , and live hogs , which , as she was leaky , he desired that I would take in tow .
I was glad this bark fell into our hands , and readily complied with his request , because , if we found the Governor of Sonsonnate 's account to be false , we might be thoroughly enabled by this help to go to India .
In the mean while , it had remained a point yet undetermined , who should be the person entrusted with the flag of truce  for my people , having known much treachery , were apprehensive the person sent would only , or chiefly , make good his own case and that of his friends to the Governor , and not care what became of the common men .
At last , my son was judged the fittest to go , as he would surely return , if it were purely for my sake .
Other difficulties were started that could not so easily be removed , notwithstanding which , we kept on our way , fully fixed in our resolution .


May 17 , another small bark came down upon us , but having stood pretty near to us , she bore away again , and ran on shore directly , at the hazard  of the lives of every soul on board .
This unaccountable behaviour , gave us good reason to believe , that the governor of Sonsonnate 's account of a cessation of arms was groundless .


May 19 , we saw a sail a-head of us , standing along shore , and being desirous of speaking with her , I let go the bark we had in tow , and made all the sail we could after her .
We gained very little upon her all the day  but had , nevertheless , got a great way a-head of our bark , wherein were four of our own people and five Spaniards .
However , notwithstanding night came on , all our sail was kept abroad , and next morning we were within gun-shot of her .
I immediately ordered our colours to be spread , fired a gun to leeward , and set a man to wave a flag of truce  but , on sight of our English ensign , she fired at us , and so continued to do , with her decks full of men , abusing us with the grossest appellations .
I made no return until I came close upon their quarter , and then I sent one of their countrymen to the bowsprit end , to inform them in Spanish , that we were bound to Panama , and desired to treat peaceably with them , and hoped , at least , they would have some regard to the white flag which they saw flying  but they still continued their fire  and presuming , as I supposed , by our quiet behaviour , that we were unable to defend ourselves , they were preparing to board us , which I no sooner perceived than I met them with our helm , and gave them so warm a salute , that they steered round off from us .
We just missed getting  hold of them , but it falling almost immediately calm , we continued our engagement for the space of two or three hours at the distance of musquet-shot .
At length , a breeze wafting us nearer to them , we found that as fast as we approached , so fast did their courage cool .
Their Captain , however , still bravely encouraging his people , and exposing himself in the openest manner , was shot through the body , and dropped down dead  upon which they immediately , and with one voice , cried out for quarter , and put an end to the dispute .
Mr. Randall , and two or three more , went on board the prize , and found the prisoners in the most submissive posture , asking for mercy , which was granted , though they had no great reason to expect it , after their direct breach of the laws of arms and nations in firing at a flag of truce .


The most considerable prisoners , being brought on board , informed me , that their ship , called the Conception de Recova , belonging to Callao , was of the burthen of 200 tons , and laden with flour , loaves of sugar , bales of boxes of malmalade , jars of preserved peaches , grapes , limes , and the like , mounted six guns , and had 70 odd men on board .
In this engagement , the Spanish Captain and a negroe were killed , and one or two slightly wounded .
On our part , our gunner was slightly wounded by a pistol ball , and our main-mast had a small piece carried out of the side of it .
We had now about 80 prisoners of all colours , though we ourselves were not above 26 .


 Amongst our prisoners we had several of note , particularly Don Baltazzar de Abarca , Conde de Rosa , an European nobleman , who had beeen Governor of Pisco , and was now upon his return to Spain , together with Captain Morel , who had formerly been taken by Captain Rogers .
They were all treated with the utmost civility , which they the more wondered at , because , from a self-conviction of their own ungenerous behaviour towards us , they could not but expect to have been dealt with quite otherwise .


The winds and calms prevented our joining the Holy Sacrament , the prize we had left behind us , till May 22 , when we bore down to her , and were surprized to find no soul on board , but that her decks and quarters were covered with blood .
By many circumstances it plainly appeared , that the Spanish crew had butchered those who were left to assist them , while they were asleep  otherwise it could not have happened , that five unarmed Spaniards could have overpowered four Englishmen completely provided with arms for their defence .
It is very probable , however , that these murderers paid with their lives , the loss of those lives they had taken away  for , being above four leagues from the land , and having no boat with them , they probably jumped into the sea on our approach , fearing , if they fell into our hands , to meet the vengeance due for so horrid a crime .
That part of the deck which was dyed with gore they endeavoured to cover , by throwing the flocks and  stuffings of beds over it  so that till these were removed , the blood was not to be seen .


This tragical accident put a damp to the pleasure we had enjoyed for a day or two past on the account of our late prize .
Our prisoners , at such a sad and sudden change , began to be alarmed , and looked at one another as if they all expected to be the victims of our revenge upon this unhappy occasion .
On the other hand , I was fearful lest these apprehensions should urge them to some desperate attempt , they being 80 in number , and we not above 17 on board of our own ship , and , when we were all together , not above 25 that could stand to arms .
In this dilemma , I ordered all the prisoners into the stern gallery , except the nobleman , and some of the chief officers , and a guard to be kept in the great cabbin .


The Spanish gentlemen observing this , let fall some expressions whereby I perceived they were afraid I intended to proceed to severities towards their people  but I assured them , that , if I was of so revengeful a nature , the laws of my country forbad me from indulging it  that I acted under my King 's commission  and that the natural abhorrence our nation had to barbarity , might quiet their fears , and make them perfectly easy .
They then , on their part , in the most solemn manner disclaimed the very thought of an attempt upon our lives  and assured us , on their honour , that they thought they should never be able to make a just return for the  generous treatment they had met with .
It was , however , prudent to secure our prisoners of the meaner sort , and when we had so done , we hauled the Holy Sacrament along-side of us .
She was half full of water , and the greatest part of her dried beef was wet and spoiled , but all that was not damaged we took out , together with some live logs .
We also took out of the Conception a twelvemonth 's provision of bread , flour , sugar and sweetmeats , and a like proportion for the Success , whom I expected to find at the Tres Marias , being then a stranger to Clipperton 's faithless desertion .
I likewise took from them their launch and their negroes  for considering we had a large ship , and a run of 175 degrees of longitude to sail , which was little less than half way round the world , I thought we could do no other than reinforce ourselves with these blacks , who are commonly good sailors in these parts  and , indeed , we afterwards found we should never have reached the coasts of Asia without them .


Thus having supplied ourselves with every thing the Conception afforded , I suffered our prisoners to return to their own ship again  but the chief of them would not leave me till they had drawn up a writing , which they signed , whereby they acknowledged the circumstances of our engagement , in the manner I have already related .
In short , no people , circumstanced as we were , could part in a more friendly manner than we did .


 Thus were we put by our design of surrendering , and were going to undertake a long and hazardous voyage to Asia .
Our strength was indeed considerably augmented , for we had now 15 guns , and ammunition enough to supply them .


Before we proceeded any farther , it was necessary to get in a full stock of water .
The island of Quibo was hazardous for us , being too near Panama  it was therefore determined to ply up to Cano , where , having a good boat , we soon did our business .
In our passage thither , the sweetmeats of all kinds , which we had taken out of our late prize , were divided among the messes .
It happened that one of the fellows , one day , complained he had a box of malmalade which he could not stick his knife into , and desired it might be changed .
I opened it , and found in it a cake of virgin silver , moulded on purpose to fill such boxes , and being very porous , it was of near the same weight of so much malmalade .
In overhauling the rest , we found five more of these boxes .
This was a contrivance to defraud the King of Spain of his fifths , which he claims in all the silver taken out of any of the mines in Peru .
We doubtless left a great many of these boxes behind us , so that this deceit served them in a double capacity , to defraud their king 's officers , and blind their enemies .
An affair as vexatious as this , is said to have been discovered too late on board a prize the Success had taken , where they found a very  considerable quantity of Pinna 's or virgin silver , in the form of bricks , very artfully plaistered over with clay , and dried in the sun , which being all the consistence they give their bricks in that country , they were taken to be really such , and a great number of them were thrown overboard as so much rubbish , without any discovery of what they were , till the four or five last pieces .
How true this may be I ca n't say , but it was reported to be , as matter of fact , by several of the officers belonging to Captain Clipperton .


I must here observe , that every thing we took in the Conception was divided among us according to the Juan Fernandian articles , and that I had no more than six instead of sixty shares .
They would not so much as allow me the money I had laid out at St. Catherine 's , which was upwards of a hundred pounds .
I had some difficulty to persuade them to run to the northward so far as California  and was obliged to use many arguments to prevail upon them to believe that the harbour of Puerto Seguro was the only port of security where we could safely lay down and refit our ship  but having at last obtained their consents , I weighed from Cano , steering to the northward , and had favourable gales for 48 hours  but then came on the constant , or what may be called the trade wind on this coast , which being as contrary to us as they well could be , I was willing to try how far off these winds might prevail , which ,  in my opinion , may be called the eddy of the true trade wind , whose course may be perverted by the interposition of this vast mountainous continent .


Accordingly I found , that , at the distance of 60 leagues , we had light winds and variable , and that , at the distance of between 70 and 80 leagues , it settled at E. N. E. and N. E. I therefore kept at this distance from the land till we had run up to the height of 20 degrees north .
In all this passage , we were not in the least sensible of any currents , and entirely out of the way of certain riplings and overfalls of water , which we frequently met with nearer to the land , and which often surprized us when we were becalmed in deep water .


In this passage we were accompanied by vast shoals of fish , and were continually incommoded by numerous flocks of the birds called boobies , making our ship their resting place , which fouled our yards and deck with their dung as fast as we could clean them .
However , for change of diet , some of my people made ragouts of them , and the smoakers made stems for their pipes of their long wing-bones .


We fell in with Cape Corientes in the beginning of the month of August , and were carried away to the islands called the Tres Marias , by a hard gale at south , and came to an anchor under the lee of the middlemost of these islands , but could see no sign of the Success having been there .
After a tedious search on all the three  islands for fresh water , there was nothing like a stream of it that we could find .
This was the more astonishing to us , as one or two of our late navigators have reported that fresh water is to be found there in sufficient plenty .
It may have been so when they were there  but we were unfortunate enough to seek , when none was to be found .


After employing three days in a fruitless search , I stretched over for the coast of California , and arrived there on the 11th of August .
The inhabitants , as soon as they discovered us , made fires all along the shore as the ship ran by them  and , towards the evening , it falling calm , two of them came off to us on a bark-log , but were a long time before they would accept of our invitation to come on board of us .
At length , they ventured in  when , in a moment , seeing our blacks promiscuously standing together with us white men , they , with very angry countenances , separated them from us , and would hardly suffer them to look at us .
They talked to us with great vehemence , but we could comprehend nothing more of their meaning , than that they rejoiced to see us .
Night coming on , they took their leave , and we gave them a knife or two , an old coat , and some other trifles , which seemed to please them very well .
They expressed themselves by signs in such a manner , that we could guess they gave us repeated invitations to go on shore with them .


 On Sunday the 13th of August , at day-break , we found ourselves near Puerto Seguro , which may be readily known by three white rocks , not much unlike the Needles of the Isle of Wight , and you must keep close on board the outermost to fetch into the bay .
We entered Puerto Seguro , surrounded by numbers of small embarkations of the inhabitants , while the shore , on all sides , was crouded with Indians , whose numbers visibly increased by multitudes which flocked together from the adjacent parts .
Our anchor was no sooner down , than they came off to us in shoals , some few on their bark-logs , but most of them swimming , talking and calling out to one another in a noisy and confused manner , but such as plainly shewed how desirous they were to come to us .
Our ship was in an instant full of these swarthy gentlemen quite naked , and amongst the rest was their King , or Chief man , who , unexpectedly , delivered to me his batoon , or ensign of royalty , which I immediately returned to him .
This man , notwithstanding the wildness of his appearance to us , had a good countenance , and his behaviour had something that was very engaging in it .
I was , at first , at a loss to know how to entertain our numerous guests , but at length I thought of regaling them with some of our liquid sweetmeats , which we had in great plenty .
This they liked extremely , and the spoons , which were mostly silver , they returned with great honesty .


 Having thus commenced a friendship with them , at day-break next morning our boat went on shore to cut wood and fill water  and before the sun was up , we were again crouded with our former guests , who seemed as if they could never be weary of gazing at us .
To keep up the amity we had already contracted with them , I ordered a great boiler to be carried on shore , with good store of flour and sugar , and a negroe cook , who was continually boiling of hasty pudding for the numbers of spectators on the beach  and it really behoved us to endeavour to keep in their favour , for on seeing a few of our men rolling great and cumbersome casks of water over the heavy sand , it inclined them to help us .
To this may be added , a sense of the kind treatment they met with from us , and the particular readiness of their chief to serve us , by shewing his people a good example  for , after Mr. Randall , my Lieutenant , he himself took up the second log of wood to carry to the boat , and was immediately followed by two or three hundred of them , who , encouraged by his example , all took to the work , repaying our civilities with their services , and every day they seemed more and more fond of us .


Mean while , the rumour of our arrival was spread through all the neighbouring parts , and some of the clans , different from those who inhabited the shores , came daily to take a view of us .
Those who came from any distance in the country could not swim  and that they were different  from those we had first seen on our arrival here , appeared by their manner of painting themselves , and by other little distinctions which were visible amongst them  but they all united to assist us , nor were any of them idle but the women , who used to sit in companies on the scorching sand , waiting for their share of what was going forward , which they used to receive very thankfully and without quarrelling .


Having done all our business here , in the space of five days , on the 18th of August , in the morning , we prepared for our departure in the afternoon .
We employed the morning in making a large distribution of sugar amongst the women .
To the men we gave a great many knives , old axes , and old iron , which we had taken in our prizes .
These were the most useful things to them , and of which they stood most in need  in return for which , some of them gave us bows and arrows , deer-skin bags , live foxes , squirrels , and the like .
Great many of the men staid in the ship all the while we were purchasing our anchor , and it was not till we were under weigh that they all jumped overboard to join in the lamentations of their countrymen on shore .


The men in this southern part of California , are tall , straight , and well made  their limbs are large , their hair coarse and black , and barely reaches down to their shoulders .
Their women are of a much smaller size  their hair is much longer than the mens , and with it some of their  Figure 5 .
illegiblealifornian Woman habited in the Skin of a Deer  faces are almost covered .
The men go quite naked , and have not the least thing to cover any part of them , except their heads , round which they wear a band of red and white silk-grass , adorned on each side with a tuft of hawk 's feathers .
The women , on the contrary , wear a thick fringe of silk-grass , which hangs down to their knees , and have either a deer 's skin , or the skin of a large bird , carelesly wrapped over their shoulders .
Nothing can be more wild and savage to look at , than these people at first sight : but there is a wide difference between what they seem , and what they really are  for , by all we could discern in their behaviour towards one another , and in their deportment towards us , they are endued with great good nature .


They seem to lead a careless life , and to enjoy every thing in common amongst them  and , having nothing but their daily food to provide , they are strangers to those numerous gratifications , the want of which multiply distresses among nations more civilized and more refined .
Their contentment makes them honest , for they never offered to steal even the things most useful to them .
In a word , they seem to pass their lives , according to the notions we have of the purest simplicity of the earliest ages of the world , before discord and contention were heard of amongst men .
Having no enemies , they live in perfect peace and harmony with one another .
Hunting and fishing are their only employments ,  except making the instruments they use in these pursuits , which are the simplest that can be .
They have no canoes , and go to sea on bark-logs  but they are the most expert divers I ever beheld By their simple manner of living , and their continual exercise , they live to a great age  and yet , what is very surprizing , they do not appear to be very numerous , considering the extent of their country .
Their only enemies are the wild beasts , and of these there are plenty in the woods and forests .
They do not appear to be so jealous of their women as they have been represented  for we had the company of some hundreds of them , young and old , without any restraint from the men .
Two things were remarkable , that they never would suffer us to take snuff , but would earnestly take it from us whenever we attempted it  nor would they ever suffer us to look through a spying-glass , which I had frequent resort to , to see how our work of wooding and watering went on .
In these two instances , they always took upon them to controul us , and in these two only  the causes of which we could never learn .


They go out to sea on their bark-logs , which are only composed of five logs of a light wood , made fast to each other by wooden pegs , rowing with a double paddle  and with their harpoons , which are made of a sort of hard wood , they strike the largest albicores , and bring them in when struck .
This was altogether surprizing to us , who had so often experienced the strength  Figure 6 .
An Indian of the Southermost parts of California as Returning from Fishing  another on his Barklog  of that fish , and the difficulty of getting them into our ship , when either hooked or struck .
One would imagine , that as soon as these Indians had struck one of these albicores , on his light embarkation , it would run away with him and his bark-log  but they either strike them so as to give them some mortal wound , or have some particular way of managing them , for they struggle and resist in vain .
When we were in this port , it was apparently their fishing season  but by the number of deer-skins one sees amongst them , it is natural to conclude they have also their season for hunting .
The skins of their deer are grey , and so are the skins of their foxes and squirrels  of all which , it is likely , they eat indifferently , as of most other animals that become their prey .
Of birds amongst them we saw scarce any , but a few pelicans .
What these Indians used instead of b [ ... ] ead is very remarkable .
It is a small black seed of an oily substance , which they grind much the same way as we do our chocolate , and afterwards make it up in some such manner .
The look of these black lumps or rolls so made up , is not very inviting , yet the taste is not very disagreeable .
When they want to drink , they go to the river .


Their arms are bows and arrows .
Their bows are about six feet in length , and their arrows seem to be somewhat too long for their bows .
Their bow-strings are made of deer 's sinews , and their arrows are composed of a hollow cane for  two-thirds of their length , and the other third next the point is of a heavy kind of wood , which is headed with a piece of flint , and sometimes with a kind of agate , the edges of which are indented , or cut in teeth like a saw .
They made no manner of shew of their arms to us , and it was rarely that we saw them in the hands of any of the men .
The women had them in the woods in search of game , which may be thence presumed to be some part of their employment .
Upon the whole , they may be truly said to be a happy people .


Aug. 18 , I sailed , as before-mentioned , from Puerto Suguro , and the same evening we took our departure from Cape St. Lucar , in latitude 23 deg .
50 min .
N. bound to Canton , in China , the most likely place where we could hope to meet with English ships homeward bound for Europe .


Aug. 21 , we discovered an island bearing W. S. W. 110 leagues distant from Cape St. Lucar .
I endeavoured to get in with it  but night coming on , I could not lose time to view it .
This isle my people called after my name .
From hence we steered gradually into the parallel of 13 deg .
N. but had our way stopped for two or three days by westerly winds .
We were astonished at such an unforeseen delay , and began to dread we might meet with many such reverses of winds in this passage  nor could we conjecture , or conceive what might be the cause or causes of them .
In the midst of this , the  usual trade-wind prevailed again , and delivered us from the fears and apprehensions we had been involved in upon this occasion .
With this we proceeded on our passage , keeping the parallel or track of the thirteenth degree of northern latitude , except when we judged ourselves to be near the shoals of St. Bartholomew .
We then ventured to sail a degree more northerly , and so continued to do for a run of 60 or 70 leagues .


About a fortnight after we had left California , my people , who had hitherto enjoyed an uninterrupted state of health , began to be afflicted with a sickness which particularly affected their stomachs .
This we took to be owing , in a great measure , to the quantities of sweetmeats they were continually devouring , together with the dried beef , half devoured with ants , cockroaches , and other vermin , which was their daily food .
This sickness increased every day , insomuch that , out of our small number , we once buried two in one day , one of whom was John Popplestone , our ingenious armourer , who was of such use to us on the island of Juan Fernandez .
Before we had stretched with favourable gales the length of Guam , most of my people were sick and disabled , my ship began to be very leaky , and , to add still to our misfortunes , we had the ill luck to have one of our pumps split , and rendered useless .


Under these circumstances , we met with black and dismal weather , with tempestuous winds ,  flying and varying all round the compass .
These boisterous gales raised such a tumbling sea , and our ship laboured so much in it , that the knee of her head , and the whole beak-head , became loose  so that the bowsprit fetched way , and played with the motion of the ship , which it continued to do all the time we were out at sea , and till we arrived at Canton .
Our main-mast stood for some time without shrouds on the larboard side , till we could unlay our best cable to make more , having knotted and spliced the old shrouds till our labour was in vain .


In the midst of all this sickness and distress , I myself was taken violently ill , and had no hope to recover till a fit of the gout gave me some relief .
Great was our want of every thing fit or comfortable for persons in such a state of sickness  yet , about the beginning of October , we passed by Guam  and , though upon the very brink of perishing , we dared not venture in , for fear the inhabitants should take the advantage of our weakness , and make some attempt upon our lives .


From Guam I directed my course for the island of Formosa .
And now , though the length of our voyage was decreasing very fast , our sickness was daily increasing upon us in a much greater proportion  and most truly it may be said , that both our ship and ourselves were no longer fit for the sea .
It was the 3d of November before we had sight of that island , and the 10th , before we could get any sort of directions  to enable us to reach our intended port .
At length , as we were passing through a very narrow channel , between a couple of islands , a fisherman took notice , by our cautious manner of working , that we were strangers , and made signs to us to bring our ship to , till he came up with us  when we made him understand in general , that we were bound to Macao , and he made signs that he would conduct us thither , if we would give him as many pieces of silver as he counted little fish out of his basket , which amounted to 40 .
We accordingly counted out 40 dollars into a hat , and next day he took us in charge , and anchored us safe in the road of Macao , near the entrance of the river of Canton .


Soon after our arrival , there came off to us a great many of the Success 's people , to make us a visit  I was amazed at the sight of them , and was very glad to hear their story .
They said , their Commander , Clipperton , left me designedly  that they went directly to Guam , where they were very well refreshed , and supplied with provisions  that their Captain sold the Governor a great quantity of powder and shot , and several other valuable things , and permitted the Marquis of Villa Rocha , who was his prisoner , to go on shore there  that Mr. Godfrey the agent , and a marine officer , went to settle the accounts for what supplies of things they had had  and that , as soon as they were landed , and the boat come off again , Captain Clipperton weighed with his ship , in order to attack a ship of 20 guns from  Manilla , that had lain quietly in the road in company with him all the time : that in approaching her he ran his own ship upon the rocks , and soon found the enemy was prepared for him : that , his condition being desperate , and supposing the loss of his ship inevitable , he had recourse to his case of brandy , and took so abundantly of it , that he fell on the deck , and snored out his time in a beastly manner , whilst his First Lieutenant , Davidson , in his stead , undertook the command of the ship , which he bravely executed till he was killed : he was succeeded by Captain Cook , their Second Lieutenant , who made a handsome resistance , and got the ship afloat again , after she had lain on the rocks forty-eight hours : that they lost their prisoner the Marquis de la Rocha , and also Mr. Godfrey , the agent-general , with the officer already mentioned  which gave the ship 's company so much distaste , that they would not suffer him to have the command of them any more , and , locking him up in his cabbin , chose Captain Cook to take charge of the ship .


They had , it seems , much bad weather between Guam and Amoy in China , whither they got with much difficulty  and there made a dividend of all they had taken , half to the owners , and half to the ship 's company .
Clipperton designed for the straits of Malacca  but his people , fearing he had no good intentions , would go no farther with him than Macao , that being a Christian port .
Upon their arrival  there , the Governor ordered Clipperton into custody .
It seems he had broke prison formerly from thence , where he had been confined ( as far as could be learned ) on account of his having run away with Dampier 's commission and one of his prizes  but upon producing his Majesty 's commission now for the Success , they gave him no farther trouble , and only contented themselves with fleecing him a little .
Here he sold his ship , the Success , for about 1000l .
sterling .
- [ Such is the account given by Captain Shelvock , for the information , as he says , of the gentlemen-owners , who will never , either publickly or privately , be let into the truth of that story . ]


But to go on , Nov. 12 , about noon , a pilot came off to us , and we immediately weighed , and entered the river of Canton , where , finding the Bonita and Hastings , two English countryships , I anchored , and sent off an officer , to desire them to instruct us how to behave ourselves in this port , and to acquaint me with the customs of it .
To this they answered , that , since the Cadogan and Frances , two European English ships were lying at Wampo , they would advise me to send up to their factories at Canton , to acquaint them of our arrival , and with the reasons which obliged me to come into that river , which I accordingly did the next day .
I now thought I was going to rest a little from my labours  but , to my misfortune , I suffered as much here , all circumstances considered , as  I had in any former part of my voyage  for the evening we anchored at Wampo , where the English ships commonly lie , there happened an accident which gave occasion to much trouble .
One of my men , being in a hurry to remove his effects on board the Bonita , in order to go in her to Fort St. George , the Bonita 's boat was , in her way to their ship , pursued by a Hoppo , or custom-house boat , who wanted to search her .
The fellow , being in liquor , and fearing they would take away the silver he had with him , fired a musquet at the pursuers , and killed the officer .
Early the next morning , the corpse was laid at the door of one of the English houses or factories , where Chinese officers , appointed for that purpose , waited for the first considerable Englishman that should come out , without any regard to whom this act of violence and murder was to be imputed .
It happened that the Supercargo belonging to the Bonita , was the first that came out  on him they seized , put him in chains , and led him , by way of example , about the suburbs of Canton .
All that could be said or done by the most considerable of the Chinese merchants who were in commerce with the English , availed nothing  till my man , who committed the fact , was delivered to them , and then the Bonita 's Supercargo was soon after released .


It is the custom in China , at least at Canton , to exact a certain sum of money from all ships that come there , according to their measurement , which is divided into rates or portions of  first , second , and third .
I therefore every day expected the Hoppo to come to measure my ship , but was given to understand , that I must go up to Canton before that could be done , though even at the hazard of my life .
I accordingly went , and staid two days at the Cadogan 's factory , during which time I was hourly alarmed by such stories as made me fear that I should , indisposed as I was , be dragged away from my bed , and put in irons : but at the end of two days , I was obliged to go down again to the ship , to be present at the measurement  and a day afterwards the Hoppo came with a numerous retinue , and seemed to do his business very quietly , but would not let me know what was the sum he intended to exact .
This gave me much trouble , for I began to think the Chinese , through a false report of our great riches , had an intention to gratify their love of money by a heavy imposition  and in this I was not mistaken .


I had not been here many days before I was deserted by all my officers and ship 's company , who were continually employed in removing their effects from on board my ship to some of the Europeans , without my knowledge , as I was all the time confined to my bed .
My officers were engaging the Indian gentlemen in their interest , and had left me and my son , with a few negroes , to look after the ship .
In short , my ship 's company had so many ways of disposing of their effects , that it was impossible to oblige  them to do what I should have thought justice to the gentlemen in England and to myself .
In a word , they were all soon recovered of their ilness by the assistance they met with here , and were become their own masters .
The gentlemen who presided over the trade , so little considered our case , that they had half a mind to refuse me a passage in one of their ships  and , in effect , I was treated by them almost as one enemy might treat another in a neutral port .


The Captains Hill and Newsham , when they first came to see me , were astonished at the ruinous appearance of my ship  and when I had given them a short history of my voyage , and desired they would receive me with my effects , they answered , that , since they plainly saw my ship was in no condition to stir any farther , upon paying our passage , they would entertain us as soon as we pleased .
This I depended upon , and expected to have no farther trouble than to remove ourselves at any time  but , on the contrary , I found that I had ignorantly applied to the wrong persons , and that my address should have been to the Supercargoes , by which means I was left neglected , while the English Captains were ordered to fall down with their ships five or six miles below us .
Thus was I left destitute in the company of five foreign ships , who , perceiving my own countrymen to be so careless of me , were so kind as to offer me their service , and assisted me with what they could  and , had it not been for them , I do n't know what I might have  suffered , for I was under perpetual alarms that the Chinese had a design to chop my ship , that is , to seize her .


Having found out my error in applying to the Captains , and not to the Supercargoes , I sent up a letter to them , not to desire , but to demand a passage for me , my officers , and ship 's company , which I was sensible they could not refuse , and indeed they did not  but their condescension was accompanied with a charge to the English Captains , not to receive any thing belonging to us , except it was consigned to the India Company in England .
This was an article which my people utterly rejected , vowing they would as soon throw what they had into the sea , as comply with such a demand  for my part , it gave me no concern , being conscious to myself that I had infringed none of their privileges .
At the same time that I was acquainted with this intention of receiving us as passengers , I was also informed of the Hoppo 's demand for anchorage in the river , which was no less than 6000 tahel  and , to quicken me in the payment of this exorbitant sum , there was a penalty annexed to this extortion of 500 additional tahel for every day we failed in the payment of it .
In short , there was no means by which I could evade this unconscionable imposition  and as it was a day before I could possibly send the 6000 tahel up to Canton , they required 500 tahel more for neglect of payment  so that they received from me , upon this extraordinary occasion , the  full sum of 6500 tahel , equal to 2166l .
13s .
4d .
English money .
This was , as is apprehended , about six times as much as the Cadogan paid , which was the largest English ship there , and measured a third more than mine .
It was now high time to get out of my ship  but before I quitted her , I sold her for 2000 tahel , which money , and the rest of my effects , were consigned to the India Company .


Towards the latter end of December , 1722 , I sailed in the Cadogan , commanded by Captain John Hill , in company with the Frances , Captain Newsham , who , sailing better than we , left us as soon as we were out at sea .
Captain Hill , finding his ship very tender , put into Batavia , where we continued about 10 days , and were informed there were several pirates in those seas  we , therefore , when we departed from Batavia , joined the Dutch homeward-bound fleet in Bantam-bay .
The Dutch Commodore promised to assist us in wooding and watering at Mew-island , the water at Batavia being very bad  but on our joining Capt. Newsham in the straits of Sunda , the Dutch made that a pretence to leave us before we got the length of Mew-island  and Capt. Newsham also deserted us the same evening , so that we were left to ourselves .


We continued at Mew-island six or seven days , during which time several boats came to us from Princes island , and brought us turtle , cocoanuts , pine-apples , and other fruits .


Some of the people having seen wild cattle  grazing near the strand , went on shore with design to kill them  but before they had advanced near enough , they discovered a small tyger , and saw the track of an old one , upon which they retired to the boat .
At this place some of the gentlemen belonging to this ship , in their outward-bound passage , saw a rhinoceros .


From Mew-island we had a very pleasant passage to and about the Cape of Good Hope , which , in my opinion , was greatly owing to Captain Hill 's good conduct , in coming in with the land betimes , I mean upon the easternmost part of the bank , and keeping a moderate distance from the land .
I can not be positive , but I think we never exceeded a degree in distance from it , generally less , and sometimes even made the land itself .


In this course , I do not remember that we took in our top-sails above twice  once for a squall , which was over in an hour 's time : and , another time , being threatened by the appearance of bad weather , Capt. Hill made all the requisite preparations to receive it , which done , he stood in for the land  and , in a few hours , we had fair weather , a favourable gale , and all our small sails set , at the same time that there remained great appearance of foul weather to the southward of us , which continued for several days afterwards .


I have observed before , that the Frances and the Dutch ships had seven days the advantage of us , by leaving us in the straits of Sunda , notwithstanding which , we gained the Cape about  as many days before the Frances , although she sailed so much better than we : and , as to the Dutch ships , there was no appearance at all of their arrival when we left the Cape .


The officers of our ship , by comparing their accounts with those of some of the Gentlemen belonging to the Frances , found that she had suffered a great deal of bad weather  whilst we , who were 10 leagues , or thereabout , to the northward of them , or nearer the shore , enjoyed fine pleasant weather and fair wind continually , till we arrived in the Table-bay , which we did the latter end of March .
This I should think of sufficient weight for any other to pursue the same track .
Here we found Governor Boon , in the London East Indiaman , and others , bound for England .


Whilst we lay at the Cape of Good Hope , nothing remarkable occurred , and it has been so often described , that I can say nothing of it that has not been said by most who have been there before .


From the Cape of Good Hope we had an agreeable passage to the island of St. Helena , and from thence to England .


We made the Land 's - end in the latter end of July  and , being come into the British channel , met with brisk gales from the western quarter , with thick foggy weather .


On July the 30th , in the evening , we anchored under Dungeness , and the same night some of the Supercargoes and passengers , and  amongst the rest myself , hired a small vessel to carry us to Dover , where we arrived early the next morning , and the same day proceeded towards London , where we arrived on the first of August .


Thus ended a long and unfortunate voyage of three years , seven months , and some days  after having sailed very considerably more than round the circumference of the earth , and having gone through a great variety of dangers and distresses , both on sea and shore .


4 .
COMMODORE ANSON 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .


 WHEN , in the year 1739 , the Spanish depredations had roused the national resentment , and the pacific ministry who then were entrusted with the administration of affairs , found it impossible any longer to prevent a war with Spain , several projects were proposed , and several plans formed , for distressing the enemy in the most effectual manner , by cutting off the resources by which alone they were encouraged to continue their insults , and by which alone they could be enabled to support a war .


Among the rest , two expeditions were planned by Sir Charles Wager , then at the head of the admiralty , and two gentlemen named by him for carrying them into execution  which were no sooner laid before the privy council to be examined than they were unanimously approved .


Captain Anson , who was nominated to command the one , being out upon a cruise , a vessel was dispatched to order him to return with his ship , the Centurion , to Portsmouth  and Mr. Cornwall , who was appointed to command the other , was acquainted with the honour conferred upon him , and directed to prepare accordingly .


 There are not to be found in the annals of Britain two expeditions , remote in the destination , yet having a connection one with the other , that promised equal advantages with these to the nation , equal honour to the promoters , or equal wealth and glory to the commanders : but by what fatality these expeditions were changed , or by what state-craft one came to be laid aside , and the other delayed , - who were the traitors that betrayed the secret of their destination , or who the demon of seduction was that perverted the grand design to the pitiful purpose of one single pilfering project , - remains at present among those secrets , which , perhaps , a second Dalrymple , in some remote period of time , may discover  when it will probably appear how much the influence of Chilian gold had operated in defeating the most formidable project for the humiliation of Spain that ever was devised  and how easy it is for a prime minister of England , in the plenitude of power , to defeat the best concerted measures , backed and supported by the King in his council , when either pride , envy , avarice , or emulation , may prompt him to opposition .


The project , as first intended , was to consist of two strong squadrons  one under Captain Anson was to take on board three independent companies of 100 men each , and Bland 's regiment of foot ( who was himself to command the land forces ) , and was to sail with all possible expedition by the Cape of Good Hope to  the city of Manilla , in the island of Luconia , of which city and island frequent mention has already been made in the course of this work  while that commanded by Captain Cornwall , of equal force , was to proceed round Cape Horn into the South Seas , there to range the coasts of Chili , Peru , and Mexico  and when the Commander in Chief had made himself master of the royal treasures in that quarter , he was then to direct his course to the Philippines , and join the squadron of Captain Anson .
This done , they were to act in conjunction , as circumstances should arise , or to wait for fresh orders from Government to proceed on fresh enterprizes .
The reader will perceive , at first view , the vast importance of this noble undertaking , calculated at once to enrich the nation , and to determine the war without the effusion of much blood  for the places intended to be attacked were at that time incapable of resistance  and as they were in possession of the royal treasures , any failure in the return of which must of necessity oblige Spain to sue for peace , that haughty nation must thus have been subdued without a battle .
But posterity will stand amazed when they are told the issue of this project , on which Sir Charles Wager was so intent , that , tho ' it was the 10th of September before Captain Anson arrived in town , yet by the 18th he had received orders to take under his command the Argyle , Severn , Pearl , Wager , and Trial sloop , and to proceed to victual the same with the utmost  most expedition .
Before the end of December such dispatch had been made by that vigilant officer , that the ships were in readiness to take the troops on board  but in January , when Captain Anson attended the Board to receive further orders , he was told by Sir Charles , that the Manilla expedition was laid aside , for what reasons he knew not , but that the expedition to the South Seas was still intended  and that he and his squadron , as their first destination was now countermanded , should be employed in that service .


Accordingly on the 10th of January , 1740 , he received his commission as Commodore  yet it was not till the 10th of June that he obtained from the Duke of Newcastle his Majesty 's instructions  and even then so many obstacles were thrown in the way , so many difficulties started , and so many delays contrived , that , before he was permitted to sail , which was not till the latter end of September , the Spaniards were so well informed of his designs , that a person who had been employed in the South-Sea Company 's service , arrived from Panama , and was able to relate to the Commodore most of the particulars of his strength and destination , from what he had learnt among the merchants before he left the South-Seas : but a still more extraordinary proof of their early and perfect intelligence was discovered afterwards , in the course of the voyage , when the Pearl , being separated from the rest of the squadron ,  in a storm , on the coast of Brazil , fell in with the Spanish fleet , that , during the unprecedented delay , had been purposely fitted out to ruin the expedition , and found Admiral Pisarro so well instructed in the form and make of Com .
Anson 's broad pendant , and those he employed had imitated it so exactly , that Capt. Mitchell , who commanded the Pearl , was decoyed by it within gunshot , before he was able to discover his mistake .


All delays being at length overcome , the squadron , consisting of five men of war , a sloop of war , and two victualling ships , namely , the Centurion , of 60 guns , 400 men , commanded by Captain Anson , as Commodore  the Gloucester , of 50 guns , 300 men , of which Richard Norris , Esq was commander  the Severn , of 50 guns , 300 men , the Hon. Edward Legg , Esq Commander  the Pearl , of 40 guns , 250 men , Matthew Mitchell , Esq Commander  the Wager , of 28 guns , 160 men , the Hon. John Murray , Commander  two victuallers , the Industry and Ann pinks , the largest of about 400 , and the [ ... ] ther about 200 tons burthen  were ordered to take the troops on board at St. Helen 's .
But how much the numbers , strength , and probability of success , of this squadron , were diminished by the various incidents that took place in near a twelvemonth 's procrastination , may fully be conceived by what has already been said .
Had the honourable Board from whence the first idea of the expedition originated been permitted to direct , all the old and ordinary  seamen on board the ships would have been exchanged for such as were young and able  the full complement of each ship would have been made up  and the salt provisions which had been so long on board in the Channel would have been remanded on shore , and fresh provisions replaced in their room : but , instead of these necessary precautions , the Captains were glad to retain their old crews  the deficiency in the numbers of which , amounting to more than 300 men , was no otherwise made up than by sending on board about 100 cripples from the hospitals , and a party of raw marines who had never been at sea before : nor were they more fortunate in the change that was made in the land forces  for , instead of three independent companies , of 100 men each , and Bland 's regiment of foot , as first promised , they had only 400 invalids from Chelsea allotted them , one part of whom was incapable of action by their age and infirmities , and the other part useless by their ignorance of their duty .
But this diminution of strength was not the greatest misfortune that attended these measures  the importance of the time which was wilfully wasted was in its consequences the source of all those calamities to which the enterprize was afterwards exposed , by obliging the Commodore to make his passage round the Cape in the most tempestuous season , when , as it was foreseen , almost all the invalids , to a man , perished long before they arrived at the place of action , expiring  in a most lamentable condition when they came to be attacked with the scurvy , with their wounds bleeding afresh , which had been healed some of them 20 , some 30 , and some 40 years before .


But to proceed : Of this voyage there are two very authentic and well-written accounts  one by Pasco Thomas , the mathematical master on board the Centurion , who sailed in her out of the British Channel , and returned with her in safety when she arrived at Portsmouth , and was an eye-witness and careful observer of all that passed : the other by the Rev. Mr. Richard Walters , Chaplain to the above ship , who received his materials , and every other assistance necessary to authenticate his narration , from the Commander in Chief .


We have chosen to follow the former in the narrative of facts , as most exact and least liable to imposition  but , in the explanatory part , we shall copy the latter  because , though Mr. Thomas suffered nothing material that passed to escape his notice , there were many things transacted , the motives for which he could only guess at  but these motives Mr. Walters has , by means of the Commodore 's assistance , been able to explain .


`` Being quite ready about the beginning of September , 1740 , we put to sea three different times , but were as often put back to the road of St. Helen 's , by contrary winds and stormy weather .
At last , on Thursday , Sept. 18 , we  sailed in company with the Lark and St. Alban 's , two of his Majesty 's ships , and several merchantships , besides our own squadron  and Saturday evening saw some men-of-war , and a large fleet of merchantmen , waiting for us at Torbay .
At one in the afternoon we joined them  and the Commodore hoisted his broad pendant , which was saluted by all his Majesty 's ships in the fleet with 13 guns each .
The King 's ships which joined us here were , the Dragon , Chatham , Winchester , and South-Sea-Castle , and near 200 sail of merchantmen under convoy , some of whom were bound to the Mediterranean , and others to several parts of North America .
We had at present the command of the whole fleet  and this same afternoon , seeing a ship to the south-west , we made the Dragon a signal for chasing her  but she proved one of our own ships , too far a-head of her station .
At four this afternoon , the Start Point bore from us E. by N. at the distance of eight leagues .


Monday the 22d , we saw two sail to the westward , and sent the Trial Sloop to speak with them .
They were Dutch ships bound to Curasoe , with soldiers for their garrisons there .


Thursday the 25th , the Winchester and South-Sea-Castle , with the merchant-ships under their convoy for Virginia , and other parts of North-America , parted from us , and proceeded on their respective voyages .
And Monday the 29th , the Dragon , Chatham , St. Alban 's , and Lark , with the merchant-ships in their charge for the  Mediterranean , did the like  and we had now no ships left in company but our own proper squadron .


Tuesday the 30th , we spoke with a Dutch man-of-war , who came from Malta , bound for Amsterdam .


Friday , October the 3d , we spoke with two English merchant-ships from Lisbon for New-York , and the 8th we spoke with a French sloop from Rochelle .
The 13th , one Philip Merrit , a common sailor , died , which I mention because he was the first man we lost on the voyage .
The next day , by an order from the Commodore , we went to short allowance  that is , one third of the allowance granted by government is kept back , in order to make our provisions hold out the longer .
The 23d , we spoke with a ship from Liverpool , and the next day with another from Glasgow , for the Cape de Verde islands  as also with a small brigantine from Falmouth for Madeira , who kept us company thither .
The next day we spoke with a Dutch ship from Surinam for Holland .
The 26th , at 6 o'clock in the morning , we saw the land bearing W. N. W. distance six leagues , and at four in the evening anchored in Fonchale road , in forty fathom water , a-breast the town of Fonchale , and about a mile and a half from it .
During this whole passage , we had almost continually contrary wind , and boisterous uncertain weather  by which means , a passage which is very commonly made in 10 or 12 days , took us up 38 .


 Our business in this place was only to water , and take in wine , and some private stocks : but , soon after our arrival , we were informed , that they had seen from the island , to the westward , about 16 or 18 sail of ships for several days together , which were supposed to be a junction of French and Spanish Ships of war  and as we had reason to imagine that our expedition had long been known , there was little room to doubt , but that those ships were designed to intercept and destroy us before we could attempt any thing to the prejudice of Spain .
On this news the Commodore sent out an English privateer which lay in the road , with one of his own officers , to see if they could discover them at sea , and what they were  but she returned the next day , having made no discovery .


Nov. 2 , Captain Norris , at his own request , being in an ill state of health , with the consent of the Commodore quitted the command of the Gloucester , in order to return to England .
The Gloucester was hereupon given to Captain Mitchel , the Pearl to Captain Kidd , the Wager to the Hon. Captain Murray , and the Trial sloop to David Cheap , our First Lieutenant  and as one of the Lieutenants of the Gloucester had quitted with Captain Norris , our two mates , who had long depended on the Commodore , were preferred to be Lieutenants on this occasion .


The 4th , at four in the afternoon , we weighed and put to sea , with all the squadron under  our command .
An English sloop , which lay in the road , saluted us at our departure with nine guns , to which we returned five .


The 6th , at four o'clock in the evening , we saw the island of Palma , one of the Canary islands , in the latitude of 29 degrees north , and longitude from the meridian of London 19 degrees 44 minutes west .
The same day we spoke with a French ship from Marseilles bound to Martinico , and the next morning with a Dutch ship from Amsterdam bound to Batavia , the metropolis of the Dutch settlements in the East-Indies .


The 11th , about four in the morning , we crossed the Northern Tropic for the first time in this voyage , in long .
24 deg .
24 min .
west from London .


The 16th , being in the latitude of about 12 deg .
20 min .
and the contract with our victuallers expiring in that latitude , the Anne Pink fired a gun , and hoisted a red flag at her foretop mast-head , to give us notice of it .


On the next day all the Lieutenants of the squadron were by a signal ordered on board the Centurion , and orders were given to unlade the Industry Pink , and each ship to take on board from her their respective quotas of provisions  in pursuance of which we immediately began to unlade her , lying by in the day , and making an easy sail in the night .


The 19th , having unloaded and discharged the Industry , at eight in the evening she parted  from us , in order to proceed to Barbadoes , whither she was bound  but the Commodore having entered into a new contract with the master of the Anne pink , she was detained with us for his Majesty 's service , our ships being too much encumbered to admit of taking on board any more provisions at this time .


The 28th , about five in the morning , we crossed the Equinoctial , in the longitude of 28 deg .
15 min .
W. from London , the variation of the compass at that place being 35 min .
E .


December the 2d , at eight in the morning , we saw a sail to the north-west , to which we gave chace .
At night we lost sight of her  but next morning we saw her and gave chace again , but in the afternoon quitted her .
We imagined this sail to be a tender on the Spanish fleet , sent purposely to get intelligence of us : but on our arrival at the Cape of Good Hope , in our return home , we learned that she was the East-India-Company 's packet bound for the island of St. Helena .


The 10th , expecting to be near the coast of Brazil , we sounded , and found 67 fathom water , on which we fired a gun for a signal , and altered our course more to the southward .
This day died Thomas Waller , our surgeon , who was succeeded by Henry Ettrick , surgeon of the Wager  the surgeon of the Trial succeeded him , and Joseph Allen , our surgeon 's first mate , was made surgeon of the trial .


 The 11th , we spoke with a Portuguese brigantine from Rio Janeiro , bound to Santos , one of the principal Portuguese settlements in the Brazils .
The 13th , we crossed the South Tropic for the first time , in long .
38 deg .
36 min .
W. from London .


The 14th died Robert Welden , our purser , who was succeeded by John Rule , purser of the Wager , and Commodore 's Secretary  Thomas Harvey , one of our midshipmen , was made purser of the Wager , in the room of Mr. Rule .


The 17th , we saw the land of the Brazils , from W. to W. S. W. very mountainous , and full of woods .
I have , for several days last past , found , by my observations , a strong current on this coast , setting to the southward near three quarters of a mile an hour , which , perhaps , may be occasioned by the neighbourhood of the vast river of Rio de la Plata  another observation , which I shall have occasion to make after our leaving the coast of Brazil , will very much corroborate this conjecture .


The same day , at four in the evening , we had 40 fathom of water , muddy ground  the island of Alvoredo , a small island at the north-east end of the large island of St. Katharine 's , then bearing N. W. by N. about eight leagues distant  and the next day at seven in the evening we came to an anchor in twelve fathom water , the north-east end of St Catharine 's bearing S. S. W. about three miles distant , and the island of Alvoredo , N. N. E. about six miles distant .
Here  we found the tide to set S. S. E. and N. N. W .
We sent ashore a Lieutenant to the fort to compliment the Governor , and to desire a pilot to carry us into the road .
The Governor returned a very civil answer , and granted our request .
The next morning we weighed and ran up the harbour , and about noon anchored in five fathom and a half water , in a place they there call Boon Porto  but being still too far from the watering-place , we on the 20th , about eleven in the morning , weighed and ran farther up between St. Katherine 's and the main land of Brazil , and in the afternoon anchored and moored in five fathom water , about two miles from the watering-place  and the same evening our third Lieutenant went ashore with materials for building a tent , to shelter the people who were to be employed in watering .
We likewise saluted the Portuguese fort with eleven guns , who returned us the like number .


Our ships beginning to be very sickly , tents were erected on shore , one for every ship , and the sick were sent ashore to them , with surgeons and proper attendance .


The agents for victualling , of which we had two with us , were ordered to procure what fresh provisions we could expend during our stay here , which they accordingly did  but though their meat , which is altogether beef , was both cheap and plenty , it was for the greatest part miserably bad , and scarce fit to be eaten .


 The men throughout the whole squadron began now to drop off apace with fevers and fluxes , occasioned chiefly , I believe , by the violent heat of the climate , and the bad air  the country being so very woody that the air must thereby be stagnated , and rendered unhealthful .


We continued here wooding , watering , and overhauling our rigging , till Sunday , Jan. 18 , 1741 , during which time we had variable uncertain weather , sometimes sea and land breezes , at other times strong gales of wind , with heavy rain , thunder and lightning , but always excessive heat .


While we lay here , we gave our ship a thorough cleansing , smoaked her between decks , in order to destroy the vermin , and washed every part with vinegar , which I mention because it is absolutely necessary in large ships , the stench of so many sick persons being noisome in hot climates .


Dec. 21 , I observed an eclipse of the moon , and by comparing the time of the end of it , with a calculation I purposely made of it in the meridian of London , from Sir Isaac Newton 's New Theory of the Moon , I found the place where the ship then lay to be 49 deg .
53 min .
to the westward of the meridian of London .
The calculation itself , and the time it ended at St. Katharine 's , I have unfortunately lost  but as the longitude is thereby settled , they are of no farther use , and not worth retrieving at the trouble of a new calculation .


 Before we arrived at this island , we had received from the descriptions of M. Frezier , a French author , and some other persons who had been on the spot , such accounts as , together with the climate in which it is situated , gave us very great ideas of its fruitfulness , and hopes of a plentiful supply of every thing we wanted for a long run  but we found ourselves miserably mistaken in almost every article we expected .


As here are several fine sandy bays , we had very good fishing with a seine , for mullets , old wives , sting-rays , maids , turbots , and other flat fish , silver fish , bass , a very boney long fish like a bass , but which our seamen call a ten-pounder , and some other sorts .
We likewise had fresh beef for present expending plenty enough , but scarce better than the carrion that we gave to our dogs .
As for lemons , limes , plantains , bananaes , potatoes , and other roots , fruits , and greens , with which those climates generally abound , which the authors above mentioned aver to be extremely plentiful here , and which we principally depended on for sea-stores , there were so few at the time of our being here , that I believe we could have consumed all that came to our knowledge of those things in one day .
The officers , however , no doubt , found plenty  as Mr. Walters agrees in his report with Frezier , that there was no want of pine-apples , peaches , grapes , lemons , citrons , melons , apricots , and adds , there were besides potatoes and onions for sea-stores .
Sassafrass  is here in great plenty , and we cut much of it among other wood for fuel .
Guaiacum they report to be very plenty here likewise , but I saw none of it , nor heard of any person who did during our stay .
Rum and sugar they have in small quantities , but very indifferent and dear .
The inhabitants are a mixture of Portuguese and Indians incorporated together , and appear to be very poor , idle , lazy , ignorant , and rude .
I believe the original of the Portuguese here was chiefly from felons , who fled hither from other parts of the Brazils to shelter themselves from justice  they never till lately having any government among them , except a Chief chosen from among themselves , who was more like a Captain of thieves and robbers , than the Commander of a colony .
At present there are some European Soldiers , and a Governor from Rio Janeiro , whose name was Don Josse Sylva de Paz , an expert engineer , who , as Mr. Walters observes , understood one branch of his business very well , which is the advantages which new works bring to those who are entrusted with the care of erecting them  for , besides a battery on a neck of land that narrows the channel to a little more than a quarter of a mile , there were three other forts carrying on for the defence of the harbour , none of which were then compleated .


The country , both the main and the island , is mountainous , and all over-grown with thick  woods , and those so entangled with the undergrowth of thorny briars , brambles , and the like , that in most places they are scarce penetrable .
These woods are reported to be full of very fierce tygers , which makes any excursions into the country dangerous , unless you go well armed , and even then much caution is necessary .


They have here some hogs and fowls , but I believe not very plenty  and in the woods are monkeys , apes , armadilloes , and other wild creatures unknown to me  as also parrots , parroquets , and many other sorts of birds proper to the climate .
Alligators are said to be plenty near the shores and in the lakes , but we saw none of them .


The country appears to me to be a good soil , and very capable of improvement , were the inhabitants more civilized and industrious .


This island lies in latitude 27 deg .
30 min .
S. longitude , as before determined , 49 deg .
53 min .
W. from London  and the variation of the compass 11 deg .
20 min .
easterly .


Dec. 27 , we discovered a sail in the offing , and the eighteen-oar'd barge was manned , and armed , and sent , under the command of the second Lieutenant of the Centurion , to examine her before she arrived within the protection of the fort .
She proved to be a Portuguese brigantine from Rio Grande  but , though the officer behaved to the master with the utmost civility , yet the Governor took offence at our sending our boat , complained of the violation of  the peace , and made that a pretence for sending Don Pisarro the most circumstantial intelligence of our force and condition , as we afterwards found by letters intercepted in the South Seas .


January 18 , 1741 , we left this island , having had a melancholy proof how much the healthiness of this place had been over-rated by former writers  for we found , that , though the Centurion alone had buried no less than 28 men since our arrival , the number of the sick in the same interval had increased to 96  and this very day we had three men die .


Before our departure the Commodore took every precaution to prevent a separation  but considering that , in such boisterous seas as we were about to encounter , he himself might be disabled , he called the officers together , and in a full council so ordered it , that , if but one ship escaped , the expedition should not be abandoned .
Proper places of rendezvous were appointed  the time was settled for staying at these places  and , if the Commodore did not arrive in that time , the Captains were ordered to put themselves under the command of the senior , and to proceed without farther delay .


The 22d in the morning , we had very stormy weather , with some thunder , lightning , and rain  and the Trial carried away the head of her main-mast .
A thick fog succeeding , we lay to , and soon after lost sight of the Pearl , the Trial , and the Anne pink .
In the afternoon we got sight of and joined company with the  Trial and the Anne , but the Pearl was still missing .


From hence to February the 13th , very variable weather , mostly foggy , from latitude 35 , or thereabouts , to latitude 39  the rest a mixture not much unlike our weather in England in the month of October , except that we had pretty often thunder and lightning , which are not so frequent with us in that month .
Being past the latitude of 36 degrees to the southward , I observed the current , which had hitherto constantly set southerly , now on the contrary , set to the northward  and the great river of Rio de la Plata being situated in between 35 and 36 degrees south , strengthens my conjecture that those currents are occasioned by the flux and reflux of that mighty river .


February 13 , we saw the land from S. by W. to S. half E. appearing plain , with very few risings , and of a very moderate height , our soundings at that time from 46 to 56 fathom , the first mud , the latter stony ground .
This day , at four in the evening , we were within about four miles of Cape Blanco on the coast of Patagonia , and in 12 fathom water  on which we hauled off , and ran along the coast , the soundings from 20 to 60 fathom water .
At five the next morning we saw the land from W. by N. to S. W. half W. with an opening near the middle  which I believe to be the harbour of Port Desire , so called by Sir John Narborough .
The northernmost land in sight is Cape Blanco ,  and the southermost Penguin Island , so called from the great numbers of penguins about it , of which birds Sir John 's ship 's company killed and salted large quantities for provisions , and which he reports to be very good and wholesome food .
Cape Blanco is in the latitude of 47 deg .
10 min .
S longit .
from St. Katharine 's 17 deg .
38 min .
W. which makes it from London 67 deg .
20 min .
W. taking the N. E. point of St. Katharine 's in 4 [ ... ] deg .
42 min .
W. to be about 11 minutes to the eastward of the place where the ship lay when I fixed it by observation .


The 17th , in the evening , we anchored about 17 or 18 leagues short of the harbour of Port St. Julian , so called by Sir Francis Drake , who touched there in his voyage round the globe , and where he condemned and executed Mr. Doughty , the next person in command to himself , on pretence of a conspiracy to murder him and ruin the expedition  whence a small island within the harbour is to this day called the Island of True Justice .
The next morning we saw a sail at S. by E. which we believing to be the Pearl , made the signal for the return of all cruizers  but she not minding it , as I suppose not seeing it , we ordered the Gloucester to chase , and at two in the afternoon the Gloucester and her chace , which to our great satisfaction proved to be the Pearl , joined us .
They informed us , that , on January the 31st , their Commander , Captain Dandy Kidd , died  and that on the  7th instant they were chaced by five large ships , which they believed to be Spanish men-of-war , and were some time within gun-shot of them , though they never fired a gun , having endeavoured to decoy the Pearl by hoisting a broad red pendant , like that of the English Commodore , at the Admiral 's main-top-mast head , and hoping by that means to be taken for our Commodore , and so to inveigle and make sure of their prey  Capt. Mitchell , thus decoyed , narrowly escaped them , by running through a space of water , where the tides or currents making a great ripling , the Spaniards , who thought it was rocky and broken ground , were afraid to follow her .
These ships we supposed to be the Spanish squadron , commanded by Admiral Pisarro , the same who got so great a name among them for his conduct in bringing home their slota safe into Port Andero the last year , eluding the vigilance of our squadrons who waited for them off Cadiz , and was therefore looked on as the properest person to be sent to intercept us .
We should not have been displeased , however , to have met them with our whole force , and did not much doubt to have either destroyed or disabled them .
But the time of their destruction was not yet come  their miserable fate shall be related in its proper place .


We were now , being the 18th , sailing along shore for the harbour of St. Julian .
I found the tide to set here north and south , about a mile an hour .
The time of flowing here on the  full and change days is N. E. by E. and S. W. by W. nearest .
We sent one of our boats with an officer in-shore , to sound and endeavour to discover the mouth of the harbour .
At six in the evening we came to an anchor in 12 fathom water .
At eight the Lieutenant returned , having found the harbour .
We sent ashore our boats to make farther discoveries , and to endeavour some to get fresh water , and others to procure salt , ( of which Sir J. Narborough observed , when he was here , that in February there was enough of it to load 1000 ships ) for the use of the squadron in the South Seas .
We continued here till the 27th , during which time we stove most of our empty casks , in order to clear our ships as much as possible , and got up and mounted such of our guns as we had before struck down into the hold in order to ease the ships  for now , not knowing how soon we might meet with the Spanish squadron , it was necessary to have them all in readiness .
We could find no fresh water here , and but a very small quantity of salt , and no other refreshments whatever  all the country , as far as we could discover , being quite barren and desolate .
We got some provisions out of the Anne victualler on board each of the other ships , repaired the Trial 's mast , and assisted her and the victualler to overhaul and new-fix most of their rigging .
Having lost the hopes of a supply of water here , we were put to the allowance of one quart a man for one day , and three pints for  another , alternately  but , considering our passage had hitherto proved extremely stormy and cold , and a dead time of the year coming on very fast , it was thought proper , in order to keep the people in as good heart as possible , to give them whole allowance of all other provisions , which was ordered accordingly .


Here we farther secured our lower-deck guns , by nailing quoins under the trucks , in case the tackles , breechings , or iron-work , might give way , or fail in the stormy weather , which we had much reason to expect .


Here likewise the Commodore removed the Honourable Captain Murray into the Pearl , in the room of Captain Kidd  and Captain Cheap into the Wager in the room of Captain Murray .
He advanced Mr. Charles Saunders , his First Lieutenant , to be Commander of the Trial sloop , in the room of Captain Cheap  and made Mr. Piercy Brett , First Lieutenant of the Gloucester , Second Lieutenant of his own ship .
The Trial being repaired , and the Pearl , who had thrown about 14 ton of water overboard when chaced by the Spaniards , being supplied from the other ships , we made ready to prosecute our voyage .


This harbour of Port St. Julian is a barred harbour , only fit to receive small ships and vessels .
We lay off in the road about two miles from the mouth of it .
It is not to be seen open from where we lay , one point shutting in another  and before any small ship or vessel pretends to venture into the harbour , they ought  to send in their boats at low water , and fix poles or buoys on the ends of the shoals , which , in a manner , block up the passage .
The country about it is pretty much on the level , except a few copling hillocks to the northward , and a pretty high one in the bay , which bears W.S.W. from the place where we lay at anchor .
The latitude of Port St. Julian is 49 deg .
10 min .
S. its longitude from London 69 deg .
48 min .
W. and the variation of the compass 17 deg .
20 min .
E .
We had here uncertain boisterous weather , with much rain , some snow , and generally thick fog , with so much wind and sea as made us ride hard , and hastened our departure from this uneasy situation .


Sir John Narborough and some others write , that they have often seen and conversed with the inhabitants in this and other parts of Patagonia , and have given wonderful descriptions of them  but as we saw none of them , I have nothing to say of that sort , nor indeed do I think there is any thing in this wild part of the world worthy of the least notice .


The 27th , at six in the morning , we made the signal , weighed , and put to sea  but the Gloucester being long in weighing her anchor , and the weather proving thick and hazy , we soon lost sight of her , and at one in the afternoon , tacked , and lay by for her coming up  at seven we fired a gun , a signal for her , and soon after she joined us , having broke her main-yard in the slings .


 Previous to our leaving this port , a council was held on board the Centurion , at which all the officers by sea and land attended , when it was proposed by the Commodore , that their first attempt , after their arrival in the South Seas , should be the attack of the town of Baldivia , the principal frontier of the district of Chili .
To this proposition the council unanimously agreed  in consequence of which , new instructions were given to the Captains of the squadron , by which they were directed , in case of separation , to rendezvous at the island of Neustra Senoro del Secoro , and there cruise for 10 days  after which , they were ordered to repair to the height of Baldivia , and there between 40 deg .
and 40 deg .
30 min .
to continue to cruise 14 days longer  and , if in that time they were not joined by the rest of the squadron , they were then to quit that station , and direct their course to the island of Juan Fernandez .


March the 4th , in the morning , we passed by the Streights of Magellan , so near that we saw them very plain  the northernmost point of which , known by the name of Cape Virgin Mary , I found to be in the latitude of 52 deg .
28 min .
S. longitude from London 70 deg .
55 min .
W. variation of the compass 18 deg .
40 min .
E. the soundings , when it bears about S. W. by W. at the distance of eight leagues , from 32 to 50 fathom , the bottom black-grey sand and mud .
The afternoon of this day being very bright and clear , with small breezes ,  inclinable to calm , most of the Captains took the opportunity of this favourable weather to pay a visit to the Commodore  but , while they were in company together , they were all greatly alarmed by a sudden flame which burst out on board the Centurion , and which was succeeded by a cloud of smoak .
However , they were soon relieved from their apprehensions , by receiving information , that the blast was occasioned by a spark of fire from the forge lighting on some gunpowder , and other combustibles , which the officers on board were preparing for use , in case we should fall in with the Spanish fleet  and that it had been extinguished without any danger to the ship .


The 6th , in the morning , we saw the land of Terra del Fuego , consisting of high craggy hills , towering above each other , mostly covered with snow , with deep horrid vallies , some few scattered trees , no plains , nor one chearful green through all the dismal prospect  so that the whole may not improperly be termed the Land of Desolation  and I much question whether a more dreary aspect is to be seen in any other part of the habitable earth  for voyagers say this is inhabited , but surely its inhabitants must be the most miserable of human beings .
This evening we lay by , that we might not overshoot the Streights of Le Maire in the night  though I believe , had we kept on , and passed round Staten Land , a small island or two , which lie to the eastward of those Streights , and together  with Terra del Fuego frame them , it would have been more to our advantage than by passing through them .


The 7th , at eight in the morning , we were very near a point of land on Terra del Fuego , called Cape St James , bearing E. S. E. another called Cape St. Vincent , S. E. half E. the middlemost of the Three Brothers , being three high hills on Terra del Fuego , appearing almost contiguous to each other , S. by W. and a very high Sugar-loaf Hill , called Monte Gorda , farther up in the country , and appearing above them , bore south from us .
It is by these marks that you know you are near Strait Le Maire  and indeed we began to open them in this position .
By noon we were almost through them , being assisted by a very strong tide with much rippling , and which made to the southward somewhat before 10 o'clock in the morning .
The course through is almost directly south , and there are no shoals nor rocks in the passage from whence you may incur any danger  the only thing you have to fear is , the tide 's turning against you while you are in the straits , for in that case you are certainly hurried back again , and can have no passage there till the next turn of the tide .
The breadth of this strait may be about six or seven leagues , and its length about seven or eight  which being passed , you enter into a vast open ocean , commonly known by the name of the South Sea .
This strait lies in latitude 55 deg .
south , longitude from London 67 deg .
 30 min .
west , variation of the compass 21 deg .
36 min .
east , soundings in the straits from 43 to 58 fathom , the bottom black sand and pebble-stones .
In passing through here , our joy was increased by the brightness of the sky and the serenity of the weather , which was indeed remarkably pleasing , for though the winter was now advancing apace , yet the morning of this day , in its brilliancy and mildness , gave place to none we had seen since our departure from England .
But we here found what was constantly verified by all our observations in these high latitudes , that fair weather was ever the forerunner of a succeeding storm , and that sunshine and tempest followed one another like light and shade .
We had scarcely reached the southern extremity of the straits , when the serenity of the sky , which had so much flattered our expectations , was all at once obscured , the wind shifted to the southward , and the sea began to swell to an astonishing height .
Before night the tempest arose , and the tide , which had hitherto favoured us , turned furiously against us  so that , instead of pursuing our intended course , we were driven to the eastward , by the united force of wind and current , with so much precipitation , that in the morning we found ourselves seven leagues to the eastward of Streight Le Maire .
From this time we had such a continual succession of tempestuous weather as surprized the oldest and most experienced mariners on board , and obliged them  to confess , that what they had hitherto called storms were inconsiderable gales compared with the violence of these winds , which raised such short and at the same time such mountainous waves , as greatly surpassed in danger all seas known in any other part of the globe : and it was not without reason that this unusual appearance filled us with continual terror  for , had any one of these waves broke fairly over us , it must in all probability have sent us to the bottom .
Nor did we escape with terror only  for the ship rolling incessantly gunwale to , gave us such quick and violent motions , that the men were in perpetual danger of being dashed against the masts or sides of the ship : and though we were extremely careful to secure ourselves from these shocks by grasping at some fixed body , yet many of our people were forced from their holds , some of whom were killed , and others greatly injured  in particular , one of our best seamen was carried over-board and drowned , another dislocated his neck , a third was thrown into the main hold , and broke his thigh , and one of our boatswain 's mates broke his collar-bone twice  not to mention many other accidents of the same kind .
These tempests , so dreadful in themselves , though unattended by any other unfavourable circumstance , were rendered more mischievous to us by their inequality , and the deceitful intervals which they at some times afforded  for , though we were often obliged to lie to for days together  under a reefed mizzen , and were frequently reduced to lie at the mercy of the waves under our bare poles , yet now and then we ventured to make sail with our courses double reefed  and the weather proving more tolerable , would perhaps encourage us to set our top-sails  after which , the wind , without any previous notice , would return upon us with redoubled force , and would in an instant tear our sails from the yards .
And , that no circumstance might be wanting which could aggravate our distress , these blasts generally brought with them a great quantity of snow and sleet , which cased our rigging , and froze our sails , thereby rendering them and our cordage brittle , and apt to snap upon the slightest strain , adding inexpressible difficulty and labour to the working of the ship , benumbing the limbs of the people employed in handing the sails , or handling the ropes , and making them incapable of exerting themselves with their usual activity , and even disabling many by mortifying their toes and fingers .


And now , as it were to add the finishing stroke to our misfortunes , our people began to be universally afflicted with that most terrible , obstinate , and , at sea , incurable disease , the scurvy , which quickly made a most dreadful havock among us , beginning at first to carry off two or three a day , but soon increasing , and at last carrying off eight or ten  and as most of the living were very ill of the same distemper ,  and the little remainder who preserved their healths better , in a manner , quite worn out with incessant labour , I have sometimes seen four or five dead bodies , some sown up in their hammocks , others not , washing about the decks , for want of help to bury them in the sea .
But as the particulars of all the various disasters and sufferings of various kinds that befel us , would be endless , I shall only mention a few .


The 10th , 11th , and 12th , very stormy weather , with snow and sleet , and a very great overgrown sea from the S. W .


The 15th , one William Baker fell overboard and was drowned .
The 16th , the Anne pink , which had separated from us the 11th in the storm , again joined us , in lat .
59 deg .
20 min .
S .


Part of the 17th , 18th , and 19th , very strong gales , and a great rolling sea from the N. W .


The 18th , we had again strong gales of wind with extreme cold , and at midnight the main-top-sail split , and one of the straps of the main dead-eyes broke .


The 23d , and part of the 24th , a most violent storm of wind , hail , and rain , with a very lofty sea .
The 23d , in the evening , we sprung the main-top-sail yard , and split the main-sail into rags , the greatest part of which was blown overboard .
On these accidents we furled all our other sails , and lay-to under a mizzen .


The latter part of the 24th proving more moderate , we bent a new main-sail , got down the  broken main top-sail yard , and got up and rigged another in its place .


The 25th , it blew a very hurricane , and reduced us to the necessity of lying-to under our bare poles .
As our ship kept the wind better than any of the rest , we were obliged in the afternoon to wear ship  in doing of which , we had no other expedient but clapping the helm a-weather , and manning the fore-shrouds  in the execution of which we had one of our best men canted overboard .
We perceived , that , notwithstanding the prodigious agitation of the waves , he swam very strong  and it was with the utmost concern that we found ourselves incapable of assisting him .
Indeed we were the more grieved at his unhappy fate , as we lost sight of him struggling with the waves , and conceived , from the manner in which he swam , that he might continue sensible for a considerable time longer of the horror attending his irretrievable situation .


The 26th being somewhat more moderate , we found two of our main-shrouds broke , which we repaired  we likewise bent our main-top-sail , and made sail .


The 30th , in the evening , the Gloucester made a signal of distress  and , on speaking with her , we found she had broke her main-yard in the slings  an accident the more grievous , as it tended unavoidably to delay us in these inhospitable latitudes , where every moment we were in danger of perishing .
The weather proving  favourable , all the carpenters were ordered on board the Gloucester , and next day she was ready to sail .


The 3d , 4th , 5th , and 6th of April , a continued storm of wind and rain  a dreadful sea , and very cold weather .
We lowered our yards , furled our courses , and lay by for the most part under a mizzen and mizzen-stay sail .
The 3d , about 11 o'clock at night , a raging sea took us on the larboard quarter , where it stove in the quarter gallery , and rushed into the ship like a deluge .
For some time it laid the ship down upon her side  but she providentially righted again , though slowly  it threw down and half drowned all the people on the deck , broke one of the straps of the main dead-eyes , and shaped a mizzen and puttock shroud .
This was the greatest sea which we had encountered since we came into those parts , and we met with but one such stroke more in the whole voyage  two or three such succeeding must certainly have sent us to the bottom .


The 7th , 8th , 9th , and 10th , continued very stormy and squally , with snow , hail , rain , and a large sea  the weather continuing very cold .


The 8th , at four in the evening , the Anne pink made a signal of distress  and , on speaking with her , we found she had sprung her forestay , and the gammoning of her bowsprit .
This was the more unfortunate , as none of the carpenters were yet returned from the Gloucester .
Nor was the Anne the only ship that suffered in  this storm  the Wager lost her mizzen-mast and main-top-sail yard , owing to the badness of the iron work .
In this dilemma we were obliged to bear away till these ships had made all fast .


The 10th , foggy and hazy .
This afternoon the Severn and Pearl were far a-stern , and seemed to me to lag designedly .
We made a very easy sail all day , and lay by at night , and fired several guns as a signal for them to join us  the weather being pretty moderate , and the wind fair for them , they might have effected it with ease .
By the close of the evening we could but just see them , and from that time saw them no more .
However , we heard afterwards in the South Seas , by letters taken on board some of the Spanish ships , of their arrival at Rio Janeiro , in the Brazils .


The 15th , the weather proved somewhat more moderate .
At half an hour past one in the morning we saw two islands right a-head , at about two leagues distance  we immediately wore our ship , and stood off to the southward .
Those islands were very unexpected , as well as unwelcome , we imagining we had been to the westward of all lands and islands of the coast of Terra del Fuego  but we now found our mistake , and that there was a necessity of our standing farther to the southward , in order to get a sufficient westing .
Those islands I find to lie in the latitude of 54 deg .
20 min .
S. longitude from London 84 deg .
10 min .
W .
Mr. Walters supposes the land we fell in with on this  occasion to be Cape Noir , and a part of Terra dei Fuego .


From this time to the 23d we had nothing remarkable , the weather continuing very uncertain and variable , with a large sea and a very cold air  and the 21st , at nine at night , we were in the latitude of 60 deg .
5 min .
S. being the greatest south latitude we made during the voyage .


The 23d very hard gales and squalls , with much rain .
This evening we lost sight of the Gloucester , Wager , Trial , and Anne Pink , being all the remainder of our squadron , after the defection of the Severn and Pearl .
The Wager 's unfortunate catastrophe is well known  the others afterwards joined us at Juan Fernandez , as shall be related in its proper place .


The 24th , 25th , and 26th , the wind being mostly fair , though still blowing hard , we made pretty good runs under an easy sail to the northwestward .
The 24th , it blew a hurricane , and the men endeavouring to hand the top-sails , the clew-lines and bunt lines broke , and the sheet being half flown , every seam in the fore-topsail was soon split from top to bottom , and the main-topsail shook so strongly in the wind , that it carried away the top lanthorn , and endangered the head of the mast  however , at length , some of the most daring of our men ventured upon the yard , and cut the sail away close to the reefs , though with the utmost hazard of their lives , whilst at the same time the fore-topsail beat about the yard with  so much fury that it was soon blown to shreds : nor was our attention to our topsails our sole employment  for the mainsail blew loose , which obliged us to lower the yard to secure the sail , and the fore-yard being likewise lowered , we lay to under a mizen .
The 25th , we found much of our running rigging broken , which we repaired .
The 27th , we bent other topsails in the places of those split .
Nothing more remarkable the rest of this month and the first week in the next , but stormy uncertain weather , and great sickness and mortality among our people .


Friday , May 8 , at seven in the morning , saw the main land of Patagonia appearing in high mountains covered mostly with snow .
We likewise saw several islands , one of which we took to be the Island del Soccoro , so called by Sir John Narborough , in his account of his voyage into those parts  and from the fine description this gentleman had given of this island , ( having been there in the very height of summer ) , this place was appointed for our first general rendezvous in the South Seas .
An unhappy appointment it was in its consequences  for when the people , already reduced to the last extremity , found this to be the place of rendezvous , where they had hoped to meet the rest of their companions with joy , and what a miserable part of the world it appeared to be , their grief gave way to despair  they saw no end of their sufferings , nor any door open to their safety .
Those  who had hitherto been well and in heart , now full of despondency , fell down , sickened , and died  and , to sum up this melancholy part , I verily believe , that our touching on this coast , the long stay we made here , and our hinderance by cross winds , which we should have avoided in a direct course to Juan Fernandez , lost us at least 60 or 70 of as stout and able men as any in the navy .
This unspeakable distress was still aggravated by the difficulties we found in working the ship , as the scurvy had by this time destroyed no less than 200 of our men , and had in some degree affected almost the whole crew .
It were , indeed , endless to recite minutely the various disasters , fatigues , and terrors , which we encountered on this coast  all these went on increasing till the 22d of May , at which time the fury of all the storms which we had hitherto experienced , seemed to be combined , and to have conspired our destruction .
In this hurricane almost all our sails were split , and great part of our standing rigging broken  and , about eight in the evening , a mountainous overgrown sea took us on our starboard quarter , and gave us so prodigious a shock , that several of our shrouds broke with the jerk , by which our masts were in danger of coming by the board  our ballast and stores too were so strangely shifted , that the ship heeled afterwards two streaks a-port .
Indeed , it was a most tremendous blow , and we were thrown into the utmost consternation , from the apprehension of instantly foundering .
Our deplorable  situation allowing no longer any room for deliberation , we stood for the island of Juan Fernandez  and , to save time , which was now very precious , our men dying four , five , and six in a day , we endeavoured to hit the island upon a meridian course .
On the 28th of May , being nearly in the parallel in which it is laid down , we expected to have seen it , and indeed the Commodore was persuaded that he did see it  but all the other officers being of opinion that it was only a cloud , to which the haziness of the weather gave too much colour , we made sail to the eastward , and by so doing lost near 14 days in recovering our westing again .
This was a most fatal disappointment  for in this run we lost about 80 of our men , which , probably , had the Commodore 's advice been attended to , would most of them have been saved .


The 8th of June , at six in the evening , we at length saw the island of Juan Fernandez , bearing N. by E. half E. about 15 or 16 leagues off .
The 10th , at two in the morning , we anchored in 56 fathom , close under the N. E. end of the island .
At 10 in the morning of the 11th , we with much labour and difficulty weighed our anchor , and at noon happily moored our ship in the Great Bay , about a mile from the shore , in 52 fathom water , to our inexpressible joy , having been from St. Katharine 's in the Brazils to this place 148 days , on such a dreadful and fatal passage as I believe very few other persons ever experienced .


 The 11th , at two in the afternoon , the Trial sloop appeared in the offing .
We immediately sent some of our hands on board her , by whose assistance she was brought to an anchor between us and the land .
We soon found that the sloop had not been exempted from the like calamities which we had so severely felt  for her Commander , Captain Saunders , waiting on the Commodore , informed him , that , out of his small complement , he had buried 34 of his men  and those who recovered were so universally afflicted with the scurvy , that only himself , his Lieutenant , and three of his men , were able to stand by the sails .


The same day we got out our long-boat , and sent her on shore with materials for building tents for the sick , and with orders to bring on board some water .


The 15th , we sent our pinnace to assist the Trial , she being driven from her anchors to sea , by the violent flaws of wind which blow off the high lands .
This and the next day we put ashore 75 sick men , in so weak a condition , that we were obliged to carry them out of the ship in their hammocks , and to convey them afterwards in the same manner from the water-side over a stoney beach to the tents prepared for their reception .
In this work of humanity , not only the officers , but the Commodore himself , chearfully lent their assistance .


The 17th , the Trial came again to an anchor , and moored .
This day and the next we sent  on shore the remainder of our sick people , the whole number now on shore being 135 , many of whom , being too far gone in the scurvy , died one after another to the number of not less than sixty .


We now began to send on shore materials for tents for the coopers , sail-makers , and some of the officers  a copper oven which we had with us for baking soft bread for the ship 's company , and the smith 's forge for making or repairing such iron-work as was necessary : and , after a short interval of relaxation , all hands were busily employed , some in cutting large quantities of wood for the ship 's use , some in making charcoal for the smith , and for a farther store  the bakers in baking bread , the coopers in making up and cleaning the casks for water , the sail-makers in mending the sails and making others  some in fishing for the sick , and the rest were otherways employed : and here being very great plenty of fine fish , all taken by the hook , two or three people could never fail to take us as much in about two hours as all the ship 's company could eat : besides this we took great quantities for salting and curing  and some private persons who had hooks and lines fished for themselves , and never failed of enough for their own use , and to give to those who had none .
The people on board were employed in cleaning the ship , which was in a very filthy condition , and in stripping the masts , and overhauling the rigging .
One of the boatswain 's mates , with some  assistants , having run up a rope-walk on shore , was employed in making what small cordage we might want  others in watering , and , in short , in every thing that might contribute to put us in as good a condition , and in as short a time as possible  and as fast as the sick recovered , they were put on the like employments .


At first sight of this island , it appeared with a most unpromising aspect , being extremely mountainous , rugged , and irregular  but , upon our nearer approach , it improved upon us  and when we were landed , we found all the vegetables which are usually esteemed to be peculiarly adapted to the cure of those scorbutic disorders which are contracted by salt diet , and long continuance at sea  for here we found water-cresses and purslain , wild-sorrel , and Sicilian-radishes , in profusion .
These vegetables , not to mention the turneps which now abound in every plain , with the fish and flesh we got here , were not only grateful to us in the extreme , but were likewise very refreshing to the sick , and contributed not a little to the recovery of those who were not already too far advanced in the disorder to admit of relief  and to the restoring of others to their wonted vigour , who , though not apparently under the malignancy of the distemper , and its baneful concomitants , were yet greatly debilitated by continual watching and anxiety of mind , from which not a soul on board was exempt .


During the time of our residence here , we  found the inland parts of the island no ways to fall short of the sanguine prepossessions we had first entertained in its favour  for the woods , which covered most of the steepest hills , were free from all bushes and underwood , and afforded an easy passage through every part of them  and the irregularities of the hills and precipices , in the northern part of the island , necessarily traced out , by their various combinations , a great number of romantic vallies , most of which had a stream of the clearest water running through them , that tumbled in cascades from rock to rock , as the bottom of the valley by the course of the neighbouring hills was at any time broken into a sudden sharp descent .
Some particular spots occurred in these vallies , where the shades and fragrance of the contiguous woods , the loftiness of the over-hanging rocks , and the transparency and frequent falls of the neighbouring streams , presented scenes of such elegance and dignity , as would with difficulty be rivalled in any other part of the globe .
It is in this place , perhaps , that the simple productions of unassisted nature may be said to excel all the fictitious descriptions of the most animated imagination .
The spot where the Commodore pitched his tent , and where he chose , during his stay , to fix his residence , exceeded in beauty any thing that words can be supposed to represent .
It was a delightful little lawn , that lay on an easy ascent at the distance of about half a mile from the sea , and was probably the very spot on  Figure 7 .
A View of the Lawn where Commodore Anson pitch'd his Tent at Juan Fernandillegible  which Shelvock twenty years before had pitched his tent .
In front there was a large avenue cut through the woods to the sea-side , which sloping to the water with a gentle descent , opened a prospect to the bay and the ships at anchor .
This lawn was screened behind by a tall wood of myrtle , sweeping round it in the form of a theatre , the slope on which the wood stood rising with a much sharper ascent than the lawn itself , though not so much but that the hills and precipices within land towered up considerably above the tops of the trees , and added to the grandeur of the view .
There were , besides , two streams of chrystal water , which ran on the right and left of the tent , within an hundred yards distance , and were shaded by the trees that skirted the lawn on either side , and completed the symmetry of the whole .
Add to these , the gentle murmuring of the distant brooks , the music of the birds among the myrtles , the sweet aromatic odour of the spice-trees that every where perfumed the air with their fragrance , and you may form in imagination a faint idea of this second paradise , which could only be exceeded by the perfection of the first .
It is astonishing , that , among all the voyagers who have visited this fortunate island before us , and who have obliged the world with descriptions of it , none of them have mentioned a charming little bird that , with its wild , various , and irregular notes , enchants the ear , and makes the woods resound with its melody .
This untutored  choirister is somewhat less in size than the goldfinch , its plumage beautifully intermixed with red and other vivid colours , and the golden crown upon its head so bright and glowing , when seen in the full light of the sun , that it surpasses all description .
These little birds are far from being uncommon or unfamiliar  for they perched upon the branches of the myrtle-trees so near us , and sung so chearfully , as if they had been conscious we were strangers , and came to give us welcome .


There is , besides the above , another little bird , unnoticed by any former writer , and which seems likewise peculiar to the island , and consequently without a name  it is still less than the former in size , but not inferior in beauty , tho ' not so musical  the back , wings , and head , are of a lively green , intermixed with fine shining golden spots , and the belly a snow white ground , with ebony coloured spots , so elegantly varied as no art can imitate .
To the catalogue of birds mentioned by former writers as inhabitants of this island , should also be added black birds and thrushes very like those in England  and owls , but of a diminutive size .


Of four-footed animals we saw none but dogs , cats , rats , and goats  and of the latter but few , as the dogs of various kinds , greyhounds , mastifs , pointers , spaniels , and mungrels , have thinned them in the plains , and driven them to the inaccessible mountains  yet some  were shot by the hunters , and were preferred by them to the best venison .
Among those presented to the Commodore were two or three venerable through age , that had been marked more than thirty years before by Selkirk , who trained them for his sport , slit their ears , and turned them loose to graze the mountains .


I remember we had once an opportunity of observing a remarkable dispute betwixt a herd of those animals and a number of dogs  for going in our boat into the eastern bay we perceived some dogs run very eagerly upon the foot , and being willing to discover what game they were after , we lay upon our oars some time to view them , and at last saw them take a hill , where , looking a little farther , we observed upon the ridge of it an herd of goats , which seemed drawn up for their reception .
There was a very narrow path skirted on each side by precipices , in which the leader of the herd posted himself fronting the enemy , the rest of the goats being ranged behind him where the ground was more open  as this spot was inaccessible by any other path , excepting where this champion had placed himself , the dogs , though they ran up hill with great alacrity , yet when they came within about twenty yards , found they durst not encounter this formidable Goliah , for he would infallibly have driven the first that approached him down the precipice  they therefore quietly laid themselves down , panting , and did not offer to stir while we remained in sight .


 These dogs have multiplied prodigiously , and have destroyed most of the cats as well as goats : the rats , however , keep possession , and were very troublesome guests in the night , when they generally paid us their visits .
It is not easy to determine in what manner such a multitude of dogs subsist , as they are much more numerous than all the other four-footed creatures upon the island .
Our people , indeed , were inclined to think , that they lived in a great measure upon the young sea-lions and seals , and supported their opinion by the report of the sailors , some of whom killed the dogs for food , who said they tasted fishy : and , truly , there is hardly any other way of accounting for the subsistence of these animals  for , as has been said , they have already destroyed all the goats in the accessible parts of the country  so that there now remain only a few among the crags and precipices , where the dogs can not follow them .
These are divided into separate herds of 20 or 30 each , which inhabit distinct fastnesses , and never mingle with each other  by this means we found it extremely difficult to kill them , and yet we were so desirous of their flesh , that we discovered , I believe , all their herds , and it was thought , by comparing their numbers , that they scarcely exceeded 200 upon the whole island .
The dogs had destroyed the pardellas , too , of which former writers have given a large account , so that there was not one of them to be seen  we found indeed their boroughs in the  earth , which leaves no room to doubt of their being found in plenty in Selkirk 's time , as well as cats , of which there is now scarce one alive .


Flesh meat being thus extremely scarce , our people , being tired of fish , though excellent in their kind , at length condescended to eat seals , which , by degrees , they came to relish , and called them lamb .
Of these , it being their brooding time , the numbers were incredible  - and likewise of the sea-lion - these animals have frequently furious battles among themselves , principally about their females  and we were one day surprized by the sight of two animals , which , at first , seemed different from all we had ever observed  but , on a nearer approach , they proved to be two sea-lions that had been goring one another with their tushes , and were covered with blood , with which they plentifully abound .
This led us to watch them more closely , and one was observed larger than the rest , and from his driving off other males , and keeping a great number of females to himself , he was by the seamen humorously stiled the Bashaw .
To this pre-eminence , however , he had not arrived without many bloody contests  for , on our people 's attacking him in the midst of his seraglio of females , he made a desperate defence , and , when overpowered , the signals of his bravery appeared in numerous scars on every part of his body .


We had now been ten days on this island , when some of our people from an eminence discerned  a ship to leeward with her courses even with the horizon , without any other sail abroad than her main topsail  from which circumstance , it was immediately concluded , that it was one of our own squadron  but the weather being hazy , no definitive conjecture could be formed concerning her .
She again disappeared for some days , and we were all thrown into the deepest concern , fearing the weakness of her condition had disabled her from working to windward , and that all her people had perished .


We continued our employ till the 26th , when we again saw the same ship  and , on her nearer approach , could distinguish her to be the Gloucester  and , making no doubt of her being in distress , the Commodore sent our boat on board her with water and refreshments .
We found her in a miserable condition , not many above 100 people alive , and almost all those helpless with the scurvy  their water so very short , that they were obliged to allow but one pint a day to a man  and the continual flaws off the land , together with their being disabled in their sails and yards , hindered them from getting into the bay .
The next day we sent them a fresh supply of fish , greens , water , and men to help to work the ship  soon after which the flaws drove them off again , and the ship appeared no more till the 30th , when at two in the afternoon she fired a gun , and made a signal of distress .
She continued in this manner off and on , sometimes in sight , and sometimes not , till July 23 , during which  time , though we often relieved the people on board with water and other necessaries , yet their sufferings were insupportable , and their whole complement were reduced to about 96 living persons , all of whom must have perished in a few days more , had not the wind proved favourable to bring them into the bay  but providentially a fresh gale sprung up from the sea , and brought them to an anchor .
We immediately sent men on board to assist in mooring the ship , and continued our constant assistance afterwards , during our stay at this place .


The 5th of August , the Commodore sent the Trial sloop to search the island of Little Juan Fernandez , lest any of the squadron should have mistaken that island for the place of rendezvous , and might remain there in expectation of meeting the rest of the fleet .


On the 16th , the Anne pink , which was separated from us with the rest of the squadron the 23d of April , appeared in sight .
Her arrival gave us new spirits , she being laden principally with provisions , and we immediately were ordered full allowance of bread .
This ship had been about two months in a safe harbour , on the main land , near the same parallel with del Soccoro , where she had been directed by Providence , and where she lay in security , enjoyed plenty , and her people , 16 in number , being once freed from their fears of shipwreck , very soon recovered their wonted vigour , having experienced none of those hardships that were endured  by the rest of the fleet .
They told us they had seen some Indians , and one time took one of their canoes with a man , a woman , some children , a dog , a cat , c. and some implements for fishery  but in a day or two the whole family , the dog excepted , made their escape from them in the ship 's small boat , and left them their canoe in her stead .
Those Indians , they say , understood a few Spanish words , and probably might have some little correspondence with the southern Spaniards of Chili , or their nearer bordering Indians  or , perhaps , some of the Fathers for propagating the faith may now and then have been among them .
The principal refreshments they met with in this port , were wild celery , nettletops , and sorrel  cockles and muscles of an extraordinary size  good store of geese , sheep , and penguins .
They judged it to lie in lat .
45 deg .
30 min .
S. and it may be known by an island which faces it , and which the inhabitants call Inchin , and by a river in which they found excellent fish .


This vessel , the Anne pink , was the last that joined us at Juan Fernandez .
The remaining ships of the squadron were the Severn , the Pearl , and the Wager store-ship .
The Severn and Pearl , as has been already observed , parted company off Cape Noir , and , as we afterwards learned , put back to the Brazils  so that of all the ships that came into the South Seas , the Wager was the only ship that was missing .
Captain Cheap , who commanded her , knowing the importance  of the charge he had in trust , without which no enterprize on shore could be undertaken , was extremely solicitous to reach Baldivia as the last place of rendezvous , and the first to be attacked , before the rest of the squadron should have finished their cruise , that no blame might rest upon him , if the attack of that city should be judged improper to be carried into execution .
But , whilst this brave officer was exerting himself in endeavouring to keep clear of the land in making the island of del Soccoro , he had the misfortune to dislocate his shoulder , and thereby to disable himself from prosecuting with vigour the purpose he had in view .
The ship being little better than a wreck , the crew in a miserable desponding condition , the officers quite exhausted , the weather cold and stormy , and the wind and currents bearing in-shore , all these unlucky circumstances concurring , so entangled the ship with the land , that all the efforts of the feeble crew could not prevent her from running upon a sunken rock  where she grounded between two small islands , not a musquet shot from the shore .
In this situation she continued entire till every one on board might have reached the land in safety , and might have stored themselves with provisions , and every necessary for their present subsistence and future escape : but the moment the ship struck , all subordination ceased  one part of the crew got possession of the liquors , intoxicated themselves in a beastly manner , and grew frantic in their cups  another part began  to furnish themselves with arms , and to make themselves masters of the money and things of most value on board  while the Captain , and some of the principal officers , endeavoured in vain to maintain their authority , and to preserve a proper discipline among them , in order to effect the deliverance of as many as it was possible from the common danger in which all of them were involved  but the mutinous disposition that prevailed rendered every effort for their preservation ineffectual .
Those who remained in possession of the ship and her stores , pointed the cannon , and fired at those who had gained the land  those at land grew riotous for want of provisions  nothing but anarchy and confusion prevailed  and , what added to the catastrophe , a midshipman , named Cozens , who had busied himself in opposition to all good government , was , by the Captain , shot dead upon the spot .
This put an end at once to all manner of subserviency  and after this every one thought himself at liberty to pursue what scheme he thought best for his own preservation .


Of about 130 persons who reached the shore , 30 died on the place  about 80 others , having converted the long boat into a schooner , sailed to the southward , attended by the cutter .
These , being distressed for want of provisions in re-doubling Cape Horn , and having lost their cutter in a storm , suffered unprecedented hardships in their return to the coast of Brazil , where only 30 of them arrived to give an account of  the miserable fate of their companions , several of whom died of hunger  others desired to be set on shore  and some , beginning to be mutinous , they landed and deserted .
Of the 19 who were left behind in Wager-Island with the Captain , 16 embarked on board the barge and the yawl , and attempted to escape to the northward  of these one was drowned in the yawl , and four were left on a desart part of the coast , where it is probable they all perished  the remaining 11 , after a fruitless attempt to weather a point of land , called by the Spaniards Cape Tresmentes , were forced to return to Wager Island , from whence they first set out , where meeting with a Chiloen Indian , who could speak a little Spanish , they agreed with him to pilot them to Chiloe  but , after coasting along for four days , the Captain and his officers being on shore , five in number , the other six persuaded the Indian to put to sea without them , by which the rest were reduced to the sad necessity of travelling near 600 miles , sometimes by land , and sometimes by water , till at length , after a variety of misfortunes and hardships not to be parallelled in romance , four of them , namely , Captain Cheap , the Hon. Mr. Byron , who lately went round the world , Mr. Hamilton , and Mr. Campbell , arrived at Chiloe , where they were received by the Spaniards with great humanity .
After some stay at Chiloe , the Captain and his three officers were sent to Valparaiso , and thence to St. Jago , the capital of Chili , where they continued  above a year  but on advice of a cartel , the Captain , Mr. Byron , and Mr. Hamilton , were permitted to return to Europe  and Mr. Campbell , who in the mean time had changed his religion , chose to embark for Spain  but not meeting there with the encouragement he expected , he soon after returned to England , where he published an account of his adventures , but mentioned not a word of changing his religion , neither does he assign his reason for leaving Spain .


It is very remarkable , that the place where the Wager struck upon the rock , was so near the harbour where the Anne pink found shelter during the winter , that the Wager 's people were within hearing of the Pink 's evening and morning gun , yet never had the thought to follow the sound , or to look out for any straggler from their own squadron .


On the 22d , the Trial arrived from searching the island of Little Fernandez , and reported that it lies about 20 leagues due west from this where we lay  that it is about three leagues in compass , being very mountainous , with some woods and good runs of water , with multitudes of goats , fish , sea-lions , and seals , as with us  but no ships were to be seen , nor any marks of any having been there .


While we continued at Juan Fernandez , besides our necessary employments , we likewise began , and pretty far advanced , a wharf for the better landing and embarking such necessaries  as we had occasion for .
We kept two ovens employed in baking bread for the ship 's companies , two smith 's forges for repairing old and fitting new iron work , and made abundance or charcoal for future use .
The Commodore likewise ordered the carpenters to take a careful survey of the Anne Pink , the master of which set forth , that she was in so rotten a condition , as not to be fit to proceed nor return without very considerable repairs  which representation upon a survey being found to be true , the Commodore purchased her materials at a fair valuation , and ordered her to be broke up , and her crew to be put on board the Gloucester , that ship not having hands enough left to navigate her , much less to fight her , in case of an attack from the enemy .


This island lies in latitude 33 deg .
40 min .
S. and longitude 87 deg 37 min .
W. from London  distance from the main continent 105 leagues  compass , by the best accounts of those who had been round it , 12 or 13 leagues .
There are two small and very commodious bays within the points , which form the large one where we lay , one to the eastward , the other to the westward of us , and no doubt several others in other parts of the island  variation , by an observation July 2 , in the morning , 8 deg .
4 min .
half E. 'T was reported , that the S. W. end of the island is much more flat and level than that where we resided , and the goats more numerous , but wood scarcer .


 On Tuesday , Sept. the 8th , at noon , we saw a sail at sea bearing N. E. by E. and , perceiving , by our glasses that she could be none of our squadron , nor an English-built ship , we fired a gun as a signal for getting all our people on board  and , having taken several men out of the Trial , bent our sails , set up our rigging , and slipt our small bower cable  at six in the evening we weighed in pursuit of her .
In the morning of the next day we got down our stumps , which are generally set up in bad weather instead of top-gallant masts , and in their place get up our top-gallant masts and yards , rigged them , and bent their sails .
At eleven the same morning we mustered and quartered the ship 's company .
At noon the island of Juan Fernandez bore W. half S. distance eight leagues  the two next days we saw nothing of the chace , nor any thing remarkable .


Saturday , Sept. 12 , at five in the morning we saw a sail to windward , which bore down towards us , and at about two leagues distance she hawled up the lee clue-garnet of her foresail , shewed her Spanish colours , and fired a gun , which we supposed to be a signal concerted between her and others which came out in company with her  but we not answering nor regarding it , she hauled close on a wind and stood from us , endeavouring to escape  upon which we gave chace , and it proving sometimes hazy and foggy , we were in danger of losing sight of her .
About nine in the morning we tacked ,  and at noon coming within gun-shot , we fired five shot at her rigging to bring her to  but she keeping on her course , we fired four more , on which she struck her colours , and surrendered without making any opposition .
This ship happened not to be the same we went out after .
She proved a rich merchant ship , having on board 18,000 l. sterling in dollars and plate , with some jewels , and abundance of gold and silver twist  but the bulk of her cargo consisted in sugars and bale goods , most of the latter European , but some the produce of the country .
She was called the Nuestra Senora del Monte Carmelo .
She was of about 500 tons , was commanded by Don Manuel Zamorra , and had on board 13 passengers , most of them persons of fortune , amongst whom was the son of the Governor of the city of St. Jago , the capital of Chili .
She came from Callao , a port of Lima , the capital of the empire of Peru , bound for Valparaiso in Chili , where those ships annually trade , exchanging silver in return for gold and corn , the latter being very scarce in Peru , Some of the prisoners informed us , that , if we had taken her in her return from Chili to Peru , we should have met with as much gold in her as we had now found silver .
She had in the whole a board her 67 persons , many of them Indians and black slaves , who were afterwards very useful to us in assisting towards the ship 's duty .
She had been 27 days from Callao , and  wanted not above two days sail to compleat her voyage when we took her .


We found in this ship , on search among the letters from some merchants in Lima to their friends in Chili , an account of the fate of the Spanish squadron which had been sent after us , viz .
that , in attempting to pass the Cape , they had been forced to put back , after encountering the most terrible storms and most pressing famine , being reduced to two ounces of bread and half a pint of water each man a day  that , besides being grievously attacked by the scurvy , which had made greater havock among them than among us , their ships were almost entirely disabled , their masts , sails , yards , rigging and hulls in a manner shattered and torn to pieces  that Admiral Pisarro , and one more of his squadron , after having suffered the greatest extremities , had got , with the utmost difficulty , to Buenos Ayres , on the River Plate  that another of the squadron , a ship of 70 guns , had been entirely lost near Rio Grande , and that two more had never been heard of  that on their return they had seen two large ships pass by very near them , which they supposed to be two ships of our squadron , but the weather proving stormy , and the sea running mountains high , they could not interfere with or attack each other .
Those ships of ours we believed to be the Severn and the Pearl , and hoped they were safely arrived at some port of the Brazils .
Those letters came over land from Buenos Ayres to Lima ,  and with them came others containing Admiral Pisarro 's advice and instructions to the Viceroy of Peru concerning us  wherein he told him , that , though he himself had been forced back in such a miserable condition , not having above 80 or 100 of his men living , and his ships in so ill a state , that , till sufficient reinforcements could come to him from Old Spain , he could not possibly come into those seas , yet as the English were a stubborn and resolute people , and daring enough to persist obstinately in the most desperate undertakings , he did believe some of us might possibly get round  but as he experimentally knew what of necessity we must have suffered in that dreadful passage , he made no doubt but we should be in a very weak and defenceless condition  he therefore advised the Viceroy to fit out all the strength of shipping he could , and send them to cruise at the island of Juan Fernandez , where we must of necessity touch to refresh our people , and to repair our ships  and farther advised , that , in case of meeting us , they should not stand to fight or cannonade at a distance , in which possibly we might have the advantage , or make our escape , but should board us at once sword in hand  which must , if well executed , in our weak condition , infallibly prove the means of taking us .


This was a well-laid scheme , and in pursuance of it the Viceroy equipt three ships at Callao , one of 50 , one of 30 , and one of 20 guns , all double manned with the choicest men  they could possibly procure , and sent them to wait for us accordingly .
Those ships arrived at Juan Fernandez some time , I think , in May , and continued till about June the 6th , when , imagining that we must be either put back or lost , they quitted their station , and sailed for the port of Conception in Chili , and by this means we luckily missed them : had it happened otherwise , as we arrived there with only our single ship , in such a defenceless condition , and had they put their orders in execution with any tolerable degree of resolution , we must in all human probability have fallen into their hands .


Our prisoners informed us further , that those ships , during their cruise , had met with a storm , in which they had received so much damage , that it must be at least two months before they could again be fit to go to sea .
The whole of his intelligence was as favourable as we could have wished  and now we were at no loss to account for the fresh marks we found at Juan Fernandez , of that island 's having been lately visited by some white people .


Sunday the 13th , having got on board most of the prisoners of note , and all the silver , we made sail for Juan Fernandez  and the weather proving very moderate , at six in the evening that island bore N. W. by N. at the distance of five leagues .
At three the next morning we fired three guns , as a signal to the ships in the bay .
At four we anchored , got in our small  bower cable , which we had slipped at leaving the place , and moored our ship .


The 15th we employed in watering , and seting up our rigging , in order to pursue our voyage .
And this day , the Commodore being informed that several merchant-ships were now pursuing their trade without fear of any surprize , the Trial was ordered out on a cruise , and proceeded immediately .


The 16th we got up a new top-gallant-mast , and wanting some cordage we were supplied with it from the Gloucester .
This and the following days , until the 19th , we spent in getting every thing ready for sea with the utmost expedition .


The 19th we sent 28 of our prisoners on board the Gloucester , she being weakly manned , and those prisoners being good sailors .
We likewise supplied the prize with two months provisions of all sorts , at full allowance , for 20 men  put all the guns belonging to the Anne pink on board of her  and , having left orders with Captain Mitchell , of the Gloucester , to burn the pink , together with her useless stores , and appointed him his station off the town of Payta , which is the place where the ships between Lima and Panama generally touch to deliver part of their cargoes to be dispersed through the inland parts of Peru , with orders to sail to that station as soon as possible , we weighed , and took leave of our winter residence , in company with the prize , which the  Commodore had fitted up to cruise against the enemy .


The 21st , at four in the evening , we had the last sight of this island , it then bearing from us W. by N. at the distance of 17 leagues .
The remaining days , until the 24th , we had variable and uncertain weather , in which we split our main-top-sail and fore-sail , and received some other slight damage .


The 24th , at five in the evening , being somewhat hazy , we saw two sail to windward , on which we cleared ship , in order to be ready to engage , the largest of the two ships bearing down upon us .
At seven she came so near , that we haled her in Spanish , and she answered in English , and told us , that she was a prize taken by the Trial , and that her consort was the Trial itself , which was very much disabled .
At 11 the next morning , there being a hard gale and high sea , the Trial fired two guns as a signal of distress , and bore away before the wind , and we after her .
The same day half an hour past noon we spoke with the Trial , and found she had sprung her main-mast , and that her main-top-mast had come by the board : and as we were all of us standing to the eastward next morning , with a fresh gale at south , she had the additional misfortune to spring her fore-mast  so that now she had not a mast left .
This was a great obstruction  for now we had intelligence by the Trial 's prize , that there were many ships at sea richly laden , and that they  had no apprehensions of being attacked by us , having received intelligence that our squadron was either put back or destroyed .
In the course , therefore , of the 48 hours we were detained in waiting upon the Trial , I am persuaded we missed the taking many valuable prizes .
The result was , that a council being called , and all the officers convened together on board our ship , it was there concluded , that in her present condition the Trial could be of no farther service  and the Commodore , being resolved to separate the ships , in order to cruise upon the coast to the greatest advantage , gave orders to Captain Charles Saunders , the Commander , to burn the Trial , and in her room commissioned the Trial 's prize for his Majesty 's service , with the same Commander , officers , and people .
This ship , the Trial 's prize , was called by the Spaniards the Nuestra Senora de Arinzazie  but , being now commissioned for his Majesty 's service , she was henceforth called the Trial 's Prize .
She was the largest ship we took in those seas , being between five and six hundred tons , and loaded with bale goods , sugar , and other commodities , to a considerable value , and about 5000l .
in specie and wrought silver .


The 28th , at nine in the morning , we parted with the Trial and both the prizes .


The 30th , we saw the main land of Chili .
This day we began to exercise our people with small arms , which was the first time we had done it since we came into those seas , and which  we continued at all proper opportunities during the voyage .


On the 1st of October we came in sight of the high land of Valparaiso , bearing N. E. half E. at the distance of about 14 leagues .
This city lies in the latitude of 32 deg .
58 min .
S. its longitude from London is by my account 80 deg .
37 min .
W .


On the 5th , the Commodore , being informed that there were murmurings amongst the people , because the prize-money was not immediately divided , ordered the articles of war to be read  and after that remonstrated to them on the danger of mutiny , and said he had heard the reason of their discontent , but assured them their properties were secured by act of parliament as firmly as any one 's own inheritance , and that the money , plate , c. were weighed and marked in public  so that any capable person , if he pleased , might take an inventory of the whole .
He then read an account of the particulars , and told them they might ( if they pleased ) make choice of any person to take an inventory for them , or buy their parts .
This spread a visible joy , and gave content to every one .
We continued cruising off the coast of Valparaiso till the 8th , when at twelve at night we broke the main top-sail yard in the slings , on which we unbent the top-sail and got down the broken yard .
At ten in the morning we saw the high land of Choapa , and over it the Cordillera mountains , being part of that long  ridge of mountains called the Andes , which run from one end of South America to the other , appearing excessively high , with their tops covered with snow .


The 14th we crossed the south Tropic to the northward , and from this time , till we were some degrees to the northward of the Equator , met with nothing but fair weather and a smooth sea .


The 21st , at noon , the high land of Morro Quemado bore E. by N. at the distance of four leagues  and here we continued cruising off and on till Nov. 2 , when , about six in the morning , we saw two sail of ships standing towards us  upon which we made a clear ship , and immediately gave them chace , when we soon perceived that they were the Trial and Centurion prizes .
As we had the wind of them , we brought to , and waited their coming up , when Captain Saunders came on board , and acquainted the Commodore that he had cleared the Trial pursuant to his orders , and having scuttled her , he remained by her till she sunk  but that it was not till the 4th of October before this was effected , by reason of the great swell and hollow sea  that , during his attendance on the sloop , they were all driven so far to leeward , that they were afterwards obliged to stretch a long way to the westward , to regain the ground they had lost  that in their cruise they had met no prize , nor had seen any vessel on all the coast .


 Nov. the 3d , at five in the evening , the island of Asia , in lat .
13 deg .
5 min .
S. long .
84 deg .
43 min .
W. bore from us N. E. by E. distance five leagues .


The 5th , at four in the evening , we saw the high land of Barranca , bearing N. E. by E. distant eight or nine leagues  and half an hour after we saw a sail to the northward , to whom we gave chace , and cleared our ship for engaging .
At 10 in the evening we came up with her , fired eight guns , and took her .
She came from Guaiaquil , and was bound for Callao , with timber , cacao , cordage , tobacco , cacao-nuts , and a small trunk with bale goods  all of little value to us , though a very considerable loss to the Spaniards .
She was called the Santa Teresa , commanded by Don Bartolo Urrunaga , with between 30 and 40 people on board , passengers included , and five or six women , besides children .
Our Third Lieutenant , two other officers , and a party of sailors , were sent on board to command and take care of her  and our other prizes being far a-stern , occasioned by our chacing this ship , we lay by till four the next morning , and fired a gun every hour as a signal for their joining us .
This day I find , by the difference of our dead reckoning and observations , a current to set along this coast to the northward of near a mile an hour .


The 7th , we were employed in getting aboard several necessary stores , as planks , cordage , and the like , from our last prize , for the use of the  squadron .
The sea here appeared for several miles of a blood-red colour , which the prisoners informed us was common in those parts , and of which mention has been made more than once already in this work .
This day we found aboard the prize , in specie and plate , 50 pounds averdupois weight .


The 9th , we brought from on board the Teresa 10 serons of cacao , one of wax , and 180 fathom of three and a half rope .


The 10th , we brought from on board our first prize the Carmelo , the following goods , viz .
cloth two bales , bays five ditto , sugar 182 loaves , straw mats two , tar one skin , raisons three bales , indigo four serons , cotton cloth one bale , hats two cases , and 25 loose ones , skins one parcel , chocolate one bag , camlet one bale and two parcels , silks one box , lead four pigs , and combs one small parcel .


The 12th , at five in the morning , we saw a sail , to which we gave chace  but there being very little wind , we manned and armed our barge , pinnace , and the Trial 's pinnace , and sent them to take her , and at eight they boarded and took her , and brought her to us at half an hour past 10 .
She was called the Carmen , commanded by Signior Marcus Marina , and came out of Payta the day before , bound to Callao , laden with iron and cloth , being a very valuable cargo .
We found on board an Irishman , named John Williams , who pretended himself a prisoner amongst them , and with much seeming  joy entered with us .
He informed us , that , amongst other ships in the Port of Payta , they left in the road a bark which was taking in 400,000 dollars , with which she would sail for Panama in a day or two at farthest  and the Spanish prisoners being examined , and confirming the intelligence , and farther giving some account of the strength of the place , the Commodore resolved to attack it this very night , and made preparations accordingly .
Mr. Thomas Simmers , mate of our ship , with one midshipman and about 10 or 12 men , were sent to command and take cate of this last prize .
At four in the afternoon , Point Nonura bore E. by S. half S. distant eight leagues .
At 10 at night , we sent our barge , pinnace , and Trial 's pinnace , to attack the town of Payta , by surprize .
They had 49 men well armed , and were commanded by the Lieutenants Brett , Dennis , and Hughes , who had orders , if possible , to secure the Governor of Payta , and send him prisoner on board , in order by that means to procure a supply of provisions , and a ransom for the town .
Half an hour after 11 we sounded , and found 43 fathom water , the ground mud , the island of Lobos bearing N. N. E. at the distance of three or four miles .
At seven in the morning , Point Onado , being the point that forms the bay of Payta , bore S. S. E. two miles distant  and the town of Payta at the same time began to open in a direct line with it , distant about four miles  soon after which we saw our British colours flying  on the castle .
At 10 , the Trial 's boat came on board , loaded with gold and silver , corn , wrought plate , jewels , and rich moveables .
They informed us , that they took the town about two in the morning  and that , though the Spaniards had some time before been apprized of our intent , they yet made a very faint resistance , having fired but two guns from their castle before our men landed , and a few small arms afterwards , when they all quitted the town with the greatest precipitation .
The Governor and his family made their escape in so much haste , that his lady was handed out of a window with no other cloaths to cover her but her shift .
All the inhabitants fled in the like confusion , except some negro women and children .
In this action we lost one man , Peter Obrian , the Commodore 's steward , who was shot through the breast by a musquet ball  and had two wounded , to wit , Arthur Lusk , a quarter-master , and the Spanish pilot of the Teresa , whom we had made use of as a guide  the first through the fleshy part of the arm near the shoulder , the second through the wrist , but neither dangerously : and I have had it reported from several officers then on shore , that our men ran to the attack , and fired in so irregular a manner , that it was , and still remains a doubt , whether those were not shot by our people rather than by the enemy .


The town of Payta , at the time of the attack , had a fort with eight guns mounted , which commanded the town and harbour  and the balcony  of the Governor 's house , which again commanded that fort , together with several other houses , was lined with armed men , of which there might be about 400 in the town  but these people having enjoyed a long peace , and being enervated by the luxury so customary in those parts , their arms in a bad condition , and no person of experience or courage to head them , it is no wonder that they made so small a resistance , and were all driven out of the town in less than half an hour by only 49 men  but I believe the noise of two drums which we made use of , together with the suddenness of the surprize , contributed to intimidate them , and facilitated our success .


On our getting possession of the castle , our commanding-officer very inconsiderately ordered the guns to be thrown over the walls , which accordingly was executed  but some time after reflecting on the ill consequence which might attend that proceeding , he ordered two of them to be got up and re mounted .


At 11 , our barge came on board , loaded with money , plate , and jewels .
This town contains about 140 or 150 houses  there are in it two churches , which , together with the Governor 's house and castle , are the only remarkable buildings .
There are several large store-houses full of rich European , Asian , and American goods , all which were destroyed when we set the town on fire  of which in its place .
The town lies in latitude 5 deg .
3 min .
S. and longitude from London 88 deg .
48 min .
W .
This afternoon  we employed ourselves in getting off the plunder , and provisions of hogs and fowls , which were here in great plenty .
In the evening we anchored in 10 fathom water , the town bearing from us S. by E. half E. at about three miles distance , not being able to get farther in , by reason of the flaws of wind from off the land .


From this time to the 15th we were employed in getting on board the plunder , which chiefly consisted of rich brocades , laced cloaths , bales of fine linens and woolens , Britannia 's , slays , and the like  together with a great number of hogs , some sheep and fowls , cases of Spanish brandies and wines , a great quantity of onions , olives , sweet-meats , and many other things too tedious to name  all which the sailors hoped would have been equally divided among the ships companies , but they found themselves disappointed .


We found in the road , one ship , two snows , one schooner , and two quarter-gallies , all which we took possession of .
The 14th , in the morning , we saw a bark-log as they call it , being a sort of raft made of the stumps of trees fastened together , overlaid with poles , and covered with for all twigs twisted mat wise , with several people in her coming along shore from the southward .
She had a sort of mast and sail in her , and at first sight we knew not what to make of her  and none of our own boats being on board , we sent the carmen 's boat , with Mr. Langdon , a midshipman , who commanded in the second place on board that ship , and some armed people ,  to pursue them , who perceiving it put on shore , and made their escape over the rocks .
Mr. Langdon took their bark-log , which he found to be laden with dried fish , which we suppose they were carrying to Payta for a market .
This evening the Spaniards , who had all along appeared in great numbers from the hills , and were now considerably increased , making a shew of warlike preparations , as if they designed in the night to attack our people in the town , they thereupon barricaded the streets , and kept very strict watches , to prevent a surprize .
Several negroes delivered themselves up , desiring to be made prisoners , that they might have some food , and more especially water , to keep them from perishing  for the country thereabouts being for many miles round quite barren and sandy , without either water or any other thing necessary for life , and the nearest town to them , named as I think Sancta Cruz , whence relief might be got , being a day and a half or two days journey off , the people who had left the town were in a starving condition , and we had melancholy accounts of several dying among them for want chiefly of water during our small stay  and yet so greatly were they infatuated or frightened , that they never offered to treat for the ransom of the place , which if they had done , I believe it would not have been destroyed  in which case they might have secured to themselves not only their habitations , but provisions and water enough ( till they could  have got a fresh recruit ) , which we should on that condition have readily left them .


The town seems to be very unhappily situated on that and some other accounts , they having no water but what is brought them by land-carriage from several leagues off  so that they are obliged to keep very considerable quantities by them in earthen jars , not only for their own use , but for the ships who frequently touch here , where they likewise often unload , and take in fresh cargoes .
They are in the same case as to grain , bread , and almost all other necessaries of life  and lie so open to an enemy , that the town has been often taken and ruined by the English , Dutch , and French  all which inconveniencies , one would imagine , should tempt them to change their situation : but then the conveniency of their trade is so great , being the only proper place they can pitch on for a mart between Panama and Peru , that they prefer this lucrative convenience to all other considerations .


Among the slaves who had desired to be entertained in our service , was one , who , having been a slave in Jamaica , had on the death of his master obtained his liberty , and thereupon entered himself a servant to one of the South-Sea Company 's factors , whom he accompanied to Porto Bello and Panama , and there got into the service of a Spanish gentleman , who took a great fancy to him , and with whom he went to Lima in Peru , where this master likewise dying left him a very considerable legacy  but the power  being now in the hands of his executors , they not only defrauded him of this legacy , but made him a slave a second time .
He was now at Payta with one of his new masters , on his passage from Lima to Panama , when he took this opportunity to come over to us  and being a very handy fellow , and accustomed to wait on gentlemen , he was immediately taken into the Commodore 's service , came with us into England , and , I believe , continued with him till his death .
This person gave us some information of the designs of the Spaniards on shore , and told us we had killed one or two of them , and wounded several others  but this account was never , that I know of , farther confirmed .


The 15th , in the morning , we sent on shore all our Spanish , and several of our Indian prisoners , keeping all the blacks and some of the Indians , to assist in working the ships , c. To the blacks , who were all or most of them slaves , was promised their liberty in England , in case they would stand by and assist us against our enemies the Spaniards  which they all promised very cordially : but we could soon discover , that , notwithstanding their seeming condescension , most of them would have much rather continued in the service of their old masters , than fail to accept of liberty with us  not that I believe those people were in love with slavery , or would not willingly have had their liberty , but then it must be on their own terms , the Spaniards in those parts being in great awe of the  Indians , whom , though they have subdued , and seem to have incorporated among them , they dare not trust , but keep these blacks as guards , and use them well .
The truth is , those Indians have still preserved , by tradition from father to son , the memory of the great cruelties which the first Spaniards exercised in those parts , and are angry enough at their present hard usage .
They look on themselves as the natural lords of the country , and the Spaniards as covetous intruders , and cruel inhuman tyrants  and want only opportunity to make them sensible of their resentment , and to recover their lost country and liberty .
'T is on this account that the Spaniards are very kind to their black slaves , whom they cherish and encourage highly , and look on them in the same light of a standing militia , always ready to arm against those Indians  so that , though the negroes in all other plantations in the West Indies are ever ready for revolts and rebellions , these , on the contrary , are always ready to defend their kind masters with their lives .
In effect they live very easy , are favoured by the Spaniards , and scorn and insult the poor Indians , who in return hate and detest both them and their masters  that being all that is left in their power .


This day an order was given to Mr. Brett , the then commanding officer on shore , to burn and destroy the town entirely , the two churches , which stood a little out of the way of the rest , only excepted  the Spaniards , as has been already  said , never having made any advance towards treating for its ransom .


But now , before I entirely quit the relation of our transactions at this place , it may , perhaps , be expected , that I should give a more particular account of the booty we made , and of the loss the Spaniards sustained .
I have already observed , that there were great quantities of valuable effects in the town  but , as most of them were what we could neither dispose of , nor carry away , the total of this merchandize can only be rudely guessed at .
The Spaniards , in their representations sent to the court of Madrid ( as we were afterwards assured ) , estimated their whole loss at a million and a half of dollars  and when it is considered , that no small part of the goods we left behind us , were of the richest and most expensive species , as broad-cloths , silks , cambrics , velvets , c. I can not but think their valuation sufficiently moderate .


As to ourselves , the acquisition we made , though inconsiderable in comparison of what we destroyed , was yet far from despicable  for the wrought plate , dollars , and other coin , which fell into our hands , amounted to upwards of 30,000 l. besides several rings , bracelets , and jewels , whose intrinsic value we could not then estimate : and over and above all this , the plunder , which became the property of the immediate captors , was very great  so that , upon the whole , it was by much the most important booty we met with upon that coast .


 There remains still another matter to be related , which on account of the signal honour which our national character in those parts has thence received , and the reputation which our Commodore in particular has thereby acquired , merits a distinct and circumstantial discussion .
I have already observed , that all the prisoners taken by us were , before our departure , put on shore , and discharged , amongst whom there were some persons of considerable distinction , especially a youth of about 17 years of age , son of the Vice-President of the Council of Chili .
As the barbarity of the buccaneers , and the artful uses the ecclesiastics had made of it , had filled the natives of those countries with the most terrible ideas of English cruelty , we always found our prisoners , at their first coming on board us , to be extremely dejected , and under great horror and anxiety  particularly this youth , who , having never been from home before , lamented his captivity in the most moving manner , regretting , in very plaintive terms , his parents , his brothers , his sisters , and his native country  of all which , he was fully persuaded , he had taken his last farewel , believing that he was now devoted for the remaining part of his life to an abject and cruel servitude .
Indeed , his companions on board , and all the Spaniards that came into our power , had the same desponding opinion of their situation .
Mr. Anson constantly exerted his utmost endeavours to efface those terrifying impressions they had received of us , always taking  care , that as many of the principal people among them as there was room for should dine at his table by turns  and giving the most peremptory orders , too , that they should always be treated with the utmost decency and humanity : but , notwithstanding this precaution , it was generally observed , that for the first day or two they did not quit their fears , suspecting the gentleness of their usage to be only preparatory to some unthought of calamity .
However , being at length convinced of our sincerity , they grew perfectly easy in their situation , and remarkably chearful  so that it was often disputable , whether or no they considered their being detained by us as a misfortune : for the youth I have above mentioned , who was near two months on board us , had at last so far conquered his melancholy surmises , and had taken such an affection to Mr. Anson , that it is doubtful to me , whether , if his own opinion had been asked , he would not have preferred a voyage to England in the Centurion , to the being set on shore at Payta , where he was at liberty to return to his country and friends .


This conduct of the Commodore to his prisoners , which was continued without interruption or deviation , gave them all the highest idea of his humanity and benevolence , and occasioned them , likewise , ( as mankind are fond of forming general opinions ) to entertain very favourable thoughts of the whole English nation .
But whatever they might be disposed to think of Mr. Anson before the capture of the Teresa ,  their veneration for him was prodigiously increased by his conduct towards the ladies whom he took in that vessel  for , being informed that there were among them a mother and two daughters of exquisite beauty , who were of quality , he not only gave orders that they should be left in full possession of their own apartments , but also forbid , on the severest penalties , any of the common people on board from approaching them  and , that they might be the more certain of having these orders complied with , or of having the means of complaining if they were not , he permitted the pilot , who in Spanish ships is generally the second person on board , to stay with them as a guardian and protector .
These were measures that seemed so different from what might have been expected from an enemy and an heretic , that the Spaniards on board , though they had themselves experienced his beneficence , were surprized at this new instance of it  and the more so , as all this was done without solicitation , and without the interposition of one friend to intercede in their favour .
The ladies were so sensible of the obligations they owed him for the care and atention with which he protected them , that they absolutely refused to go to shore at Payta , till they had been permitted to wait on him on board the Centurion to return him thanks in person .
Indeed , all the prisoners left us with the strongest assurances of their grateful remembrance of his uncommon treatment :  a jesuit , in particular , whom the Commodore had taken , and who was an ecclesiastic of some distinction , could not help expressing himself with great thankfulness for the civilities he and his countrymen had found on board , declaring that he should consider it as his duty to do Mr. Anson justice at all times , adding that his usage of the men prisoners was such as could never be forgotten , and such as he should never fail to acknowledge upon all occasions  but that his behaviour to the ladies was so extraordinary , and so extremely honourable , that he doubted if all the regard due to his own ecclesiastical character would be sufficient to render it credible .
Indeed , we were afterwards informed , that he and the rest of our prisoners had not been silent on this head  but that , both at Lima and at other places , they had given the greatest encomiums to our Commodore  that the jesuit , in particular , as we were told , on his account , interpreted in a lax and hypothetical sense , that article of his church which asserts the impossibility of heretics being saved - But to return :


After we had finished our business , set the town in flames , and got the treasure on board , Mr. Brett , the officer who commanded the attack , having collected his men together , was directing his march towards the beach where the boats waited to take them on board , when the Spaniards on the hill behind the town , observing his retreat , resolved to try if  they could not precipitate his departure , and thereby lay some foundation for future boasting .
To this end a party of horse , all picked men singled out for this daring enterprize , marched down the hill with much seeming resolution  so that , had we not entertained a just opinion of their prowess , we might have imagined , that , now we were upon the open beach , with no advantages of situation , they would certainly have charged us : but we presumed , and we were not mistaken , that all this was mere ostentation  for , notwithstanding the pomp and parade they at first came on with , Mr. Brett had no sooner ordered his men to halt and face about , than the enemy stopt their career , and never dared to advance a step farther .


When our people arrived at their boats and were ready to go on board , they were for some time retarded by missing one of their number  and being unable , on their mutual enquiries among each other , to inform themselves where he was left , or by what accident detained , they , after a considerable delay , resolved to get into their boats and to depart without him : but , when the last man was actually embarked , and the boats were just putting off , they heard him calling to them to take him in .
The place was by this time so thoroughly on fire , and the smoke covered the beach so effectually , that they could scarcely discern him , though they heard his voice .
However , the Lieutenant instantly ordered one of the boats to his relief ,  who found him up to the chin in water , for he had waded as far as he durst , being extremely frightened with the apprehensions of falling into the hands of an enemy , enraged , as they doubtless were , at the pillage and destruction of their town .
On enquiring into the cause of his staying behind , it was found that he had taken that morning too large a dose of brandy , which had thrown him into so sound a sleep , that he did not awake till the fire came near enough to scorch him .
He was strangely amazed , at first opening his eyes , to see the houses on a blaze on one side , and several Spaniards and Indians not far from him on the other .
The greatness and suddenness of his fright instantly reduced him into a state of sobriety , and gave him sufficient presence of mind to push through the thickest of the smoke , as the likeliest means to escape the enemy  and , making the best of his way to the beach , he ran as far into the water as he durst ( for he could not swim ) , before he ventured to look back .


By the time our people had helped their comrade out of the water , and were making the best of their way to the squadron , the flames had taken possession of every part of the town , and burnt so furiously , both by means of the combustibles that had been distributed for that purpose , and by the slightness of the materials of which the houses were composed , and their aptitude to take fire , that it was sufficiently apparent no efforts of the enemy ( though they flocked down  in great numbers ) could possibly put a stop to it , or prevent the entire destruction of the place , and all the merchandize contained therein .
Mr. Brett had the curiosity to delineate its appearance , together with that of the ships in the harbour , as may be seen in the Plate .


Our detachment having now safely joined the squadron , the Commodore prepared to leave the place the same evening .
At seven , Cape Blanco , in lat .
4 deg .
28 min .
S. and long .
88 deg .
16 min .
W. from London , bore from us S. S. E. half E. about seven or eight miles distant .
This afternoon and the next day we were employed in taking the most useful and valuable things out of the Santa Teresa and the Payta bark : we likewise designing to take every necessary thing which we conveniently could out of the Santa Teresa , in order to destroy her , and bring our strength into a less compass , we took her in tow , and set the Payta bark on fire with the same view .
The next day we destroyed the Santa Teresa in the same manner , having got out of them both some anchors , cables , hawsers , yards , and top-masts , blocks , bales of goods , and several other necessaries .


The 17th at three in the afternoon , the Gloucester , with a prize of her 's in tow , joined us .
This prize was called the Del Oro , and was chiefly laden with wine  however , out of her and a small boat which they took going along shore , they got , in gold , silver , and wrought plate , to about the value of 17 or 18000 l.  These two were all the prizes the Gloucester took in those seas .


On board this prize of this Gloucester were two horses , which being , I suppose , fat , and probably better food than their salt beef or pork , they killed and eat them  and this , I imagine , gave ground to that fiction which one of the spurious accounts of our voyage has given , of our eagerly hunting and eating wild horses , whereas in reality we never saw nor heard of a wild horse during the voyage .


The Gloucester had chaced two or three ships which had escaped her , and one of those touched at Payta  and though they could give no certain account that the ship which had chaced them was an enemy , yet the circumstances they gave were so strong , that it put the people of Payta upon securing their treasure , and the best of their effects , not caring to be too well provided for the profit of such unwelcome visitants .


The 21st , at half past five in the morning , we saw the island of Plata , so called from Sir Francis Drake 's having , as it is said , divided the treasure he took in the South Seas at this place .
At two this afternoon , the port of Manta bore S. E. by E. distant about eight or nine leagues .
We at this time sent six months provisions on board the Carmen  and all the ships had orders , in case of separation , for several rendezvouses on the coast of Mexico , or , in case of not meeting there , to make the best of their way to Macao ,  in China , where they were to await the arrival of the Commodore .


The 22d , a division was made of the plunder of Payta , and the Commodore not appearing in that affair , it was done at the pleasure , and to the entire satisfaction , of five or six ( no doubt ) very disinterested officers  and , indeed , most things of this nature , during the course of the voyage being managed with the same discretion and honour , no room was left for complaining of particular partialities .


Here , however , we can not help remarking a very considerable difference between the relation given by Pascoe Thomas , and that given by Mr. Walters  the former having asserted , that the Commodore did not interfere in the distribution  the latter , that it was by his prudent management , that a jealousy , which had arisen between those who were the real captors , and those who remained on board the ship , was accommodated .
Mr. Walters ' account will set this matter in a true light : ' `` And now , says he , ( while the ships lay-to , in hopes of joining the Gloucester , ) a jealousy , which had taken its rise at Payta , between those who had been commanded on shore for the attack , and those who had continued on board , grew to such a height , that the Commodore , being made acquainted with it , thought it necessary to interpose his authority to oppose it .
The ground of this animosity was the plunder gotten at Payta , which those who had acted on shore had appropriated to themselves , considering it  as a reward for the risques they had run , and the resolution they had shewn in that service .
But those who had remained on board looked on this as a very partial and unjust procedure , urging , that , had it been left to their choice , they should have preferred the acting on shore to the continuing on board  that their duty while their comrades were on shore was extremely fatiguing  for , besides the labour of the day , they were constantly under arms all night , to secure the prisoners , whose numbers exceeded their own , and of whom it was then necessary to be extremely watchful , to prevent any attempts they might have formed in that critical conjuncture : that , upon the whole , it could not be denied , but that the presence of a sufficient force on board was as necessary to the success of the enterprize , as the action of the others on shore  and , therefore , those who had continued on board maintained , that they could not be deprived of their share of the plunder without manifest injustice .
These were the contests amongst our men , which were carried on with great heat on both sides  and , though the plunder in question was a very trifle in comparison of the treasure taken in the place ( in which there was no doubt but those on board had an equal right ) , yet as the obstinacy of sailors is not always regulated by the importance of the matter in dispute , the Commodore thought it necessary to put a stop to this ferment betimes .
Accordingly , the morning after our leaving Payta , he ordered  all hands upon the quarter-deck , where addressing himself to those who had been detached on shore , he commended their behaviour , and thanked them for their services on that occasion  but then , representing to them the reasons urged by those who had continued on board , for an equal distribution of the plunder , he told them , that he thought these reasons very conclusive , and that the expectations of their comrades were justly founded  and therefore , he insisted , that , not only the men , but all the officers likewise who had been employed in taking the place , should produce the whole of their plunder immediately upon the quarter-deck , and that it should be impartially divided amongst the whole crew , in proportion to each man 's rank and commission  and , to prevent those who had been in possession of the plunder from murmuring at this diminution of their share , the Commodore added , that , as an encouragement to others who might be hereafter employed on like services , he would give his entire share to be distributed amongst those who had been detached for the attack of the place .
Thus , this troublesome affair , which , if permitted to have gone on , might , perhaps , have been attended with mischievous consequences , was , by the Commodore 's prudence , soon appeased , to the general satisfaction of the ship 's company : not but there were some few whose selfish dispositions were uninfluenced by the justice of this procedure , and who were incapable of discerning  the force of equity , however glaring , when is tended to deprive them of any part of what they had once got into their hands . '' '


Being now joined by the Gloucester and her prize , it was resolved that we should stand to the northward , and make the best of our way either to Cape St. Lucas on California , or to Cape Corientes on the coast of Mexico .
Indeed , the Commodore , when at Juan Fernandez , had determined to touch in the neighbourhood of Panama , and to endeavour to get some correspondence over land with the fleet under the command of Admiral Vernon  for when we departed from England , we left a large force at Portsmouth , which was intended to be sent to the West Indies , there to be employed in an expedition against some of the Spanish settlements .
And Mr. Anson , taking it for granted that this enterprize had succeeded , and that Porto Bello perhaps might be then garrisoned by British troops , he hoped that , on his arrival at the isthmus , he should easily procure an intercourse with our countrymen on the other side , either by the Indians , who were greatly disposed in our favour , or even by the Spaniards themselves , some of whom for proper rewards might be induced to carry on this intelligence  which , after it was once begun , might be continued with very little difficulty  so that Mr. Anson flattered himself , that he might by this means have received a reinforcement of men from the other side , and that , by  settling a prudent plan of operations with our Commanders in the West Indies , he might have taken even Panama itself , which would have given to the British nation the possession of that isthmus , whereby we should have been in effect masters of all the treasures of Peru .


Such were the projects which the Commodore revolved in his thoughts , at the island of Juan Fernandez , notwithstanding the feeble condition to which he was then reduced  but in examining the papers which were found on board the Carmelo , the first prize we took , we learned , that our attempt against Carthagena had failed , and that there was no probability that our fleet in that part of the world would engage in any new enterprize that would at all facilitate this plan .
Mr. Anson therefore gave over all hopes of being reinforced across the isthmus , and consequently had no inducement at present to proceed to Panama , as he was incapable of attacking the place , and there was great reason to believe that , by this time , there was a general embargo on all the coast .


The only feasible measure , then , which was left us , was to steer as soon as possible to the southern parts of California , or to the adjacent coast of Mexico , there to cruise for the Manilla galleon , which we knew was now at sea , bound to the port of Acapulco  and we doubted not but to get on that station time enough to intercept her : but there was a business which we foresaw would occasion some delay , and that was the  recruiting our water , it being impossible to think of venturing upon this passage to the coast of Mexico till we had procured a fresh supply .
It was for some time a matter of deliberation , where we should take in this necessary article  but , by consulting the accounts of former navigators , and examining our prisoners , we at last resolved for the island of Quibo , situated at the mouth of the bay of Panama .
Nor was it but on good grounds that the Commodore conceived this to be the properest place for watering the squadron .
Indeed , there was a small island called Cocos , which was less out of our way than Quibo , where some of the buccaneers had pretended to find water  but none of our prisoners knew any thing of it , and it was thought 100 dangerous to risque the safety of the squadron , by exposing ourselves to the hazard of not meeting with water when we came there , on the mere authority of those legendary writers , of whose misrepresentations and falsities we had almost daily experience .
Determined , therefore , to take in water at Quibo , we directed our course northward , being eight sail in company , and consequently having the appearance of a very formidable fleet  and on the 19th , at day-break , we discovered Cape Blanco , bearing S. S. E. half E. seven miles distant .
By this time we found that our last prize , the Solidad , was far from answering the character given of her as a good sailor  and she and the Santa Teresa delaying us considerably , the Commodore  commanded them to be cleared of every thing that might prove useful to the rest of the ships , and then to be burnt .
And having given proper instructions , and appointed a rendezvous to the Gloucester , and to the prizes , in case of separation , we proceeded in our course for Quibo .


On the 25th , Point Manta bore S. E. by E. at seven miles distance , and there being a town of the same name in the neighbourhood , Captain Mitchell in the Gloucester took the opportunity of setting on shore several of his prisoners .
The boats were now daily employed in distributing provisions on board the prizes , to compleat their stock for six months  and that the Centurion might be the better prepared to give the Manilla ship a warm reception , if happily she should fall in our way , the carpenters were ordered to fix eight stocks on the main and fore tops , which were properly fitted for the mounting of swivel guns .


On the 25th we had sight of the island of Gallo  and from hence we crossed the bay of Panama , shaping our course in a direct line for Quibo .
Here we found , in a few days , a very considerable alteration in the climate  for , instead of that uniform temperature , where neither the excess of heat or cold was prevalent , we had now close and sultry weather , like that we met with on the coast of Brazil .
We had , besides , frequent calms and heavy rains , which we at first ascribed to the neighbourhood of the Line ,  where this kind of weather is observed to obtain at all seasons of the year  but , finding that it attended us for more than seven degrees of north latitude , we began to suspect that the stormy season , or , as the Spaniards call it , the Vandewals , was not yet past  though many writers , particularly Captain Shelvock , assert , that this season begins in June , and ends in November : but , perhaps , its end may not be always regular .


On the 27th , Capt. Mitchell having cleared his largest prize , she was likewise set on fire  and now our fleet consisted only of five ships , and we were fortunate enough to find them all good sailors .
On the 3d of December we had a view of the island of Quibo , the east end of which bore from us N. N. W. four leagues distant , and the island of Quicara W. N. W. at about the same distance .
When we had thus got sight of land , we found the wind to hang westerly  and therefore night coming on , we thought it adviseable to stand off till morning , as there are said to be some shoals at the entrance of the channel .
At six the next morning , Point Marrato bore N. E. half N. three or four leagues distant .
In weathering this point , all the squadron , except the Centurion , were very near it  and the Gloucester , being the leeward-most ship , was forced to tack and stand to the southward  so that we lost sight of her  and , the wind proving unfavourable , we saw her no more till we quitted the island .
At  seven in the evening we anchored in the Canal Bueno , or Good Channel , which is at least six miles in breadth , muddy ground .
Next morning an officer was dispatched on shore to discover the watering-place , who , having found it , returned before noon  and then we sent our long-boat for a load of water , and at the same time weighed and stood further in with our ships , for the convenience of being sooner supplied  so that we were little more than two days in laying in all the wood and water we wanted .
Whilst the ship continued here at anchor , the Commodore , attended by some of his officers , went in a boat to examine a bay which lay to the northward , and they afterwards ranged all along the eastern side of the island .
In the places where they put on shore , in the course of this expedition , they generally found the soil to be rich , and met with great plenty of excellent water .
In particular , near the northeast point of the island , they discovered a natural cascade , which surpassed , as they conceived , every thing of this kind which human art had ever yet produced .
It was a river of transparent water , about 40 yards wide , which rolled down a declivity of near 150 feet in length .
The channel itself was very irregular , intirely composed of rocks , both its sides and bottom being made up of large detached blocks , and by these the course of the water was frequently interrupted  for in some parts it ran sloping with a rapid but uniform motion , whilst in  others it tumbled over ledges of rocks with a perpendicular descent .
On the neighbourhood of this stream was a fine wood  and even the huge masses of rock which over-hung the water , and which by their various projections formed the inequalities of the channel , were covered with lofty forest trees .
Whilst the Commodore , with those who accompanied him , were attentively viewing this place , and were remarking the different blendings of the water , the rocks , and the wood , there came in sight , as it were to heighten and animate the prospect , a prodigious flight of Mackaws , which , hovering over this spot , and often wheeling and playing on the wing above it , afforded a most brilliant appearance , by the glittering of the sun , and their variegated plumage  so that some of the spectators can not refrain from a kind of transport when they recount the beauties which occurred in this extraordinary waterfal .


In three days we compleated our business in this place , and were impatient to depart , that we might arrive time enough on the coast of Mexico , to intercept the galleon  but the wind , being contrary , detained us a night  and next day , when we had gained an offing , while we were hovering about in hopes of getting sight of the Gloucester , we on the 20th discerned a small sail to the northward of us , to which we gave chace , and coming up with her took her .
She proved to be a bark from Panama , called the Jesu Nazareno , laden with oakum , rock salt ,  and a small quantity of money to purchase a cargo of provisions at Cheripe , an inconsiderable village on the continent , which , however , has a good market , from whence future voyagers , in case of necessity , may be plentifully supplied .


On the 12th of September we joined the Gloucester , who informed us , that , in tacking to the southward , on her first approach towards the island , she had sprung her fore-top-mast , which had disabled her from working to windward , and prevented her from joining us sooner .
We now scuttled and sunk the Jesu Nazareno , and , on the 12th of December , stood to the westward , having previously delivered fresh instructions for the conduct of the fleet .
We had now little doubt of arriving soon enough upon our intended station , as we expected , upon the increasing our offing from Quibo , to fall in with the regular trade-wind , but , to our extreme vexation , we were baffled for near a month , so that it was the 25th of December before we saw the island of Cocos , which , according to our reckoning , was only 100 leagues from the continent , and even then we had the mortification to make so little way , that we did not lose sight of that island again in five days .
This island we found to be in the lat .
of 5 deg .
20 min .
N .


We had flattered ourselves , that the uncertain and western gales we met with were owing to the neighbourhood of the continent , from which ,  as we got more distant , we hoped to be relieved by falling in with the eastern trade-wind  but in this too being disappointed , we began at length to despair of the great purpose we had in view .
This produced a general dejection among us , as we had at first considered the project as almost infallible , and had indulged ourselves in the most boundless hopes of the advantages we should thence receive .
However , our despondency was , in some measure , alleviated by a favourable change of the wind  and , as we now advanced a-pace towards our station , our hopes began again to revive .
On the 17th of January , we were advanced to the lat .
of 12 deg .
50 min .
N. and , on the 26th of January , finding ourselves to the northward of Acapulco , we tacked and stood to the eastward , with a view of making the land  and we expected , by our reckonings , to have fallen in with it on the 28th , yet , though the weather was perfectly clear , we had no sign of it at sunset  about ten at night we discovered a light on the larboard bow , bearing from us N. N. E. and , soon after , the Trial 's prize made the signal for seeing a sail .
As we had none of us any doubt but that what we saw was a ship 's light , we were all extremely animated with a firm persuasion that it was the Manilla galleon , that had been so long the object of our wishes .
We immediately cast off the Carmelo , and pressed forward with all our canvas , making a signal for the Gloucester to do the same .
Thus we  chaced the light , keeping all our hands at their respective quarters , under an expectation of engaging within half an hour , as we sometimes conceived the chace to be about a mile distant , and at other times to be within reach of our guns .
In this constant and eager attention we continued all night , always presuming that another quarter of an hour would bring us up to this Manilla ship , whose wealth we now estimated at round millions : but , when day-light came , we were most vexatiously disappointed , by finding that the light which had occasioned all this expectancy , was only a fire on the shore .
At sunrising , after this mortifying delusion , we found ourselves about nine leagues off land , extending from the N. W. to E. half N. On this land we observed two remarkable hammocks , which bore N. from us , and which a Spanish pilot and two Indians affirmed to be over the harbour of Acapulco  but we found them egregiously mistaken , these being in 17 deg .
56 min .
whereas Acapulco lies in 17 deg .
only .


Being now in the track of the Manilla galleon , it was a doubt with us , as it was near the end of January , whether she was or was not arrived : but , examining our prisoners about it , they assured us , she was sometimes known to come in after the middle of February  and they endeavoured to persuade us , that the fire we had seen on shore was a proof that she was yet at sea , it being customary , as they said , to make use of these fires as signals for her direction when  she continued out longer than ordinary .
On this reasoning of our prisoners , we resolved to cruise for her some days , and we accordingly spread our ships at the distance of 12 leagues from the coast , in such a manner that it was impossible she should pass us unobserved  however , not seeing her soon , we were very solicitous to gain some positive intelligence .
With this view the Commodore resolved to send a boat under cover of the night into the harbour of Acapulco , to see if the Manilla ship was there or not .
To execute this enterprize , the barge was dispatched the 6th of February , carrying a sufficient crew and two officers , as also a Spanish pilot and an Indian .
Our barge did not return till the 11th , when the officers acquainted Mr. Anson , that they had mistaken the harbour , and that Acapulco lay a considerable distance more to the eastward , and that , not having a sufficient quantity of provisions for their passage thither , they were obliged to return to make known their disappointment .
On this intelligence we made sail to the eastward , and the next day we dispatched the barge , with particular instructions to keep at a sufficient distance not to be seen from the shore .
We watched six days without receiving any intelligence , so that we began to be uneasy for her safety  but on the 7th day she returned with advice , that , being at the very place they sought for , though they were then ignorant of their situation , they surprized a fishing canoe with three negroes , who told us that the Manilla  galleon arrived at Acapulco on the 9th of January , but that , having delivered her cargo , she was taking in water and provisions in order to return  and that the Viceroy of Mexico had by proclamation fixed her departure from Acapulco to the 14th of March .
This last news was most joyfully received by us , since we had no doubt but she must fall into our hands  and it was much more eligible to seize her on her return , than it would have been to have taken her before her arrival , as the money for which she had sold her cargo , and which she would now have on board , would be much more esteemed by us than the cargo itself .
Thus we were a second time engaged in an eager expectation of meeting with this Manilla ship , which , by the same of its wealth , we had been taught to consider as the most desirable capture that was to be made on any part of the ocean .


As it was the 19th of February when the barge returned , and brought us our intelligence , and the galleon was not to sail till the 3d of March , the Commodore resolved to continue the greatest part of the intermediate time in his present station to the westward of Acapulco , in order to avoid a discovery from the shore .
During this interval we were employed in getting all things in readiness to engage  and , when the long-wished-for 3d of March came , we were all so strongly prepossessed with the certainty of our intelligence , and with an assurance of her coming out of port , that some or other of us were  constantly imagining that they discovered one of our cutters returning with a signal  but , to our extreme vexation , both this day and the succeeding night passed away without any news of her approach .
However , we did not yet despair , nor did we abate of our vigilance : but , after remaining till the 25th of March , we at length concluded , and we afterwards found it to be true , that we had been discovered , and that in consequence an embargo had been laid upon the galleon , and her departure postponed till the next year .


The cutters , having on that day finished their cruise before the harbour , returned to the squadron , and the signal being given for the fleet to join , it was determined to retire to Chequetan , to take in a fresh supply of water , which was then nearly exhausted .
In the mean time , a cutter , commanded by Mr. Hughes , Lieutenant of the Trial 's prize , was ordered to continue off the harbour of Acapulco for 24 days , in order that , if the galleon should set sail in that time , we might be speedily informed of it .


On the 5th of April we entered the harbour of Chequetan , in lat .
17 deg .
36 min .
N. about 30 leagues to the westward of Acapulco .
The watering-place has the appearance of a large standing lake , without any visible outlet into the sea , from which it is separated by a part of the strand .
The origin of this lake is a spring that bubbles out of the ground , near half a mile within the country .
We found its water a little  brackish , but more considerably so towards the sea side  for the nearer we advanced towards the spring-head , the softer and fresher it proved .
This laid us under a necessity of filling all our casks from the farthest part of the lake , which was facilitated by means of canoes which traversed the lake , and brought a number of small casks to the side next the beach  thence the water was started into larger vessels in the boats , and by that contrivance brought on board with very little trouble .


As the country hereabouts , particularly the tract of coast contiguous to Acapulco , appeared to be well peopled and cultivated , we hoped to have easily procured from thence some fresh provisions , and other refreshments , which we now stood much in need of .
To facilitate these views , the Commodore , the morning after we came to an anchor , ordered a party of 40 men well armed to march into the country , and to endeavour to discover some town where they were to attempt to set on foot a correspondence with the inhabitants  for , when we had once begun this intercourse , we doubted not but by proper presents we should allure them to bring down to us whatever fruits or fresh provisions were in their power .
As our prizes abounded with various sorts of coarse merchandize , which were of little consequence to us , though to them they would be extremely valuable , our people were directed on this occasion to proceed with the greatest circumspection , and to make as little  ostentation of hostility as possible  for we were sensible we could find no wealth in those parts worth our notice  and what necessaries we really wanted , we expected would be better , and more abundantly supplied , by an open , amicable traffic , than by violence and force of arms .
But this endeavour of opening a commerce with the inhabitants proved ineffectual , and therefore we desisted from any more attempts of the same nature , contenting ourselves with what we could procure for ourselves in the neighbourhood of the port where we lay .
We caught fish in abundance  among the rest cavallies , bream , mullets , soals , fiddle-fish , and lobsters  and we here , and in no other place , met with that extraordinary fish called the Torpedo , which is in shape very much resembling the fiddle-fish , and is only distinguished from it in appearance by a brown circular spot of about the bigness of a crown-piece near the center of its back .
This fish is , indeed , of a most singular nature , benumbing whoever touches it all over his body , but more particularly that limb which happens to come in immediate contact with it .
The same effect , too , will be in some degree produced by touching the fish with any thing held in the hand  and it has lately been discovered , that it may be communicated like the electrical shock to a large circle , by means of a certain apparatus much more simple than that which is used in experiments in electricity .


The animals which we met with on shore  were chiefly guanoes , with which the country abounds , and which are by some reckoned delicious food .
We saw no beasts of prey , except we should esteem that amphibious creature the alligator as such , several of which our people discovered , but none of them very large .
It is , however , certain , that there were great numbers of tygers in the woods , though none of them happened to make their appearance while we remained upon the coast .
Parrots and pheasants were found in plenty , but by no means proper for food , being dry and tasteless , though they were often killed and eaten , being by some thought preferable to salt provisions .


The papah , lime , and a little sour plumb , were all the fruits the woods furnished , and of these there were but a scanty portion  nor was there any other useful vegetable , except brooklime , which , being esteemed an antiscorbutic , was frequently eaten , though from its bitterness it was exceedingly unpalatable .


While we lay at Chequetan , it was resolved , after mature deliberation , to destroy all our prizes , as the whole number of men on board our squadron did not amount to the complement of a fourth-rate man of-war .
It was therefore judged most prudent to set fire to the ships , and to divide the men between the Centurion and Gloucester , now preparing to set sail for China .
Besides the necessary repairs for a voyage of such length , the removal of their stores and cargoes into the men-of-war took up so much  time , that it was the end of April before we were in a condition to leave the place .


It should have been remarked , that , from this harbour of Chequetan we discovered but one pathway through the woods into the country  and as this was much beaten , we were from that circumstance convinced , that it was not unfrequented by the natives .
As it passed by the spring-head , and was the only avenue by which the Spaniards could approach to surprize us , we at some distance beyond the spring-head felled several large trees , and laid them one upon another across the path , and at this barricadoe we constantly kept a guard .
We , besides , ordered our men employed in watering , to have their arms always in readiness , in case of an alarm , and to march instantly to this post .
And , though our principal intention herein was to prevent our being disturbed by the enemy 's horse , yet it answered another purpose , which was , to hinder our people from straggling singly into the country , where we had reason to believe they would be surprized by the Spaniards , who would doubtless be very solicitous to pick up some of them , in hopes of getting intelligence of our future designs .
To avoid this inconvenience the strictest orders were given to the centinels , to let no person whatever pass beyond this post  but , notwithstanding this precaution , we missed one Lewis Legere , who was the Commodore 's cook .
As he was a Frenchman and a Roman Catholic , it was at first imagined that lie had deserted  with a view of betraying all that he knew to the enemy  though this appeared , by the event , to be an ill-grounded surmise  for it was afterwards known , that he had been taken by some Indians , who carried him prisoner to Acapulco , from whence he was transported to Mexico , and thence to Vera Cruz , where he was shipped on board a vessel bound to Old Spain .
But , the vessel being obliged , by some accident , to put into Lisbon , Legere escaped on shore , and was by the British Consul sent from thence to England  where he gave the first authentic account of the safety of the Commodore , and of his principal transactions in the South Seas .


The relation he gave of his own seizure , was , that he rambled into the woods , at some distance from the barricadoe where he had first attemped to pass , but had been stopt and threatened to be punished  that his principal view was to gather a quantity of limes for his master 's stores  and that in this occupation he was surprized unawares by four Indians , who stript him naked , and carried him in that condition to Acapulco , exposed to the scorching heat of the sun , which at that time of the year shone with its greatest violence  that afterwards , at Mexico , his treatment was sufficiently severe  so that the whole course of his captivity was a continued instance of the hatred which the Spaniards bear to all those who endeavour to disturb them in the peaceable possession of the coasts of the South Seas .
Indeed , Legere 's  fortune was , upon the whole , extremely singular  as , after the hazards he had run in the Commodore 's squadron , and the severities he had suffered in his long confinement among the enemy , a more fatal disaster attended him on his return to England  for though , when he arrived in London , some of Mr. Anson 's friends interested themselves in relieving him from the poverty to which his captivity had reduced him , yet he did not long enjoy the benefit of their humanity , since he was killed in an insignificant night-brawl , the cause of which could scarcely ever be discovered .


When we were necessitated to proceed to Chequetan to recruit our water , the Commodore considered that our arrival in that harbour would soon be known at Acapulco  and therefore he hoped , that on the intelligence of our being employed in that port , the galleon might put to sea , especially as Chequetan is so very remote from the course generally steered by the galleons : he therefore ordered the cutter , as has already been noticed , to cruise twenty-four days off the Port of Acapulco , and her Commander was directed , on perceiving the galleon under sail , to make the best of his way to the Commodore at Chequetan .
As the Centurion was certainly a much better sailor than the galleon , Mr. Anson , in this case , resolved to have got to sea as soon as possible , and to have pursued the galleon across the Pacific Ocean  however ,  the Viceroy of Mexico ruined this project , by detaining the galleon in port all the year .


Towards the latter end of April , all things being in readiness for sailing , the Centurion and Gloucester weighed anchor  and , after having gained an offing , the prizes were set on fire , and a canoe fixed to a grapple in the middle of the harbour , with a bottle in it , well corked , inclosing a letter to Mr. Hughes , directing him to go back immediately to his former station before Acapulco , where he would find Mr. Anson , who resolved to cruise for him in that station some days .
Indeed , it was no small mortification to us , now we were at sea , and the stormy season approaching , that we were detained by the absence of the cutter , and under a necessity of standing towards Acapulco in search of her .
As the time of her cruise had been expired near a fortnight , we suspected that she had been discovered from the shore , and that the Governor of Acapulco had thereupon sent out : force to seize her  which , as she carried but six hands , was no very difficult enterprize .
However , this being only conjecture , the Commodore , as soon as he was got clear of the harbour of Chequetan , stood along the coast to the eastward in search of her  and , to prevent her from passing by us in the dark , we brought-to every night , and carried lights which the cutter could not but perceive .


By the 2d of May we were advanced within three leagues of Acapulco  and , having seen  nothing of our boat , we gave her over for lost  which , besides the compassionate concern for our shipmates , and for what it was apprehended they might have suffered , was in itself a misfortune , which in our present scarcity of hands we were greatly interested in  since the crew of the cutter were the flower of our people , purposely picked out for this service , as known to be , every one of them , of tried and approved resolution , and as skilful seamen as ever trod a deck .
However , as it was the general belief among us , that they were taken and carried into Acapulco , the Commodore 's prudence suggested a project which we hoped would recover them .
This was founded on our having many Spanish and Indian prisoners on board , some of them of quality .
The Commodore , therefore , wrote a letter to the Governor of Acapulco , telling him , that he would release them all , provided the Governor returned the cutter 's crew .
This letter was dispatched by a Spanish officer , of whose honour we had a high opinion , and who was furnished with a launch belonging to one of our prizes , and a crew of Spaniards , who gave their parole for their return .
The Spanish officer , too , besides the Commodore 's letter , carried with him a joint petition , signed by all the rest of the prisoners , beseeching the Governor to acquiesce in the terms proposed for their liberty .
But while we were thus contriving their release , the centinel called out from the mast-head , that he saw a boat under sail at a considerable  distance to the south-eastward , which , to our unspeakable joy , upon her nearer approach , we found was our own cutter , the wan and meagre countenances of whose crew , the length of their beards , and the feeble and hollow tone of their voices , convinced us that they had suffered much greater hardships than could be expected from even the severities of a Spanish prison .
They were obliged to be helped into the ship , and were immediately put to bed  where , by rest , and nourishing diet , with which they were plentifully supplied from the Commodore 's table , they recovered their health and vigour .
And now we learnt that they had kept the sea the whole time of their absence , which was above six weeks  that , when they had finished their cruise , and had just begun to ply to the westward , in order to join the squadron , a strong adverse current had forced them upwards of 80 leagues to leeward , where they found every where so great a surf , that there was no possibility of landing  that they passed some days in the most dreadful situation , without water , having no other means left them to allay their thirst than sucking the blood of the turtles which they caught  that at last , giving up all hopes of succour , the heat of the climate too augmenting their necessities , and rendering their sufferings insupportable , they abandoned themselves to despair , fully persuaded that they should perish by the most terrible of all deaths  but that soon after a most unexpected incident  happily relieved them  for there fell so heavy a rain , that , on spreading their sails horizontally , and putting bullets in the centers of them , they caught as much water as filled their casks  that immediately upon this fortunate supply , they stood to the westward in quest of the Commodore , and being now luckily favoured by a strong current , they joined him in less than 50 hours from that time , after having been absent in the whole full 43 days .


And now having , to our entire satisfaction , got on board our people , and the season of the year for sailing to Asia being far ( we found it too far ) advanced , the Commodore resolved not to wait for any return from Acapulco , but gave orders to equip two large prize launches , to carry on shore the Spanish and Indian prisoners , both from ourselves and the Gloucester  and , having given them provisions and all necessaries for Panama , whither they intended to sail , about four in the evening they left us , to the number of about sixty persons , having first , though enemies , observed the custom of seafaring people at parting , and wished us a prosperous voyage .


From the 6th of May , the day we took our departure , we met with little remarkable for above a month , except that the true trade-wind , which is said never to fail at about sixty or s [ ... ] venty leagues from the shore of Mexico at the farthest , was so far from answering our expectations , that we had nothing but cross winds ,  squalls , rain , thunder and lightning , till by account we were 600 leagues to the westward of Acapulco , having been above 40 days in getting so far .
The 9th , we found the foremast sprung in a dangerous manner , and thereupon fished and secured it very strongly .


The 22d in the evening , we sprung a leak , making 12 inches water in a watch , and on a search found it to be on the larboard side , abreast the main hatch-way , and not quite under water .
The carpenters soon stopt it with very little trouble .


The 11th of June , we found a current to set to the southward , about 24 miles a day , but could not discover whether to the east or west , for want of opportunity to try it .
This was by account about 450 leagues from Acapulco  and , much about this time , abundance of scorbutic symptoms , such as blackness in the skin , hard nodes in the flesh , shortness of breath , and a general lassitude and weakness of all the parts , began to prevail , almost universally , among our people .
This , with the great mortality we experienced from this distemper in our Cape Horn passage , and the time we might still expect to be at sea , having yet 1800 leagues to those islands called , by Sir Francis Drake , the Ladrones , or Islands of Thieves , from the thievish disposition of the inhabitants , but by the Spaniards the Marian Islands , where only we could expect our next refreshments  and no trade-wind being yet settled  - these considerations ,  I say , gave us dreadful apprehensions of what this passage might terminate in  and the event shewed that we had but too much reason for them .


The 14th , at five in the evening , the Gloucester , having sprung the head of her main-mast , 12 feet below the trussel-trees , fired a gun as a signal of distress , on which we brought to , and waited for her  and , after enquiring into , and hearing the cause , we sent them on board two carpenters to assist in fishing and securing it  but the carpenters in concert , having viewed and considered the damage , reported , the next day , that the mast was unfit to stand , and would not bear repairing  but that it must be shortened 26 feet from the head , and the top-mast be set on the stump .
This , therefore , was concluded on , and ordered accordingly .


The 23d , we found our own main-top-mast sprung in the wake of the cap  whereupon we reefed it 20 inches , that is , we lowered it so much , and secured it there , and fleeted and set up the shrouds and back-stays .


The 24th , in the evening , we got the top-mast down , and put up another in its place , and a man falling overboard , we brought the ship to , and took him up safe  likewise , the slings of our crossjack-yards being broke , we fixed new ones , and the next day got up the fore-top-gallant mast and yard .


The 27th , we made the Gloucester signal , and sent our boat on board of her .


 The 28th , we received from the Gloucester half an anchor-stock , for a farther security to the fore-mast .


The 29th , the Gloucester finished her jury-mast , and made sail on it .
Nothing farther remarkable till


July 1st , we had fresh gales , and cloudy weather , with some lightning .


The 2d , we unbent the fore-sail , and bent another .
We had , not only now , but for almost our whole passage , abundance of birds of prey , also flying fish , which are their proper food , and vast quantities of skipjacks , albicores , c. whereof we took a great number , which contributed much to our refreshment after the loss of the tortoises , that generally leave all ships about twenty or thirty leagues off the land .
I think this the more worthy of notice , because Dampier , Rogers , Cook , Cowley , and most other voyagers , some of whom have been not only once , but several times on this voyage , have reported , that they never saw a fish or fowl in this whole run .
I will not say , as Mr. Cook frequently does , when any other person 's account does not happen to square exactly with what himself has observed , viz . '
`` What credit is to be given to such authors ? '' '
never making allowances for contingencies which might or might not happen , and which would better have displayed his own impartiality , than a dogmatical condemnation of every other person , without  examination .
For my part , I readily believe and conclude , that this difference in our observations and accounts is really occasioned by the different seasons of the year in which we happened to perform this passage  it being a known truth , and confirmed by the experience of thousands in all ages , that most fish have their different seasons for their different rendezvouses .


The 10th , we saw three gannets , or , as they call them in Scotland , soland geese  being , by what I can learn from the most intelligent of that nation whom I have conversed with , and who often have opportunity to observe them in several different parts , of one and the same species  we likewise saw some see weeds  both which circumstances made us imagine that some islands or shoals were not far off , those fowls never being observed to fly very far out to sea .


The 10th , we unbent the fore-top-sail , and bent another .


The 12th , at noon , we were , by my account , 180 deg .
11 min .
to the westward of the meridian of London , which is just 11 min .
more than half round the globe , for which reason I note it .
We were at this time , by my account , 1429 leagues distant from the port of Acapulco .


From this time till the 16th we had fresh gales , with squalls and rain .


The 17th and 18th , we had moderate and cloudy weather .


The 19th and 20th , fresh gales , with abundance  of rain .
We made this observation , that , with rainy weather , or even slight transient showers , the fish bit more freely , and were caught in greater numbers , than with fair weather  which made our fishermen the more attentive at such times .
It was likewise remarked , that the Gloucester , when they could find opportunity to fish , had always much greater success than we  whether their fishermen had more art than ours , or whatever else occasioned it , the fact is true .
They had also a better way of disposing of them , when taken , if I may be allowed to judge , than we  for Capt. Mitchell constantly ordered several boys , who were very dexterous at it , to catch fish for the ship 's company , especially the sick  and those were very justly and regularly divided among them : whereas our fishermen were left at liberty to make their advantage of what they took , and to prey upon their suffering shipmates  and they took care not to overslip the opportunity , for the least fish you could purchase of them would cost you a bottle of brandy  which , at this time , was worth four , or perhaps six , and sometimes even eight shillings , or half a guinea  and you must be very thankful , and acknowledge yourself to be highly obliged into the bargain , or else expect none next time , and very often fail of it notwithstanding .
About this time our people began to die very fast , and , I believe , above five parts out of six of the ship 's company were ill , and expected to follow in a short time .
 Those , whose breath was any ways affected , dropt off immediately  but those .
who were attacked first in the more remote parts of the body , languished generally a month or six weeks  the distemper advancing , in the mean time , towards the lungs , by a very regular and sensible approach .
As I was myself one of those who were severely afflicted in this latter manner , I shall give such an account of its progress , as I found by experience in myself , and corroborated by the similar report of my fellow-sufferers .
I was first taken , about the beginning of this month , with a slight pain on the joint of my left great toe  but , having hurt that a little while before , I imagined it to be the effect of that hurt , and minded it the less - ( but here I shall observe , once for all , that if ever any part of the body had received a bruise , strain , or contusion , if not perfectly cured , the scurvy was sure to attack that part first )  but , in a little time , a large black spot appearing on the part affected , with very intense pains at the bone , gave me to understand my case .
I now took physic often , by way of prevention , but to little purpose : several hard nodes now began to rise in my legs , thighs , and arms , and not only many more black spots appeared in the skin , but those spread , till my legs and thighs were for the most part as black as a negroe  and this accompanied with such excessive pains in the joints of the knees , ancles , and toes , as I thought , before I experienced them , that human nature  could never have supported .
It next advanced to the mouth  all my teeth were presently loose , and my gums , over-charged with extravasated blood , fell down almost quite over my teeth : this occasioned my breath to smell much , yet without affecting my lungs  but , I believe , one week more at sea would have ended me , and less than a month more , all the rest .
One thing was very remarkable , and likewise universal , which was , that , when the distemper had far prevailed , if the afflicted person lay quiet in his hammock , he seemed to be perfectly well and hearty  but , if he was removed out of it , on any necessity , he immediately fainted away  and this was always a sure sign of the party 's dissolution .


Since our passing Cape Horn , our surgeon , Henry Ettrick , who was a very good practical surgeon , had been very busy in digesting a theory of scurvies , wherein he enumerated many cases very particularly , having been allowed to open and examine as many bodies as were abundantly sufficient for that purpose .
His system was principally grounded on the observations made on a long passage in a very cold climate .
He took abundance of pains to prove , by many instances , that the tone of the blood was broken by the cold nipping air , and rendered so thin , as to be unfit for circulation , or any other of the uses of life  and being thus deprived of a proper force and vigour , stagnation and death must necessarily ensue .
From this supposition ,  he had laid it down as an infallible rule , that food of a glutinous nature , such as salt fish , bread , and several sorts of grain , were alone proper on such voyages .
As for liquids , I know not which he had pitched on , as the most salutary , on this occasion .
But this passage , in a very hot climate , where the symptoms were not only more dreadful , but the mortality much more quick and fatal , in proportion to the number of people , put our scheming doctor to a sad non-plus : he could not account for this on the same principles with the other  nay , they must be , in a manner , diametrically opposite .
All this obliged him at last ( though he was still endeavouring to reconcile contradictions ) , to own , that , though some of the concurrent causes of this disease were plain enough , yet the grand cause was certainly the long continuance at sea , or an entire secret  and that no cure but the shore would ever be effectual .
The Commodore , on this great mortality , having by him a quantity of Ward 's pills and drops , in order to experience whether they would be of any use , first tried them on himself , and then gave what he had left to the surgeon , to administer to such of the sick people as were willing to take them .
The surgeon would not recommend them to any person , but several took them  though I know of none who believed they were of any service to them .
They worked most people who took them very violently , both by vomit and stool : after which , as several told  me , they would seem to be a little easier , tho ' weaker , for perhaps a day or two , but then they always relapsed , and became worse than before  and this , together with the inefficacy of all that our surgeons could do in the case , sufficiently shewed the vanity of attempting the cure of this distemper at sea .


And here , before I quit this subject , I shall endeavour to remove a prejudice , under which the afflicted have long severely suffered  and that is , from the notion generally prevalent , that none but the lazy are attacked with this disorder  whereas , the direct contrary is the truth  our experience having abundantly shewn , that the most laborious , active , stirring persons were oftenest seized with this disease  and the continuation of their labour , instead of curing , only helped to kill them the sooner .


Many undeniable instances might be given of this in our voyage  and , if future voyagers will give themselves the trouble of observing this hereafter , I am certain that the event will correspond with my assertion  nor does this distemper , in a general way , incline people to indolence , till it is come to that height , that , at the least motion , the person is ready to faint .
It is certain , that , if the person afflicted desires to lengthen out his life as long as he can , his best way is to stir as little as possible .
This I have seen verified by many instances .


The 23d and 24th , we reefed and repaired our  rigging , which had suffered much in the variable weather .


The 26th , being , according to our reckoning , 300 leagues from the Ladrones , we met with a westerly wind , which did not come about again in four days .
This was a most dispiriting incident , as we were all that while forced to lie to , the current insensibly driving us out of our course .


The 27th , our gunner , Henry Kipps , died of the scurvy , being one of the most able-bodied men , as well as the most active in the ship : he had taken Ward 's medicines once or twice .


On the 28th , we had calms with much rain , and received from the Gloucester 20 casks of flour and four of groats .
Having here an occasion of mentioning flour , it may not be amiss to take notice , that , since our departure from Juan Fernandez , the principal officers had always soft bread new baked , the biscuit being so much worm-eaten , it was scarce any thing but dust , and a little blow would reduce it to that state immediately .
Our beef and pork were likewise very rusty and rotten  and the surgeon endeavoured to persuade us from eating it , alledging it was , though a slow , yet a sure poison  but very little other food being to be had , we were reduced to a very deplorable condition .


The 29th , in the morning , the Gloucester 's fore cap splitting , her fore-top-mast came by the board , and , in its fall , meeting with the fore-yard , broke it in the slings .
As she was hereby rendered  incapable of making any sail for some time , we were under a necessity , as soon as a gale sprung up , to take her in tow , and near 20 of the healthiest and ablest of our seamen were removed from the duty of our own ship , and were continued eight or ten days together to assist in repairing her damages  but these things , mortifying as we thought them , were only the commencement of our misfortunes  for , scarce had our people finished their business in the Gloucester , before we met with a most violent storm from the western board , which obliged us to lie to .
This storm lasted from the 10th to the 13th of August , attended with rain , thunder , and lightning , and such a lofty and dangerous sea as I have seldom seen , and could not have believed in latitudes between the Tropics , especially for such a long duration .
Most of the time we lay to , we drove to the northward  abundance of our people died daily  and , the ship proving very leaky , every person who could stir , the principal officers not excepted , was obliged to take his turn at the pumps , and all little enough to keep us above water .


The 13th of August , at 10 in the morning , the Gloucester made a signal of distress , and , being to windward , bore down towards us  but we observed she was long in wearing , rolled very much , and made bad steerage .
About half an hour after noon they spoke with us , and told us that they were so leaky that they must quit their ship  that they had seven feet water in the hold   and that all the men they had capable of stirring were quite exhausted with pumping , and could work no longer .
This was an additional misfortune , and seemed to be without resource  for , whilst the Gloucester 's crew were thus enfeebled , our own sick were now so much increased , and those who still remained in health , so over-fatigued with labour , that it was impossible for us to lend them any aid : all , therefore , that could be done was to send our boat on board for a more particular account of the ship 's condition  as it was soon suspected , that the taking her people on board us , and then destroying the Gloucester , was the only measure that could be prosecuted in the present emergency both for the preservation of their lives and of our own .


Our boat soon returned with a representation of the melancholy state of the Gloucester , and of her several defects , signed by Capt. Mitchell and all his officers  by which it appeared , that the ship was decayed in every part  that her crew was greatly reduced  that there remained alive no more than 77 men , officers included , 18 boys , and two prisoners  that of the whole number , only 16 men and 11 boys were capable of keeping the deck , and several of these very infirm  that the water was so deep in the hold , that those who were yet alive were starving , and could neither come at fresh water nor provisions .


From this representation , which was in no one instance exaggerated , the Commodore sent immediately  an order to Capt. Mitchell , to bring his people on board the Centurion , and to take out such stores as could most easily be come at , among which he was very desirous of saving two cables , and a sheet anchor  but the ship rolled so much , and the men were so excessively fatigued , that it was with the greatest difficulty the prize-money was secured , ( the prize-goods amounting to many thousand pounds being abandoned ) : nor could any other provisions be got at , than five casks of flour , ( three of which were spoiled by the salt-water ) , a small quantity of brandy , and some living stock .
Even this little business was so languishingly performed , that two days were wasted in the execution , during which time three or four of the sick perished on being removed .


As the weather was now calm , and we were uncertain how far distant we might be from Guam , a settlement in possession of the enemy , to whom the wreck of such a ship with guns and ammunition on board would have been a very valuable acquisition , the Commodore judged the most effectual way to prevent her from falling into their hands was to set her on fire : and accordingly , as soon as the Captain and his Officers had quitted her , the combustibles placed for that purpose were lighted , and she continued burning the whole night , and at six the next morning she blew up .
Thus perished his Majesty 's ship the Gloucester  and now , it might have been expected , that , being freed from  the embarrassment in which her frequent disasters had involved us , we should have proceeded on our way much brisker than we had hitherto done .
However , we were soon taught , that our anxieties were not yet to be relieved .


We were at this time in the utmost distress  the ship considerably lumbered with prize-goods , and the small room we had left thronged with the sick , whose numbers were now very much increased with those from the Gloucester  the dirt , nauseousness , and stench , almost every where intolerable  more people daily disabled with the disease  no sign of land , nor but very little wind , and that not fair but variable  very bad provisions and water , and the ship very leaky  and , though we discovered the leak to be in her bows on each side the stern , it lay in such a manner that we could not stop it , nay the attempting it rather made it worse .
In this distress we made the best of every little spurt of wind .


Nothing farther remarkable happened till Sunday the 22d , when , about eight in the evening , we discovered two islands , one bearing W. half S. and the other S. W. by W. at the distance of about 10 leagues .
We were overjoyed at this sight , and stood toward them with all our sail  but , there being little wind , we did not get near them till the next day about noon , when being about three miles off the largest and most promising of them , which appeared very hilly and full of trees , we sent on shore one of our Lieutenants in the cutter to make discoveries ,  who returned at nine in the evening , and gave us but a very indifferent account of the shore .
The trees were mostly cocoa-nut-trees , of which there were prodigious quantities  about 60 cocoa nuts they brought on board with them , but they could find no water , nor any good place to anchor in : on this account it was thought fit to stand further to the southward , for some more proper place .
This was a severe disappointment to most of the sick , who , on the sight of land , ( or hearing that we were so near it ) had begun sensibly to revive : but as persons in such circumstances are soon driven to despond , when an aid they had depended upon deserts them , so this disappointment destroyed our hopes , and increased our dejection .
We feared , that , if we met with more islands in the same run , they might be either as bad , worse , or inhabited by our enemies the Spaniards , who , in our weak condition , might easily be able to hinder us from proper refreshments : add to this , how near many of us were to death , and how little we could expect to survive any time in searching for other islands .
I know not whether these were the general thoughts of the sick , but I must own they were mine , and made our situation at that time appear ten times worse to me than at any other in the whole course of our voyage .
I was indeed very ill , and my illness might possibly occasion every thing to appear in its worst light , yet I never was one of those who were frightened at the apprehension , or even the visible approach  of death  it had no unreasonable terrors in any of its prospects to me  and I always could , and I hope always shall be ready to meet it with calmness and perfect resignation : but I believe the healthiest and stoutest at that time had probably the greatest apprehensions  and I have since heard it from many of those , that they expected all to have perished , had we been so little as three weeks longer at sea  and I much question whether they were not right in that expectation .


On the 26th , at five in the morning , we saw three other islands , bearing from S. E. by S. to N. E. the middlemost of the three , which was the largest , due E .


The 27th , at three in the afternoon , being got pretty near the shore of the middlemost island , we sent our cutter and pinnace in-shore for discovery .
At four the pinnace came off , and brought with her an Indian paroo , with a Spaniard and four Indians , whom they took in her .
They likewise told us , that they had inshore a small bark of about 16 tons , and between 20 and 30 more people on the island , all of whom had been sent there from Guam to kill cattle and hogs , and make jerked beef and cocoa-nut-oil , c. for the Spanish garrison there  and that there are constantly people sent on that account , who , after some months stay at that place , are relieved by fresh parties for the same purpose .
We secured both bark and paroo , together with all the Indians who fell into our hands , to hinder  their carrying intelligence of us to the Spaniards at Guam .
One of those Indians was a carpenter by trade , and his father was one of the principal builders at Manilla .
This young man , having been ill used by the Governor at Guam , voluntarily entered with us , and became one of our carpenter 's crew , and proved a very useful handy fellow .


The Spaniard being examined as to the state of the island we were now approaching , the account he gave surpassed even our most sanguine hopes  and , tho ' uninhabited , he said , it wanted none of those accommodations with which the best cultivated countries are furnished .
On mustering up our whole force , as we drew near , all the hands we could collect capable of any kind of duty , even on the most pressing occasions , amounted to no more than 71 men , officers included .
This number , inconsiderable as it may seem , were all of the united crews of the Centurion , Gloucester , and Trial , that could move without being assisted , notwithstanding that , when we left England , they consisted of near 1000 men .


When we had entered the road , our first business , after furling the sails and securing the ship , was to provide an hospital on shore for the sick  but the officer and seamen who were sent upon this service , returned joyfully , and acquainted us , that the Indians on shore had saved them that trouble , and had provided for us better than we could have done for ourselves   for , having erected a number of little cabbins for their accommodation during their residence on the island , and one in particular , which they made use of by way of storehouse to stow their provisions in , there could be nothing more suitably adapted for the reception both of the sick and the healthy than these erections .
Accordingly , we instantly began sending ashore as many of the sick as could possibly be conveyed , among which number I myself was one  I say , as many as could possibly be conveyed , for we were all so extremely feeble and helpless , that we were no otherwise to be landed than by being carried in our hammocks , both in and out of the boats , on mens shoulders , in which service both the Commodore himself and his officers very humanely assisted  and , indeed , they were almost the only persons on board capable of performing it  the healthiest seamen being so much enfeebled , that they had but just strength enough left to help themselves .


The next day , being the 29th , the remainder of the sick were brought on shore , of whom 21 men died  but the greatest part of the rest recovered surprizingly .
As soon as I was capable of stirring about , I found the island to lie in lat .
14 deg .
58 min .
N. [ Walters says 15 deg .
8 min . ]
and in long .
223 deg .
35 min .
W. from London , being , according to my reckoning , 117 deg .
7 min W. from Acapulco .
[ Walters says 114 deg .
50 min . ]
And here it is observable , how writers of the first characters for veracity  differ in their accounts of the same places , by writing them at different periods .
The description of this island of Tinian by Commodore Byron , who lately visited it in his voyage round the world , bears no similitude to that we are now about to recite  nor can any one conceive how an interval of only 30 years could occasion so remarkable an alteration .
But to proceed :


The soil , upon examination , we found to be every where dry and healthy  and being withal somewhat sandy , it was thereby the less disposed to a rank and over-luxuriant vegetation : and hence the meadows and woods were neater and smoother than is usual in hot climates .
The vallies and hills were most beautifully diversified by the mutual encroachments of woods and lawns , which skirted each other , and traversed the island in large tracts .
The woods consisted of tall and well-spread trees , some celebrated for their beauty , and some for their fruit  whilst the lawns were generally crouded with herds of cattle , of which it was not uncommon to see thousands feeding in a herd , and , being all milk-white , it is no wonder that such an appearance excited our longings , and increased our impatience , to kill and eat .
Add to these , the innumerable swarms of poultry that crouded the woods , and , by their frequent crowings , gave us in idea the pleasing apprehension of being in the neighbourhood of farms and villages  and we even fancied , that in the covert of the woods  we should find such concealed .
The cattle we had sight of were computed at 10,000  and , besides these and the poultry , we likewise found abundance of wild hogs , which were excellent food , but fierce , and not easily mastered .
At first we killed them by shooting  but , our ammunition failing , owing to an accident , we at last hunted them down with dogs , several of which joined us on the island , and , being trained to the sport by the Indians , readily enough followed us , and afforded us good diversion .
In their conflicts with the boars , some indeed were killed  but those that came off victorious , were still more eager to engage in every new pursuit .


This island was no less fortunate to us in its vegetable than in its animal productions  more particularly abounding in such fruits and plants as were best adapted to the cure of that disease by which we had been so dreadfully debilitated .
In the woods cocoa nuts were to be gathered without number  and , what is remarkable , cabbages grew on the same trees .
There were , besides , guavas , limes , sweet and sour oranges , and , what is common to all the Tropical islands , bread-fruit .
In the plains we found water melons , dandelion , creeping-purslain , mint , scurvy-grass , and sorrel  all which , together with the fresh-meats of the place , were such salutary refreshments , that the sick , who were at death 's - door when they landed , before they had been a week on shore , put on very different countenances ,  and with their new complexions received a fresh recruit of spirits .


Amidst such a variety of provisions as the land furnished , it was thought unnecessary to indulge ourselves in those offered us by the sea .
From fish , therefore , we wholly refrained  and the rather , as some we caught at our first arrival surfeited those who eat of them .
This , however , was not regretted , as beef , pork , poultry , and wild-fowl , were in such plenty , that , except the trouble of bringing them from a consideable distance sometimes , there was no difficulty attending their procurement .
It were , indeed , an endless task to recount all the excellencies and delicacies we met with in this delightful island : nor is it easy to say which to prefer where every thing is worthy of admiration  the neatness of its lawns , the stateliness , freshness , and fragrance of its woods , the happy inequality of its surface , and the variety and elegance of the views it afforded , - all these conspired to charm the sight , while at the same time the excellency of its productions could not fail to gratify the appetite .
And these advantages were greatly enhanced by the healthiness of the climate , by the almost constant cool breezes that prevailed , and by the frequent gentle showers that seemed to fall just to refresh the earth , and add to its fertility  for these , instead of the long-continued rains that in other countries fill the air with noxious vapours , and overflow the earth with wasteful inundations , seemed just enough  to purify the air , and to refresh the soil  which was observable enough by the effect it had in increasing our appetites , and promoting our digestion .
This effect was , indeed , remarkable , since those amongst our officers , who were at all other times spare and temperate eaters , were here in appearance transformed into gluttons  for instead of one reasonable flesh-meal a day , they were scarcely satisfied with three : and yet our digestion so well corresponded to the keenness of our appetites , that we were neither disordered nor even loaded by this uncommon repletion  for , after having made a large beef breakfast , it was not long before we began to consider the approach of dinner as a very desireable , and even somewhat tardy event .


The principal inconveniences that attended our residence upon this island arose from the vast number of musketos and other troublesome flies , by which we were perpetually teized  there was likewise a venomous little insect , that , like the sheep-ticks in England , would bury its head in the skin , and , if not instantly removed , would cause an inflammation .


Running water there was none in the island  but that defect was supplied by a large lake , or lagoon , almost in the center of it , to which the cattle , in times of drought , generally resorted  but the freshness of their pasture , and the copious dews and gentle showers that often moistened it , rendered that resource almost unnecessary .
There were , besides , springs of excellent  water , and near the surface wells might every where be dug , whose waters , in any other place , would not have been complained of .


But the great danger we had to dread remains to be told .
During four months in the year , that is , from the middle of June to the middle of October , when the western monsoons prevail , the winds , about the full and change of the moon , are variable , and blow with such fury , that the stoutest cables afford no security to ships riding at anchor in the road : and what adds to the danger is the rapidity of the tide , which sets to the S. E. and occasions such a hollow and over-grown sea as is not to be conceived  insomuch that , though we were in a sixty-gun ship , we were under the dreadful apprehension of being pooped by it .
During the rest of the year the weather is constantly settled , and ships have nothing to fear , if their cables are well armed , which otherwise will suffer from the foulness of the ground .


From the 29th of August , when our sick were all put on shore , to the 12th of September , when the Commodore himself landed , those who remained on board were chiefly employed in mooring and securing the ship , in shifting her guns to come at her leaks , and in [ ... ] ackling the cables , to prevent their being galled by the friction against the rocky bottom .
At the same time an anchor and cable were put on board the Spanish bark , her own being only a heavy log of wood , and a rope made of  bass  and some barrels of powder to be dried and recovered , which by long keeping was become moist .


From the 12th to the 18th , the hands were continually shifting , those who were so well recovered as to be capable of duty were sent on board , and those who had born the burden of the labour were relieved and sent on shore .


On the 19th , the weather began to alter , and to threaten a storm : on that day , the next , and the 21st , it blew hard  however , we rode it out , and flattered ourselves that the prudence of our measures had secured us from accidents , On the 22d , the hurricane came on , and our only hope of safety seemed to depend on our putting out to sea  but the Commodore was on shore , and all communication with the land absolutely cut off .
At five in the afternoon , the small bower parted , and the ship sprung off to the best bower .
As night approached , the violence of the storm increased  yet , notwithstanding its inexpressible fury , the rapidity of the tide was such as to prevail over it , and to force the ship before it , as it were , in despight of its utmost rage .
It was now that the sea broke all round us in a most tremendous manner  and that a large tumbling swell threatened to ingulph us in its bosom : the long-boat , which was moored a stern , was on a sudden canted so high that it broke the transum of the Commodore 's gallery , and would , doubtless , have risen as high as the tafferel , had it not been for the  stroke , which stove the boat to pieces  but yet the poor boat-keeper , though much bruised , was saved almost by miracle .
About eight , the tide slackened  but , the wind not abating , the the best bower cable , by which alone we rode , parted at eleven .
In this extremity , Mr. Saumarez , our First Lieutenant , who commanded in the absence of the Commodore , ordered guns to be fired , and lights to be shewn , as signals of distress  and , in a short time after , the night being excessively dark , the storm raging , the thunder roaring , and nothing to be seen but the blue lightning flashing through the rain , we were driven to sea , and , by this catastrophe , the whole crew , both by sea and land , reduced to a state of despair  those on shore concluding they had now no means left them ever to get home  whilst those on board , being utterly unprepared to struggle with the fury of such seas and winds , expected each moment to be their last .
In this state of despondency , while those on board were every moment in expectation of being dashed against the rocks of Aiguigan , an island at about three leagues from Tinian , those on shore were persuaded the ship could not survive the storm , the whole channel between the two islands appearing from the land like one continued breach , the sea swelling , breaking , and roaring , like mountains rolling over mountains , and forming the most awful and terrifying sight that the mind of man can possibly conceive .
Indeed , the condition of those on  board was truly pitiable  they were in a leaky ship , with three cables in their hawses , to one of which hung their only remaining anchor  they had not a gun on board lashed  nor a port barred in  their shrouds were loose  and their fore top-mast unrigged  and they had struck their fore and main yards down before the hurricane came on , so that there was no sail they could set except the mizzen : to add to their misfortunes , they were no sooner at sea , than , by the labouring of the ship , whole floods of water rushed in through the hawse-holes , ports , and scuppers  which , with the usual leakage , kept the pumps constantly at work .
Persuaded that their destruction was inevitable , sinking , however , was only their secondary concern  they judged , by the driving of the ship , that they were making towards the land , and that , in the darkness of the night , they should no otherwise perceive it than by striking upon it  but daylight relieved them from that uneasy apprehensions , and shewed them that the island they so much dreaded was at a considerable distance , and that a strong northern current had proved the means of their preservation .
It was not , however , till after three days that the turbulent weather that had driven them from Tinian began to abate  when every man in the ship was so worn out with fatigue , that they found it impossible to man the pumps , and hand the sails at the same time .
They had twice attempted to heave up the main and fore yards , in which  they had as often miscarried by the breaking of the jeers , and in the last effort one of their best men perished .
During all this time the ship was driving to leeward , and dragging her sheet anchor , the only one she had left , with two cables an end at her bows .
This was a circumstance of the greatest consequence , and required a speedy remedy  for , though upon a third exertion of their whole force , they had replaced their yards , they durst not , while the anchor continued in that situation , venture to spread their canvas .
Some rest and refreshment became necessary before a work of such labour could be proposed to a feeble and diminished crew , who hardly consisted of 100 men : It was , therefore , five days after their departure before they could secure their anchor  and now they set their courses , and , for the first time , stood to the eastward , in hopes of soon regaining the island , and rejoining their Commander and the rest of their company : but in this they were unhappily disappointed  for having run , as they thought , the distance necessary for making the island , and being in full expectation of seeing it , they found themselves bewildered by the irregularity of the currents , and knew not what course to steer , till , after several days uncertainty , they came at last in sight of Guam , from whence they directed their course with infinite labour to Tinian , the wind being constantly against them , and the tide variable .
This severe employment held till the 11th of  October , when , after nineteen days absence , they appeared again in the offing , and were reinforced from the shore , to the inexpressible joy of the whole crew .


A few days after the ship was driven off , some of the people on shore cried out , A sail !
and this spread a general joy , supposing it to be the Centurion returning  but presently a second sail was descried , which wholly destroyed the first conjecture , and made it difficult to guess who they were .
The Commodore turning his glass towards them , saw they were two boats  and instantly concluding that the Centurion was gone to the bottom , and that those were her boats returning with the remains of her people , this sudden suggestion wrought so powerfully upon him , that , to conceal his emotion , he was obliged to retire to his tent , where he past some bitter moments in the firm persuasion that all his hopes were now at an end , and that , instead of distressing the enemy , he must himself with his people fall a prey to their relentless cruelty .
He was , however , soon relieved from this mortifying thought , they appearing , upon their nearer approach , to be Indian proas , directing their course towards the bay , with a view , as was supposed , to relieve their countrymen , or to take on board their provisions .
On this intelligence , the Commodore ordered his people to conceal themselves  but the proas , after advancing within a quarter of a mile of the shore , lay by for the space of  a few hours , and probably observing some change in the appearance of the place , which might raise their suspicion that an enemy lay in ambush , they got again under sail , and steered to the southward .


After this incident an opinion began generally to prevail , that the Centurion would never more appear at this island  and that she was either lost , or forced upon the coast of China , from whence , in her crazy condition , it would be impossible for her ever to return .
Though the Commodore did not apparently give into this opinion , yet he was not without his fears  and , therefore , to provide against the worst , he proposed cutting asunder the Indian bark which they took on their first arrival , and lengthening her in such a manner as to be capable of taking on board all who were then upon the island , and following the ship , if peradventure she should be driven to Mocao .
After some hesitation , owing to the difficulty attending the execution , the men were at length prevailed upon to engage in the work , and the Commodore by his example encouraged their diligence  for , being always at work by day-break himself , it was thought a disgrace to be idle when their Chief was employed .
It fortunately happened , that the Carpenters both of the Gloucester and Trial were on shore , and that they had brought for safety their chests of tools with them .
The smith , too , was on shore with his forge , but his bellows was still in the ship .
This defect occasioned some  delay  but was soon supplied by the ingenuity of his ship-mates , one or other of them never being at a loss for expedients on such occasions : they limed a fresh hide for leather , the carpenters shaped out a wooden frame , and a gun barrel served for a nozel .
The smith being now in readiness to prepare the iron-work , some were employed in cutting down trees , nnd sawing them into plank , whilst the main-body were busied in digging out a draw-dock to receive the bark , and in laying of ways to heave her up and down .
All , in short , were variously employed  and the work went on successfully for 16 days , in which time the bark was sawn asunder , her two parts separated , and placed at the proper distance from each other  and , the materials being all in readiness before-hand , they proceeded with no small dispatch in the enlargement , insomuch that they fixed the 5th of November as the day when they should be ready to depart .
The alacrity with which this business was carried on , left no room for reflection among the common sailors , though their superiors were not without their fears .
They had no sea-provisions , except some jerked beef , which the Indians had prepared and abandoned when they fled , and they had a run of 600 leagues before they could presume upon a supply  they had no bread , and the bread fruit on the island could not be preserved at sea  they wanted salt  and , what was still a more necessary article in their present situation , they wanted ammunition for their defence ,  in case of an attack from the enemy  for , upon the strictest search , no more than 90 charges of powder could be collected , which was short of one round a-piece for each of the company  they were , too , in an unknown sea , and wanted instruments to direct their course : in short , though the common men had no other thought but how they should get on board , the officers foresaw a thousand difficulties , which were almost insurmountable to human apprehension , but which they carefully concealed , that the main business might not be retarded .


But , in the midst of these gloomy apprehensions , which , the nearer the time of their departure approached , still became the more serious , and when all hope of seeing the Centurion at Tinian had subsided , one of the Gloucester 's men , being upon a hill at a distance looking out for cattle , perceived , as he fancied , something like a ship in the clouds , which , on steadily observing it , seemed to move slowly towards the land .
It was not long before he was sensible of its approach , and persuading himself it was the Centurion , he in an extacy ran towards the landing-place , crying to his comrades , The ship !
The ship !
This being heard by the nearest , was echoed from mouth to mouth till it reached the spot where the Commodore was at work , who , on hearing the joyful news , threw down his axe , and joined in the general transport .
In a few hours the Centurion appeared in the offing , and a boat with  18 men was sent off to reinforce her , and to carry fresh meats , fruits , and refreshments , for the crew .
In the afternoon of the 11th of October she happily cast anchor , the Commodore went instantly aboard , and the joy and congratulations on that occasion were equally sincere and mutual .


The labour of the artificers was now at an end , and another kind of employment succeeded , which was that of laying in water for the remainder of the voyage .
Now also hunting , shouting , setting , and every device that could be contrived to catch live cattle , hogs , and poultry , for stores , took , place  while , at the same time , the Commodore and Officers amused themselves with traversing the island , and examining more minutely its several parts .
In one of these excursions , being on a rising ground , they observed , in a valley beneath them , the appearance of a small thicket , which , by attending to it , seemed to have a progressive motion , as indeed it had  but was no other than a parcel of cocoa-bushes trailed upon the ground by persons concealed beneath them .
From this uncommon circumstance , it was immediately concluded , that the Indians , whose boat they had surprized upon their first arrival , must be the persons who were dragging the bushes , and that it could not be far to the place of their concealment  they therefore kept their eye upon them , and traced them to their cell  but , to their surprize , when they came to enter it , they  found it abandoned , though all things were ready prepared for dinner , and stood smoaking hot on a table of turf .
The officers , having in vain endeavoured to track them , returned , and , with an appetite increased by the keenness of the pursuit , sat down to that meal which the poor hungry savages had abandoned .
It consisted of salted spareribs , cocoa-nuts , and bread fruit  all which they found ready drest , and in quantity as much as they all could eat .


On the third day after the second arrival of the ship , the Commodore being on board , a sudden gust of wind arose , and again brought home our anchor , and drove us out to sea .
Our chief officers were now all on board  and only about 70 of our men , with a midshipman or two to command them , were employed on shore in filling water and catching cattle .
Of these about 30 came off to us in the cutter , and the eighteen-oared barge was sent for the rest  but they not being in readiness , and the ship quickly driving out of sight , it was no longer in their power to join us .
However , as the weather soon proved favourable , and we were now stronger and healthier than at our first disaster , in about five days we regained the road , and anchored safe in our former station .
On our return we found the Spanish bark restored to her old dimensions , and the parts brought together , and in good forwardness to be compleated  for the few remaining people , despairing of the return of the ship , had determined  to follow her to her destined port .
We now laboured indefatigably to get in our water , in order to sail , in which service two of our men employed in the well unfortunately perished  for the sides of the well being loose earth , by the carelessness of those above , in not properly attending the filling , the bank gave way by the weight of a heavy cask , and both that and the bank fell in upon them together .
Some other misfortunes happened through haste in rafting the casks to the ship  yet , notwithstanding , being such as are generally accounted trifling on board a man of war , our watering went on so successfully , that by the 20th of October it was compleated  and on that day leave was given for a man from each mess to go ashore , and gather as many oranges , lemons , cocoa-nuts , and other fruits of the island , as should be sufficient for us all while at sea .
This being accomplished , the Spanish bark set on fire , the men returned on board , and the boats hoisted in , on the 21st we set sail  and the wind being fair , and the weather moderate , nothing remarkable happened till we arrived on the coasts of China , except that while we were passing by the rocks of Vele Rete , near the south end of the island Formosa , we were alarmed by a cry of fire on the forecastle , which brought the whole crew together in the utmost confusion , so that it was difficult for some time to reduce them to order  but , as soon as discipline took place , and a proper examination  could be made , it was found to proceed from the furnace , where the bricks , being over-heated , had begun to communicate the fire to the wood-work , which , had it not been timely discovered , might have been of the most dreadful consequence  but , as it fell out , it was extinguished with the greatest facility , and the brickwork so secured , that no accident of the like kind could again happen .


From the island of Formosa we directed our course so as to fall in with the coast of China , to the eastward of Pedro Blanco , as that rock is generally esteemed the best direction for ships bound to Mocao  and , on the 6th of November we fell in with it , when we were presently surrounded by an incredible number of fishing-boats , which covered the surface of the sea as far as the eye could reach .
Nor was this swarm of fishing vessels peculiar to that place  for , as we ran on to the westward , we found them as abundant on every other part of the coast .
From among these we had no sort of doubt of procuring a pilot to Mocao  but , when we thought ourselves near it , though we tempted them with shewing them bags of Spanish dollars , for which , it is said , a Chinese would sell his father , yet not one of them would venture to come on board us , nor give us the least intelligence  neither did our ship , the like of which , so armed and fitted , had never before appeared upon their coasts , seem to excite in them any curiosity : they continued their fishing  with the same apparent indifference as if any trading ship had been passing by  and , when we made them signals , they disregarded them as much , though they certainly understood them , as if we had been only in sport .
The next day , however , about two in the afternoon , as we were standing to the westward within two leagues of the shore , still surrounded as before , we observed that a boat a-head of us waved a red flag , and blew a horn .
This we apprehended was a signal for us , and accordingly we hoisted out our cutter , and sent to know the meaning of it  when we presently discovered our mistake , and that it was only the usual notice to leave off fishing , which the whole fleet instantly obeyed .
Being thus disappointed , we kept on our cruise till we came to a group of islands , round the westernmost of which we were directed to pass , and then to haul up .
While we were thus employed , a Chinese pilot came on board , and in broken Portuguese undertook to pilot us into harbour for 30 dollars , and on the 12th of November anchored us safe in Mocao-road  where the first thing we did was to salute the fort , and to send to the Portuguese Governor to advise with his Excellency in what manner to behave to avoid giving offence to the Chinese .
The difficulty the Commodore principally apprehended related to the port charges usually paid by ships in the river Canton , from which charges men-of-war are exempted in every port of Europe , and which the Commodore was  determined not to be forced to pay in this .
In the evening the boat returned with two officers , who delivered it as the Governor 's opinion , that , if the Centurion ventured into the river of Canton , the duty would most certainly be expected  and , therefore , if the Commodore approved of it , he would send a pilot to conduct the ship into another harbour , called the Typa , where it was probable the port charges would never be demanded .
To this proposal the Commodore agreed , the pilot was sent , and the ship safely moored .


Next day the Commodore paid a visit in person to the Governor , to solicit a supply of provisions , and of naval stores to refit the ship .
The Governor very frankly acquainted the Commodore , that he durst not openly furnish either the one or the other  for that he himself neither received provisions for his garrison but from day to day , by permission from the Chinese government , nor any thing else but what his present necessities required : however , he assured the Commodore in a friendly manner , that he would give him all the assistance in his power .
On this declaration , the Commodore determined to go to Canton himself , to procure a licence from the Viceroy to purchase a supply , and , with this view , hired a Chinese boat for himself and his attendants to carry them into port : but just as they were ready to embark , the Hoppo refused to grant them a permit  nor would he , notwithstanding all the interest the Commodore could make , withdraw the prohibition ,  till he was threatened to be compelled to it by force .
This operated when fair means had failed  a permit was next day sent on board , and the Commodore proceeded to the English factory , to consult with the principal officers there about the cautions that were to be used , lest the factory should suffer by violent measures , which he was solicitous to avoid .
They advised him to transact the business by the mediation of the Chinese merchants , who at first undertook to accomplish it  but , after trifling with him more than a month , they declared they durst not interfere in it .
The merchants then undertook to procure him provisions clandestinely  but that would not suffice .
Upon his return , he found the ship so much out of repair , that she could not proceed without being hove down  he , therefore , next day wrote a letter to the Viceroy , acquainting him , that he was Commodore of a squadron of his Britannic Majesty 's ships that had been cruising in the South Seas against the Spaniards , who were at war with his nation  that his ship was leaky  that his people were in want of provisions  that he had put into Mocao , a friendly port , for a supply , but that , being a stranger to the customs of the country , he had been unable to succeed  and , therefore , requested , that he might be permitted to employ workmen to repair his ship , and that he might be supplied with provisions at the accustomed rates at which the articles he stood in need of were generally sold .
Another difficulty  was now started as to the delivery of this letter , the Hoppo at first refusing to intermeddle with it  but , on the Commodore 's expressing some resentment , and threatening to convey it to Canton by his own messengers , he at length undertook not only to deliver it , but to procure an answer : accordingly , though the letter was only dated on the 17th of December , on the 19th a Mandarine of the first rank , together with two others of an inferior class , and their attendants , having in their retinue 18 half gallies , decorated with streamers , and furnished with bands of music , came to a grapple a-head of the Centurion , whence the Mandarine sent in form to acquaint the Commodore , that he came by order of the Viceroy to examine the condition of the ship , and to report the same as it should appear to him upon a just survey .
On this message , preparations were instantly made to receive him  in particular , a hundred of the most sightly men on board , uniformly dressed in the regimentals of the marines , were drawn up under arms on the main-deck against his arrival .
When he entered the ship , he was saluted by the drums and military music , and conducted by some of the principal officers to the quarterdeck , where he was received in state by the Commodore , and then introduced to the great cabbin , where he explained his commission , and presented the persons he had brought with him to take the survey .
The Mandarine appeared to be a person of superior abilities , and endowed  with a frankness and honesty not usually to be met with among the ordinary ranks of Chinese officers  and , being an eye-witness of the dangerous state of the leaks , and of the necessity there was for a thorough repair , he expressed his entire acquiescence in the report that had been given , and promised to lay the same immediately before the council upon his return .
He was exceeding curious in inspecting the ship , in examining her guns , and poising her great shot .
He exprest his astonishment at her strength and her magnitude  and the Commodore , to increase his wonder , and shew his own power , let him know how easy it would be for him to destroy the whole navigable force of China , and lay the city of Canton in ruins  but , nevertheless , he assured him , that not the least violence should be offered , provided his wants were supplied upon reasonable terms .


At the same time the Commodore complained of the behaviour of the officers at Mocao , who had prohibited the country people from selling provisions to his company , though they had paid for what they purchased in sterling silver .
The Mandarine heard the complaint without emotion , but said it should be remedied for the future .
After the business was over , dinner was ordered , and the Commodore apologised for the meanness of the fare from the difficulty he had to procure better : but the two inferior Mandarines , who were the only persons of their retinue permitted to sit at table with them , shewed  no dislike to any thing set before them , except the beef , to which they have the same dislike as the Jews have to pork , from an early prejudice derived from their ancestors  of this the Commodore was not apprized , nor were they offended at its being set before them .
They were , indeed , very aukward at the use of knives and forks , and it was found necessary to introduce their own servants to carve for them , before they could make an end of their dinners .
But if they were deficient in their manner of eating , they were no novices in putting about the glasses  for there was not an officer at table that durst engage with them .
Seeing they were fond of Frontiniac , and that they presently emptied four or five bottles of it without any effect , the Commodore ordered a bottle of Citron water to be brought up , which , on tasting , they liked , and , the Commodore excusing himself on account of an illness he had not yet recovered , they clapped a ruddy-faced officer on the shoulder , and desired him to pledge them , saying , by their interpreter , they were sure he could not plead illness for declining his glass .
When the bottle was out , they all rose from table , without appearing to be in the least disordered , and , after the usual ceremonies , departed , very well pleased with their entertainment .


The Commodore now impatiently expected the licence he had requested  but it was several days before it passed the necessary forms , chiefly owing to the intrigues of a Frenchman , who ,  having the advantage of speaking the language fluently , was at no loss in traversing the measures of the friendly Mandarine in favour of Mr. Anson  but a repetition of the threats already referred to , produced , at last , the desired effect .
On the 6th of January , the licence was received , and the carpenters were set to work  but , previous to this , the prohibition was taken off , and provisions were every day brought to the ship in plenty .


It was , however , the beginning of April before the repairs could be compleated , and the Chinese began to be very uneasy at their long stay .
They had frequently sent messages to the Commodore to hasten his departure , not knowing or believing that he was no less in earnest to be gone , than they were to be freed from the dread of his stay .
At length , on the 3d of April , two Mandarines came on board from Mocao , with a peremptory command addressed to the Commodore , requiring him to depart  to which he made answer , in a determined tone , that he would go when he thought proper , and not when they presumed to command him .
After this rebuke , however , all communication was forbidden , and no more provisions were suffered to go on board  and so strictly were those injunctions carried into execution , that from thenceforwards nothing could be purchased at any rate whatever .
On the 6th of April , the Centurion weighed , and warped to the southward  and , by the 15th , she was safe in  Mocao road , having compleated her water as she passed along .
On the 19th , she again weighed anchor , and put to sea .


But long before this , that is , some time in November , Captain Saunders , Commander of the Tryal 's prize , took passage on board a Swedish ship with dispatches from the Commodore to the government .
And soon after , that is , about the middle of December , Captain Mitchell , Col. Crackerode , Mr. Taswell , with his nephew Mr. Charles Herriot , and the Rev. Mr. Walter , embarked on board the company 's ships on their return home .
About this time we received the first news of the safe arrival of the Severn and Pearl ( the two ships of our squadron that parted from us in doubling Cape Horn ) at Rio Janeiro , on the coast of Brazil .
The Severn had been remarkable for the extraordinary sickness that had been more fatal on board her than on board of any other in the whole squadron , insomuch that her hands had been twice recruited from the Centurion during her voyage to the straits of Le Maire  and yet when she parted company she wanted hands to navigate her in a storm , which was the reason of her return .
It was from the knowledge of this uncommon mortality that prevailed among the crew , that the Commodore concluded the Severn to be lost .
The news , therefore , of her and the Pearl 's safety was received with the greater pleasure , as we had long  entertained an opinion that both of them had perished .
But to return from this digression :


From the 1st to the 15th of April , we had stormy weather , with heavy rains and such amazing and terrifying claps of thunder and flashes of lightning as nothing of the kind I had ever seen or heard bore any proportion to .
This was upon the breaking-up of the easterly monsoon , when such storms are usual in the country , accompanied sometimes with dreadful gusts of wind , called here by the name of Tuffoons , of the effects of which the Chinese relate very wonderful stories .


While we were warping out of the harbour , the Commodore went on shore to Mocao , to take leave of the Portuguese Governor , who had , to the utmost of his power , behaved in a very friendly manner  and , at his coming from the fort , he was saluted with 15 guns .


During our stay we had entered about 20 fresh hands , being chiefly Lascars , Persians , and Dutchmen  so that our whole complement , when we sailed , amounted to 224 men and boys , among whom were some of all nations , languages , and religions .


Being now at sea , we were some time in a state of uncertainty what course the Commodore intended to steer .
He gave out at Mocao , that he was bound to Batavia , and thence to England  but his real design was very different .
The project the Commodore had resolved upon in his own mind , was , to cruise  for the annual ship from Acapulco to Manilla  and , not discouraged by his former disasters , he determined again to risque the casualties of the Pacific Ocean , and to take his station off Cape Spirito Santo on the island of Jamal , being the first land the Acapulco ships always make in approaching the Philippines .


Being now at sea , it was no longer necessary to conceal this project  he , therefore , summoned all his people on the quarter-deck , and in a short , but spirited speech , informed them of his design  which was received by them with the most expressive tokens of general approbation : and such a confidence of succeeding diffused itself through all the ship 's company , that the Commodore , who had taken some Chinese sheep to sea with him for his own provision , enquiring one day of his butcher , why he had lately seen no mutton at his table ?
the man replied dryly , that in truth there were only two sheep left , and these , with his honour 's leave , he proposed to reserve for the entertainment of the General of the galleons .


When the Centurion left the port of Mocao , she stood for some days to the westward  and , on the first of May , passed the island of Formosa  and , steering to the southward , on the 4th in the evening they came in sight of the Bashee Islands , which they suspected to be wrong laid down by Dampier , and from observation found them 25 leagues too far to the westward .
On the 20th of May , they came in  sight of Espirito Santo .
As it was known there were centinels placed upon the Cape to make signals to the Acapulco ships , the Commodore immediately tacked , and ordered the top-gallant-sails to be taken in , to prevent a discovery : and this being the station in which he proposed to cruise , he fixed the limits between the latitude of 12 deg .
50 min .
N. and 13 deg .
5 min .
the Cape itself lying in 12 deg .
40 min .
N. and in 4 deg .
of east longitude from Psotel Tobago Xima .
It was now the time when the Manilla ship was every hour expected  for they seldom or never fail of making land in the month of June , and sometimes sooner , and it was now the last day of May , according to their stile , when the Commodore took his station .


It were tedious to entertain the reader with the various conjectures , surmises , doubts , and anxieties , that agitated the minds of the people on board , from the day they came in sight of the Cape till the day that Mr. Charles Proby , a midshipman , called out from the mast-head , A sail !
This was on the 20th of June , just one month after their arrival at the Cape .
There did not remain a doubt but that it was one of the galleons ( for two were expected this year , as none had been permitted to sail the year preceding )  and the Commodore accordingly stood towards her .
At half after seven in the morning , they could see her from the deck , at which time she fired a gun to leeward , and took in her top-gallant-sails , as a signal , as it was then supposed ,  to her consort  but in reality , as a signal to her own people to prepare for action .
The Commodore was surprized to see her steadily pursue her course , and was now in no fear of losing sight of her , as at noon he could fetch her wake .
Her consort not appearing , it was concluded they had parted company  and it now became visible , that the galleon did not intend to fly , but to fight .
Every preparation had been previously made on board the Centurion , and all hands properly instructed  so that every man on board repaired to his post with as much regularity and unconcern as if preparing for a review .
Thirty of the best marksmen lined the tops  two men placed themselves at a gun to load them  and gangs of ten men each were appointed to go from gun to gun , to run them out , and fire them as fast as they were loaded .
A constant running fire was by this means kept up , and no interval allowed for the enemy to stand to their guns in safety , as is common when whole broadsides are discharged at once .


About one in the afternoon , the galleon hauled up her fore-sail , and brought to under top-sails , with her head to the northward , hoisting Spanish colours , and having the standard of Spain flying at the top-gallant-mast-head .
About the same time the Centurion hoisted her broad pendant and colours , being within gun-shot of the enemy  and the Commodore , seeing them clearing their decks of their cattle and lumber , gave orders to fire the chace-guns , to disturb them in  their work .
The galleon returned the fire with two of her stern-guns , one of which carried away one of our fore-shrouds , and our forestay tackle , which could not have been done by an ordinary ball .
The Centurion setting her sprit-sail fore-and aft for boarding , the galleon , out of a bravado , did the same .
Soon after , the Centurion shot a-breast of the enemy within pistol-shot , and now the engagement became hot .
For the first half hour the Centurion over-reached the galleon , and lay on her bow , and , by the wideness of her ports , could traverse almost all her guns upon the enemy , whilst the galleon could only bring a part of her 's to bear upon the Centurion in return .
In the heat of the action , the mats with which the galleon had stuffed her netting took fire , and burnt violently , blazing up near as high as the mizzen-top .
This accident threw the enemy into the utmost terror , and also alarmed the Commodore , for fear the galleon should be burnt , and for fear he himself might suffer by being closely grappled by her .
Happily , however , that danger was averted , and the fire extinguished , by cutting away the netting , and letting the whole tumble into the sea .
All this while the Commodore kept his first advantageous position , firing with great regularity and briskness  while at the same time the galleon 's decks lay open to our top-men , who , having at their first volley driven the Spaniards from their tops , made prodigious havock with their small arms , killing or wounding every officer but one  that appeared upon the quarter-deck , and wounding in particular the General of the galleon himself .
Thus the action continued for more than half an hour  but then the Centurion lost the superiority of her situation , and came close alongside of the galleon , when the enemy continued their fire with great activity for near an hour longer  yet , even in this position , the Commodore 's grape-shot swept their decks so effectually , and the number of the dead and wounded became so considerable , that they began to fall into great confusion , especially as the General , who was the life of the action , was no longer able to exert himself .
The disorder was so great , that their officers were seen from the Centurion running about to prevent the desertion of their men from their posts : but all their endeavours were in vain  for , after having , as a last effort , fired five or six guns with more judgment than usual , they yielded up the contest  and , the galleon 's colours being singed off the ensign-staff at the beginning of the engagement , she struck the standard at the main top-gallant-mast-head  but even this office would have been at the peril of the man 's life , had not the Commodore , observing what he was about , given express orders to leave off firing .


The Commodore , when the action was ended , resolved to make the best of his way with his prize to the river Canton , being in the mean time fully employed in securing his prisoners , and in removing the treasure from on board the  galleon into the Centurion .
His first business was to commission the ship , and put her under the command of proper officers : Lieut. Saumarez was appointed Captain , and was immediately ordered on board to take possession of his charge .


But , just as the galleon had struck , the officer who commanded between decks cam cup , seemingly to congratulate the Commodore on his conquest , but at the same time privately whispered to him , that the Centurion was dangerously on fire near the powder-room .
It seems one of the lads , called powder-monkies , being heedless , a cartridge that he was carrying blew up in his hands  this fired another , and that three of the lower-deck guns on the off side of the ship , which being happily loaded and laid down for service , and the ports hauled up to vent the smoke , they did not occasion the least mischief  however , the cartridges and guns together raised such a smother , that it was at first doubtful whether it proceeded from the explosion , or from a part of the ship being on fire .
In fact , upon examination , it was found to proceed from both  for , part of a cartridge having fallen between the planks of the cieling , close aft by the scuttle of the Chaplain 's cabbin , not only a considerable smoke issued out , but a very sensible heat , and , had it not been immediately extinguished , the consequence would have been dreadful : to be brief , a few pails of water seasonably applied did more than all the water of the ocean could had effected after an hour 's delay .


 This alarm being thus happily subsided , we draughted out 50 of our people ( of whom myself was one ) to board and man the prize .
I had heard we had killed them 60 men , and wounded as many more , and expected to have seen the horrid spectacle of mangled limbs , dead carcasses , and decks covered with blood  but no such spectacle appeared  a party having been properly stationed , during the time of action , to wash away the blood , and to throw the dead over-board .
We found , however , many desperately wounded , and among them the General , who had received a musket-ball in his breast , and was so ill , or pretended to be so ill , that it was judged unsafe to move him from him cabbin  but all the other officers , together with the passengers of note , were sent on board the Centurion .
Among the latter was an old gentleman , Governor of Guam , who was going to Manilla to renew his commission , and who had scarce mounted the Centurion 's side before he was received with open arms by Mr. Crooden , Captain of marines , who 36 years before , at the battle of Almanza , had been his prisoner , and honourably used by him .
These two renewed their old acquaintance , and Captain Crooden had a long-wished for opportunity of returning the favours he had formerly received , and which he gratefully remembered .


The ship , upon examination , was found to contain to the value of more than a million and  a half of dollars , was called the Nuestra Signora de Cabadonga , Don Jeronimo de Montero Commander , by nation a Portuguese , and accounted the most intrepid officer employed in the Spanish mercantile service : and , indeed , in my opinion , he was more brave than prudent  for , surely , no wise man , intrusted with such a cargo , six leagues to the windward of a man-of-war purposely stationed to intercept him , would have borne down upon his enemy , and braved him to his teeth , when , with the advantage of the wind , he might have gone safe to port , from whence he was not more than 10 or 12 leagues distant , and where he might then have set his pursuer at defiance .


His galleon was indeed larger than the man-of-war , was pierced for 64 guns , but had only 36 mounted , most of them 12 pounders , and 17 of them brass : she had , besides , 28 peteraroes , in her gunwale , quarters , and tops , carrying each a 4 lb .
ball  and , before the engagement , she mustered 640 men capable of bearing arms , officers and passengers included .
She was , besides , well furnished with small arms , and was particularly provided against boarding , both by her close quarters , and by a strong network of two-inch rope laced over her waste , and fortified with half-pikes placed in the manner of cheveaux de frize  but , notwithstanding all her defences , she had 64 men killed , and 84 wounded , whilst the Centurion had only two men killed , and a Lieutenant and 16 men  wounded , all of whom recovered , one man only excepted .


And now the Commodore learnt from some of the prisoners , that the other ship , which he had kept in the port of Acapulco the year before , instead of returning in company with this , as was expected , had sailed earlier in the season than usual , and was probably got into Manilla before the Centurion set sail from Mocao  so that , notwithstanding our present success , we had reason to regret the loss of time occasioned by the delays of the Chinese , which prevented our taking two rich prizes instead of one  though , to say the truth , it would not have been an easy task to dispose of the prisoners , which , even as it fell out , was a matter that gave the Commodore no small disquietude  for they were above double the number of our own people  and some of them observed , when they were brought aboard , how slenderly we were manned  and the General himself could not help expressing his indignation to be thus beaten by a handful of boys .
It was therefore necessary for our own preservation to prevent their rising  and that could not be securely effected without exercising a degree of severity , which in any other circumstances could not have been justified on the principles of humanity  for there was no method practicable but that of stowing the men in the holds of the two ships  and as for the officers , 17 in number , they were confined in the First Lieutenant 's  cabbin , under a guard of six men , first depriving them of their arms , and then keeping a strict watch on all their motions .
Indeed , the sufferings of the common men , such of them in particular who were not employed in navigating the ship , were much to be pitied  for , the weather being extremely hot , the stench of the holds loathsome beyond conception , and their allowance of water but just sufficient to keep them alive , being only a pint a day for each man , it was next to a miracle that not a man of them died during their confinement , except five of the wounded , who expired the very night they were brought aboard the Centurion .
Thus circumstanced , the motives of humanity , as well as interest , strongly urged the Commodore to hasten his return to China  and the prize being much damaged , both in her hull and rigging , it was found necessary to take her in tow for the quicker dispatch .


On the 21st of June it blew a storm , which continued till the 25th , when the sea ran mountains high : in this storm the Centurion lost her long-boat , and the prize a launch .


On the 2d of July we passed between the Bashee Islands , though the rippling of the sea seemed to indicate breakers or rocky ground  but the wind being so far to the northward as to render it difficult to weather them , we risqued the danger to shorten the voyage .
On the 8th of July we made the coast of China , and on the 11th came to an anchor off the city of  Mocao  from thence we proceeded to the river of Canton , where we met with the usual obstructions from the custom-house officers , and where the Commodore was again obliged , as it were , resolutely to force his way to his intended station .
The officer who came to take the dimensions of his ships , in the usual manner , seemed astonished when he talked of being exempted from the accustomed rates , and gave him to understand that the emperor 's duty must be paid by every ship that came into his ports  and the pilot had private instructions not to carry the ships through the Bocca Tygris , or narrow pass that forms the entrance into the river of Canton , till security was given for the accustomed charges .


And here it may be necessary just to mention , that this pass , not more than a quarter of a mile in breadth , is defended by two forts on the opposite sides  but these the Commodore disregarding , and being determined to enter the river without delay , as the stormy season was approaching , he caused the pilot to be brought before him , and in a determined tone threatened to hang him to the yard arm , if he did not instantly take charge of the ship , and carry her safe , without striking ground , through the Bocca Tygris into the open river .
The poor pilot performed his office , but did not escape punishment for what he could not help .
He was instantly seized on being released from the Centurion , committed to prison , and rigorously  disciplined with the bamboo .
However , he found means to get access to the Commodore afterwards , to supplicate a recompence , who , ever ready to reward the sufferers in his service , gave him such a sum as more than contented him for his whipping .
Nor was the poor pilot the only sufferer  for the Governors of the forts were both displaced for not preventing what it was in vain for them to attempt to oppose , and for not doing what all the council must know was impossible to be done .


On the 16th , the Commodore sent his Second Lieutenant to Canton , with a letter to the Viceroy , assigning his reasons for putting into that port , demanding a licence for purchasing provisions and stores , and intimating an intention of waiting upon his Excellency in person to make his acknowledgements .
The Lieutenant was civilly received , and promised an answer the next day .
In the mean time , the principal officers of the prize desired permission to go to Canton on their parole , which was readily granted .
These no sooner arrived , than they were called before the magistracy , and examined  when they generously and frankly acknowledged , that they fell into the hands of the Commodore by the chance of war , and that though they were prisoners , they were notwithstanding at liberty to treat for their release : they said farther , that it was not the custom among European nations to put prisoners to death  but that the laws of war authorized  much severer treatment than they had hitherto met with from their conquerors .
This confession from an enemy had great weight with the Chinese , who , till then , though they had revered the Commodore 's naval force , had yet suspected his morals , and had considered him rather as a lawless free-booter , than as one commissioned by the state for the revenge of public injuries .


On the 20th of July , three Mandarines with their retinue came on board , and brought the Viceroy 's permit for a daily supply of provisions , and for pilots to carry the ships up the river as high as the second bar  and , at the same time , they delivered a message from the Viceroy , in answer to that part of the Commodore 's letter which related to his visiting his Excellency  the substance of which message was , that the Viceroy wished the Commodore to defer his visit till the hot season was over , but that , in September , when the weather would be more temperate , he should be glad to receive him .
This the Commodore looked upon as a finesse , knowing an express was sent up to the Emperor 's court at Peking  whence the real motive for putting off the visit seemed to be to gain time to receive the Emperor 's instructions concerning the ceremony to be observed at his reception .
The Mandarines , having dispatched this part of their commission , next entered upon the business of the port charges  whereupon the Commodore at once cut them short , by telling them , that ,  as he did not come to trade , he was not to be treated upon the same footing with trading ships  that his Britannic Majesty 's ships never paid customs in the ports of Europe , nor ever would be subject to any pecuniary imposts in any other port whatever .
Finding nothing to be gained on this head , they told the Commodore , that they had still another matter in charge , and that was the release of the prisoners taken on board the galleon  for that the Emperor would never permit the subjects of princes with whom he was in alliance to be held in bondage in his dominions , nor could the Viceroy answer it to his Sovereign , if he suffered it  and that , therefore , his Excellency hoped that the Commodore would give immediate orders for their release .


Though nothing could be more agreeable to the Commodore , who wanted much to be rid of the incumbrance , than this requisition , yet , to inhance the favour , he at first raised difficulties  but at length suffered himself to be prevailed upon by their intreaties , and concluded , by assuring them , that , to shew his readiness to oblige , he would deliver up the prisoners whenever the Viceroy would please to order boats to fetch them .
Matters being thus adjusted , the Mandarines departed : and , in a few days , two Chinese junks were sent from Canton to carry them to Mocao , under the direction of one Captain Fial , Commander of a Spanish merchant-man , to whose ship we gave chace in our  passage from the Bashee Islands to Mocao , but lost sight of her in the night .


To this gentleman the General of the galleon , and all his officers , except one who accompanied us to England , were delivered up .
And now I have occasion to mention the General , I can not help relating an affair which gave us on board the prize a great deal of concern , and sufficiently shewed the meanness of his spirit , and his beggarly craft .
I have already taken notice of his being wounded in the engagement , and of his being indulged with the use of his own cabbin till he was fit to be removed .
The Commodore , over and above this indulgence , sent him a surgeon from his own ship , upon a complaint that the Spanish surgeon on board the galleon was quite ignorant in his profession  but at the same time he sent an officer to demand his commission .
Pretending to the officer that he was unable to move , he referred him to a small box in a locker of his private cabbin , in which , he said , it was , and likewise a sword-belt set with diamonds of great value , his own property  but , upon search , neither the commission nor the belt could be found : and , as some of our people had been rummaging both that and other parts of the ship , he protested , that , if they could not be there found , they must have been taken away and concealed .
Under colour of this concealment , though he never produced his commission , he all along received the most humane and gentlemanlike  treatment that the most worthy officer could desire or expect  and such was continued till his departure , when neither his chests , of which he had two very large ones , nor any of his trunks or cases were suffered to be searched : but every thing which he claimed as his personal effects were delivered to him with the greatest care and punctuality  though , as I was afterwards informed , he had many valuable ventures concealed , which ought to have been delivered up as prize to the captors  but , as that was never examined into , he carried them off with the rest , and , it was supposed , was not the least among the gainers by the capture of his ship .
He persisted , however , to the last in the loss of his commission and belt , and , though there were none on board on whom he could charge the theft , yet the Commodore sufficiently expressed his displeasure against the whole by the prohibition he laid upon us , as soon as the prize came to an anchor in the river , by which all communication was cut off between us and the country people , and no boat suffered to come near us but our own  by which severe order we were entirely debarred from purchasing our own provisions and necessaries from the Chinese , which the people in the Centurion were at full liberty to do  neither could we employ the Chinese tradesmen to supply us with apparel , of which we stood greatly in need , though in that too the Centurion 's people were indulged : and all this for no other reason , that was  ever assigned , but that , if the jewels the General had lost were concealed , the Commodore was determined the secreter should have no opportunity of disposing of them without being discovered .
Had this precaution been taken , as it ought , for the satisfaction of those who suffered under the severity of the censure , and had the effects of the Spanish General been properly inspected , the secreter would have been publicly exposed  for , when we afterwards fell down to Mocao with the ships , where we sold the prize , I was myself told by an Irish priest , that the General had both his commission and his belt  that he made no secret of the matter at Mocao  and that he had offered the jewels ( being only made up by way of blind ) among the merchants for sale .


But to return : during our stay in the river Canton , our people were employed in repairing the Centurion , over-hauling her sails and rigging , cleansing and ventilating her decks and quarters below , and in paying and decorating her hull  insomuch , that when she came to sail , she had more the appearance of a ship newly fitted out , than one that had been a three-year 's voyage in traversing the globe .
While these things were doing on board the Centurion , we in the prize were busied in rummaging for treasure , till about the latter end of August , when we made a full end of our search , and found , upon account of the captors , in specie , 1,278,546 dollars , and 1,324 of wrought plate and virgin  silver .
The jewels we found were not then valued .


At the same time that the inferior officers and seamen were employed in these different services , the Commodore had a still more important business in hand .
He knew it was impossible for us to proceed to Europe without an ample supply of provisions and other sea-stores  and , though we were furnished with a daily allowance , yet no order had been obtained for victualling us for our intended voyage .
Application had indeed been made , and terms agreed upon with the contractors to furnish whatever was necessary  and they had undertaken to procure the Viceroy 's permission for the delivery  but when , about the middle of September , the proper officer was sent to enquire what forwardness these things were in , he found that neither the baker had begun to bake the bread , nor the butcher to kill the oxen , nor was the least step taken to comply with any one article of the agreement .
We could no otherwise account for this faithless procedure of the Chinese , than by supposing they meant to starve us into a compliance with their accustomed demands for port charges , with which the Commodore was determined never to acquiesce .
Indeed , it was suspected , that the contractors themselves had some interest in promoting the delay , though it was not easy to penetrate the views by which they were influenced , as it may with truth be asserted , that in artifice , falshood ,  and attachment to all kinds of lucre , the Chinese , as a nation , are not to be paralleled by any other people under the sun .
It were endless to recount all the artifices , extortions , and frauds , which were practised on the Commodore and his people by this interested race .
The method of buying provisions in China being by weight , the tricks made use of to make them heavy are almost incredible .
At one time a number of fowls and ducks being brought for the ship 's store , the greatest part of them presently died , which spread a general alarm on board lest they should have died of poison  but , on examination , it was discovered that they had been crammed with small stones and gravel to increase their weight .
The hogs , too , bought of the Chinese butchers ready killed , were found to have had water injected into the carcases for the same purpose  and when , to avoid this cheat , the hogs were bought alive , it was found that salt had been given them to increase their thirst , that methods had been used to suppress their urine , and that the tortured animals had been sold in that inflated state .
Mr. Walter adds - [ for it is on his authority that these instances are reported ] - that , as the Chinese never scruple to eat the animals that die of themselves , they contrived , by their secret practices , when the Commodore put to sea , that part of his live sea-store should die in a short time after it was put on board : in order , therefore , to make a second profit of the dead carcases  which they expected would be thrown over-board , they followed in boats to pick up the carrion  and , accordingly , two thirds of the hogs dying before they were out of sight of land , their labour could not be in vain .


The treachery of the contractors being now discovered , the Commodore determined to renew his former requisition for an audience with the Viceroy .
With this view , he notified his intention to the proper Mandarine , and desired that he would fix the time with the Viceroy when he would be pleased to receive him  at the same time giving him to understand , that , on the first of October , he intended to proceed in his boat to Canton .
The Mandarine returned for answer , that he would acquaint the Viceroy with the Commodore 's intentions .
As it was apprehended , that the payment of the customary duties would be demanded at this interview , the Commodore took the necessary precautions to prevent the Chinese from facilitating the success of their pretensions by having him in their power at Canton , and , therefore , gave the command of the Centurion to his First Lieut. Mr. Brett ( now Sir Piercy ) , with orders , if he should be detained , to lie at the mouth of the river , and suffer no ship or boat to pass or repass till he was released , by which the whole navigation of the river would be immediately obstructed .


This being known to the Chinese , they were now more than ever embarrassed in their deliberations .
 The morning of the first of October arrived , and just as the boat 's crew , eighteen in number , which the Commodore proposed to take with him , appeared in their uniform , namely , scarlet jackets and blue silk waistcoats , the whole trimmed with silver , with silver badges on their jackets and caps , his linguist came to him from the Mandarine , to tell him , that a letter had been received from the Viceroy , desiring the Commodore to defer his intended purpose for two or three days , which not being doubted , the men were ordered to be undrest , and the preparations were all laid aside  but , in the afternoon of the same day , another linguist came on board , seemingly in a great panic , informing him , that the Viceroy had expected him up that day  that the council was assembled , and the troops under arms to receive him  and that the Viceroy was highly incensed at the disappointment , and had sent the Commodore 's linguist to prison , chained , supposing him to be the sole cause of the contempt .
This plausible tale gave the Commodore great uneasiness , not at that time suspecting any imposition  and though it afterwards appeared to be all a mere farce , yet the falshood was so well supported by the artifices of the Chinese merchants , that three days afterwards the Commodore received a letter , signed by all the Supercargoes of the English ships then at the place , expressing their uneasiness at what had happened , and intimating their fears that some insult  would be offered to his boat , if he attempted to come to Canton before the Viceroy was fully satisfied of the mistake .
To this letter the Commodore replied , that he did not believe there had been a mistake , but was persuaded it was a forgery of the Chinese to prevent his visiting the Viceroy  that , therefore , he would certainly come up to Canton on the 13th of October , confident that the Chinese would not dare to offer him any insult , as well knowing he should want neither power nor inclination to make them a proper return .


On the 13th of October , the Commodore continuing firm to his resolutions , all the Supercargoes of the English , Danish , and Swedish ships , came on board the Centurion , to accompany him to Canton , for which place he set out in his barge the same day , attended by his own boats , and by those of the trading ships , which on this occasion were sent to augment his retinue .
As he passed by Wampo where the European vessels by , he was saluted by all of them except the French , and in the evening he arrived safely at Canton .


The Chinese merchants , who affected to appear very much pleased that he had met with no opposition in his way , pretended that the Viceroy was then so fully employed in preparing his dispatches for Peking , that there was no getting admittance to him  but that they had engaged one of the officers of his court , as soon as he was at leisure , to notify the Commodore 's  arrival , and endeavour to fix the audience .
Though the Commodore knew this to be a falsehood , yet he suffered himself to be persuaded by the European Supercargoes not to appear to doubt it , provided the Chinese merchants would undertake that his bread should be baked , his meat salted , and his stores in readiness , within the space of 40 days  after which time , if the least article was pretended to be forgotten , he would force his way to the Viceroy , and prefer his complaint .
During the interval , while the contractors were endeavouring in earnest to fulfil the terms of the agreement on their part , ( which by the way they insisted should be paid for in advance on his ) , a fire broke out in the suburbs of Canton , which on the first alarm might easily have been extinguished , by pulling down some of the adjoining sheds  which the Commodore with his officers and crew observing , were instantly about to carry into execution  but they were told , that whatever they pulled down they must build up again at their own expence , and that none but a Mandarine must presume to direct upon such occasions .
The Commodore , on this admonition , dispatched his people to the English factory to assist them in securing their effects , as it was easy to foresee that no distance was safe from fire , where the common people contented themselves with gazing at it , and now-and-then holding up an idol or two to extinguish it .
At length , however , a Mandarine came out of the city , with 4 or 500  firemen , who made some very feeble efforts to pull down the neighbouring houses  but by this time the fire had extended itself , and had spread among the merchants warehouses , where the Chinese firemen had neither spirit nor skill to encounter it  so that it was feared the whole city would have been laid in ashes .
In this emergency , the Viceroy vouchsafed to make his appearance , and a message was sent to the Commodore , requesting his assistance .
Accordingly , he hastened a second time , with about 40 of his people , to the place where the fire raged with the most violence , and in sight of the whole city performed such daring , and , to the people who beheld them , such astonishing feats , that they looked upon them as salamanders , and cried out , that they could live in fire .
In truth , it was no uncommon thing to see the boldest and most active among them tumble on the roofs amidst the ruins of the houses which their own efforts had brought down under them .
And thus , by their resolution and agility , the fire was very soon subdued , to the astonishment of the Chinese who were spectators of the wonders they performed .
On this occasion the Swedish was the only European factory that suffered  yet on my arrival in England , to my no small diversion , I read in the Paris Gazette , that the city of Canton had been almost wholly destroyed  and that , in particular , the English , Dutch , Danish , and Portuguese factories , had been burnt down , and almost all their effects consumed  but that the French  factory had providentially escaped , their goods being all shipped before the conflagration reached the quarter allotted for their residence .


This signal assistance gained the Admiral much respect , he was the next day waited [ ... ] on by the principal inhabitants with presents and thanks  and soon after , a message came from the Viceroy appointing the 30th of November for the day of audience .
Being highly pleased with this last intimation , he instantly gave orders for the necessary preparations  and engaged Mr. Flint , a gentleman belonging to the English factory , for his interpreter , who , being trained up from his infancy among the Chinese , spoke their language fluently , and who was not afraid to declare with boldness what the [ ... ] miral delivered him in charge , a part which [ ... ] Chinese interpreters would not have dared [ ... ] performed with equal fidelity .


On the day appointed , at 10 o'clock , the C [ ... ] modore and his retinue set out  and , as he [ ... ] ed the outer gate of the city , he was met [ ... ] guard of 200 soldiers , who conducted him [ ... ] great parade before the Emperor 's palace , [ ... ] the Viceroy then resided , where a body [ ... ] to the number of 10,000 were drawn [ ... ] under arms , who made a fine appearance , [ ... ] all new cloathed for this ceremony .
[ ... ] ugh the [ ... ] ddle of this body the Commodore with his retinue ma [ ... ] ched to the hall of audience , where he found the Viceroy seated under a rich canopy in the Emperor 's chair of  state , with all his council of Mandarines attending .
He was seated the third in order from th [ ... ] Viceroy , the chiefs of the law and treasury being the only persons seated above him .
He the [ ... ] addressing himself to the Viceroy by his interpreter , complained to him of the delays he ha [ ... ] met with , the insincerity of those he had employed , the vexatious impositions of the office [ ... ] of the customs , the grievances of the British subjects , and [ ... ] [ ... ] stained by the [ ... ] , who had arrived there [ ... ] a few days before the fire happened , by which the [ ... ] been g [ ... ] eat sufferers , and the Captain in particular , who had lost a ches [ ... ] of treasure value 4500 [ ... ] .
To the latter article the Commodore received for answer , that , [ ... ] thing [ ... ] with that ship , the Capta [ ... ] [ ... ] considered .
To the othe [ ... ] [ ... ] the Commodore received no answ [ ... ] at al [ ... ] .
And having now gone through the [ ... ] veral articl [ ... ] he had in charge from the co [ ... ] pany , he [ ... ] next upon his own affairs , [ ... ] particularly concerning the [ ... ] to ship [ ... ] his provisions and stores , which , he said , we [ ... ] all ready , and the season for sa [ ... ] ng [ ... ] now [ ... ] in .
The Viceroy re [ ... ] ed to thi [ ... ] , [ ... ] the licence should be immediately issued , and that every thing should be ordered on [ ... ] and the fo [ ... ] lowing day .
The business [ ... ] now at an end , the Viceroy co [ ... ] d [ ... ] conversation for some time on matters of indifference and curiosity  [ ... ] that the Centurion had been  long on their coast , he concluded with acknowledgments for the services the Commodore had rendered the Chinese nation by the activity of his people at the late fire , and with wishing him a prosperous voyage to Great Britain .
Thus happily concluded this long-expected audience  and , in pursuance of the Viceroy 's promises , the provisions were begun to be shipped the very next day : and now all the preparations for putting to sea were pursued with so much expedition , that by the 9th the Centurion and her prize were ready to unmoor , and on the 10th passed through the Bocca Tygris into the open road , and on the 12th anchored before the town of Mocao .
While they lay here , the Portuguese merchants entered into treaty with the Commodore for the purchase of the prize , for which they would give no more than 6000 dollars , though worth double that sum  but the impatience of the Commodore to be gone , that he might himself be the messenger of his own good fortune , and thereby prevent the enterprizes of the enemy to intercept him , prevailed upon him to conclude the bargain  and , she being delivered on the 15th of December , and the money received , in the afternoon of the same day he hoisted sail , and took his departure for his native home .
On the 3d of January he came to an anchor on Prince 's Island , in the straits of Sunda , where he staid the best part of five days to wood and water , and on the 8th weighed and continued his course .
From this time till  the 20th we had foul and stormy weather , so bad , that I thought it impossible to meet with such in latitudes so near the Equator  and the wind blowing directly against us , we were driven pretty near the coast of New Holland  and , had it continued blowing from the same quarter , with equal violence , for 48 hours longer , we should have found it difficult to have cleared that coast  but , on the 21st , the wind abated , and the weather became moderate .
On the 24th , the trade-wind set in , and we then proceeded on our passage with the highest alacrity .


On the 22d of February , at half after four in the morning , I discovered a comet to the eastward , near the horizon , being , as I judged , lately emerged from the sun 's rays .
Its tail was at this time about 10 degrees in length  but in less than a fortnight it increased and extended itself to near 40 degrees .
Its head appeared very large and bright  and , on a nice inspection , I have perceived it when the sun has been about a diameter above the horizon .
The next time I observed its distance from the planet Venus to be 26 deg .
50 min .
following the order of the planets  but not having instruments proper for taking altitudes without a very obvious sensible horizon , I was prevented from making more satisfactory observations .
From this time , till the 6th of March , we had pleasant weather , with few exceptions  but on that and the three following days , being near the Cape of Good Hope , we had some boisterous  storms  yet , when we arrived at Tablebay , on the 11th , the Dutch knew not that any such had happened .
We found riding here two English East-Indiamen , the Salisbury and Warwick , each of which saluted us with 13 guns , and we returned 11 .
We also found five Dutch ships , one of which having , as Admiral , a flag at his main-top-mast-head , saluted us with 9 guns , to which we returned 7 .
At 11 at night we parted our best bower cable and hawser , both of which were very rotten , and the next day moored again with others purchased from the Dutch .
Here the Commodore continued till the beginning of April , highly delighted with the place , and during his stay entered about 40 new men .
On the 3d of May , having compleated our water and provisions , we on that day weighed and put to sea .
On the 19th of April we passed within sight of the island of St. Helena , which , however , we did not visit .
On the 26th we caught on board the ship a snake that measured in length six feet and two inches , which our surgeon , on examination , pronounced to be perfectly harmless .
It was supposed to be brought on board with our wood , at Prince 's Island , in the straits of Sunda .
The 30th , being before the wind , with a fine breeze , and a gentle rain , a violent and sudden squall took us a-head , threw all the ship 's sails a-back , carried away her fore-top-sail yard , split the fore-sail , the fore-top-sail , the fore-top-gallant-sail , and the mizzen and  mizzen-top sail .
During this squall the ship laid down very much , and we were in the utmost danger of our masts coming by the board  but providentially we escaped without further damage .


The 9th of June , in the evening , it being a thick fog , we on a sudden saw a ship close by us  we fired a shot , and brought her too .
She proved an English ship from Amsterdam , bound for Philadelphia or Carolina , with Palatine emigrants .
She gave us the first notice of a war with France , and proceeded on her voyage .
The 10th of June we came into soundings .
The 11th , at half past eleven in the morning , we discovered three sail , and at one in the afternoon spoke with one of them , being a Dutch ship from Dublin .
At the same time , the second , being pretty near us , shewed Dutch colours .
The third , who had been in chace of the others the whole day , perceiving we designed to speak with her , stood from us with all the sail she could crowd .
We gave chace to her for about three hours , when , finding we did not gain upon her , we resumed our former course .
On the 12th , in the morning , the fog clearing up , we perceived the Lizard Point : but that the signal perils , which had so often threatened us , and from which we had been more than once providentially delivered , might be discoverable to the last , we were afterwards told , that there was a French fleet of considerable force cruising in the chops of the channel  through the middle of which we had this night sailed without being perceived .


On the 13th , between the Isle of Portland and the Isle of Wight , we saw a ship towing another which was disabled in her masts .
This ship proved the Salamander privateer , with a French [ ... ] rize .
The 14th .
at eleven in the morning , we anchored at the back of the Isle of Wight , and in the evening weighed , and again [ ... ] - Thus we finished a long and perilous voyage , which had lasted three years and nine months , after having by its events , as Mr. Wal [ ... ] er observes , strongly evinced this important truth , That though prudence , intrepidity , and perseverance , united , a [ ... ] e not exempted from the blows of adverse fortune , yet , a [ ... ] long [ ... ] of transactions , they usually rise superior to its power , and in the end rarely fail of proving successful . ''


Having now brought this celebrated voyage to a conclusion , it may , perhaps , be expected that we should give some account of the Spanish squadron , which we have more than once had occasion to mention , and which was so near intercepting the Commodore at first [ ... ] etting out , that , had the Spanish Admiral [ ... ] to the eastward of the island of Madeira , instead of the westward of it , the two fleets must have certainly met  and , in that case , whatever had been the event of the action , the progress of the voyage must have been effectually prevented .


 This squadron was composed of the following ships : the Asia , of 66 guns , 700 men , commanded by Don Joseph Pizarro , as Admiral  the Guipuscoa , 74 guns , 700 men  the Hermiona , [ ... ] guns , 500 men  the Esperanza , 50 guns , [ ... ] men  the Estevan , 40 guns , 350 men  and a patache of 20 guns , 120 men  and over and above this complement , they had on board on old Spanish regiment of foot , intende [ ... ] to reinforce their garrisons in the South Seas , and to counterbalance the land forces that it was known were inten [ ... ] to be put on board the Commodore .


When this [ ... ] had cruised , as has been said , to the [ ... ] eward of Madeira , till they were in a manner certain that the Commodore had either passed by , or [ ... ] voyage , their Admiral determined to [ ... ] instructions , and continue his [ ... ] to the [ ... ] uth Seas , but first , it was necessary t [ ... ] [ ... ] to the coast of Braz [ ... ] l to recruit [ ... ] provisions , being victualled only for four months , and more than two of the four [ ... ] already [ ... ] .


A [ ... ] the beginning of November ?
[ ... ] off the Madeiras , and [ ... ] the 5 [ ... ] of January following , [ ... ] , where coming to a [ ... ] anchor [ ... ] n the bay of Maldando , he sent immed [ ... ] ately to Buen [ ... ] s Ayres for a supply .


While they [ ... ] here , they received intelligence , by the treachery of the Portuguese Governor of St. Catharine [ ... ] s , of the Commodore 's  arrival at that port , and of the weak condition he was then in  but , whatever were his reasons , Pizarro declined making any other use of this intelligence , than hastening his preparations to double the Cape , which he hoped to effect before the Commodore was in readiness to follow him .
With this view , after refreshing his crew , and recruiting his water , he instantly set sail without waiting for his provisions ( which , however , arrived a day or two after he set sail , ) [ ... ] ightly concluding , that , if he got the st [ ... ] rt of the Commodore in the South Seas , he should not only alarm the coast , but so strengthen the forts against the attacks of the enemy , as effectually to bas [ ... ] e their designs , by depriving them [ ... ] the means of procuring necessaries .
But , not [ ... ] thstanding this precipitation , the Commodore put to sea [ ... ] day , before him , and , in some [ ... ] of the passage [ ... ] the Cape , the fleets [ ... ] so near each other , that the Pearl , as has been said , being separated in a storm , ran within g [ ... ] - shot of the Asia before she found her mistake .


It was with the utmost difficulty , and not [ ... ] out cons [ ... ] derable rewards , that the Spanish [ ... ] were prevailed upon to undertake the [ ... ] ssage round Cape Horn at that tempestuous [ ... ] ?
however , being once engaged , they con [ ... ] d to persevere , till by the latter end of Fe [ ... ] ary they had run the length of the Cape , and [ ... ] turning to the westward , when a storm [ ... ] , in which the Guipuscoa , Hermiona ,  and Esperanza , lost sight of the Admiral , and on the 6th of March the Guipuscoa was separated from the other two .
On the 7th the storm increased , and by its irresistible violence drove the whole squadron to the eastward , and , after several unsuccessful efforts , obliged them to return to the coast of Brazil , where the Asia took shelter in the river of [ ... ] ate , and about the middle of May was joined by the Esperanza and Estevan  the Hermiona having , as was supposed , foundered at sea , as she was never more heard of , and the Guipuscoa being run ashore and sunk on the coast of Brazil .
The patache , we should h [ ... ] ve observed , was condemned before they [ ... ] the coast of Brazil , and her crew distributed among the other ships  so that , of the [ ... ] of which [ ... ] squadron originally consisted , there now on [ ... ] y [ ... ] nded three , and those [ ... ] most miserable condition  for , though it does not appear , that the Spaniards were so severe [ ... ] visited with that most fatal disease the sea scurvy , which carr [ ... ] ed off so many of the English in the passage , yet they were reduced by famine to such infinite [ ... ] stress , that rats , when they could be caug [ ... ] t , were sold for four dollars a-piece  and a sailor , who died on board , had his death concealed for several days by his brother , who during that time lay in the same hammock with the de [ ... ] corpse , only to receive the dead man 's allowance .


In this dreadful situation , they were alarmed by the discovery of a conspiracy among the soldiers  on board the Asia , to murder the Admiral , and all the ship 's crew , originating from no other motive but that of appropriating the whole stock of provisions to the conspirators own proper use .
But this plot was prevented , when just upon the point of execution , by means of the priest on board , who , having taken the confession of one of the conspirators as he lay at the point of death , pursued proper measures to defeat their bloody purposes , and to bring three of the ring-leaders to condign punishment .


But , though this combination failed of its effect , there were other distresses that multiplied upon them , and which could not be prevented .
Hunger and thirst , the most dreadful of all other calamities , daily became more grievous  the ships grew continually more and more leaky , and the men less able to stand at the pumps  nothing was to be seen but despondency in every countenance  nothing heard but lamentations and complaints , which were embittered by the absolute impossibility of relieving them .
Under the weight of these affecting circumstances , the Asia was near sinking , when she arrived at Monte Vedio with scarce half her crew alive .
The Estevan , when she anchored in the bay of Barragan , had in like manner lost about the same number of her hands  but , what was still worse , and is almost incredible , the Esperanza , out of a crew of 450 seamen which she brought from Spain , had only 58 that reached the shore , and the whole regiment of soldiers , 60 men only excepted , perished .


 Being now in want of all kinds of necessaries , masts , yards , rigging , provisions , and money , Pizarro dispatched an express over land to St. Jago , in Chili , to be from thence forwarded to the Viceroy of Peru , desiring a remittance of 200,000 dollars  and what must astonish the reader is , that the Indian who was charged with this dispatch , though in the depth of winter , when the Cordilleras are judged impassable by reason of the snow , was only 13 days in his journey from Buenos Ayres to St. Jago , places distant from each other 300 Spanish leagues .
At the same time an advice-boat was sent with a letter of credit to Rio Janeiro , to purchase what was wanting of the Portuguese  but neither the one nor the other of these dispatches succeeded to the wish of the Spanish Admiral .
The Viceroy , instead of 200,000 dollars , sent him only 100,000  and the Portuguese , instead of furnishing him with masts and yards , the principal articles of naval stores that he wanted , spared him only some pitch , tar , and cordage , with which he was obliged to be contented : but a more mortifying disappointment he had still to suffer  for a carpenter , whom , after the return of the money , he had trusted with a considerable sum , and whom he had sent up into the country of Puraguay to cut masts , instead of prosecuting the business with which he was entrusted , married in the country , and settled out of his reach , refusing to return .


In this dilemma , the only thing that could  be done , was , to shift the masts of the Esperanza into the Asia , and to fit up the Estevan with what spare masts and yards they could muster , and with these two ships to hazard a second attempt to double Cape Horn , as it was now summer , and the weather less severe .
But a certain fatality seemed to preside over every part of this unfortunate expedition .
The Estevan , as she was coming down the river Plate , ran on a shoal and beat off her rudder  and the Asia , though she proceeded alone with moderate weather and a favourable gale , yet when she came to the height of Cape Horn , and was tacking to change her course to the westward , by some misconduct in wearing the ship , rolled away her masts , and was a second time forced back to the river of Plate  from whence Pizarro undertook to cross the continent by land , and with some difficulty accomplished his design .


By this time Don Mindinuetta , Captain of the Guipuscoa , wrecked , as has been said , on the coast of Brazil , arrived , with those of his crew who escaped , at the place of general rendezvous  and , finding the Esperanza without masts , applied a second time to the Portuguese , by whose assistance he completed her repair , and , in 1742 , doubled the Cape , and arrived in the South Seas , where he was met by Pizarro , who claimed the command of the Esperanza , which Mindinuetta disputing , an irreconcileable quarrel arose between the two Commanders ,  which the Viceroy of Peru in vain endeavoured to reconcile .
In 1745 , they both returned over land to the coast of Brazil , where they found the Asia still in a shattered condition .
This ship , however , they determined to carry to Europe , and , with this view , they fitted her up in the best manner they could  and , having manned her partly with Portuguese , partly with English prisoners , and partly with Spaniards , together with some Indians whom they forced out of the country , they set sail from Monte Vedio for Europe about the beginning of November  but they had not been long at sea before the Indians , eleven in number , formed a conspiracy to destroy the Spaniards , and to regain their liberty , in which they had hopes of being joined by the English and Portuguese , whom the Spaniards used with great insolence .
At the head of this conspiracy was their Chief Orellana  and one evening , about nine o'clock , he and his companions came all together on the quarter-deck , and drew towards the door of the great cabbin .
The boatswain immediately reprimanded them , and ordered them to be gone  on this Orellana spoke to his followers in his native language , when four of them drew off , two towards each gangway , and the Chief and the remaining six seemed to be slowly quitting the quarter-deck .
When the detached Indians had taken possession of the gang-way , Orellana placed his hands hollow to his mouth , and bellowed out the war-cry  used by those savages .
This was the signal for beginning the massacre  accordingly , the six , with their Chief , who remained on the quarter-deck , falling suddenly on the Spaniards who were intermingled with them , laid near forty of them at their feet , of which above twenty were killed on the spot , and the rest disabled .
Many of the officers , in the beginning of the tumult , pushed into the great cab [ ... ] n , where they put out the lights , and barricadoed the door , whilst of the rest , some endeavoured to escape along the gang-ways into the forecastle , where the Indians placed on purpose stabbed the greatest part of them as they attempted to pass by  others threw themselves into the waste , and thought themselves fortunate to lie concealed amongst the cattle  but the greatest part escaped up the main shrouds , [ ... ] d sheltered themselves either in the tops or the rigging  and though the Indians attached only the quarter-deck , yet the watch in the forecastle finding their communication cut off , in the utmost [ ... ] likewise gave all over for [ ... ] ost , and in great confusion ran up into the rigging of the fore-mast and bowsprit .
But when the Indians had intirely cleared the quarter-deck , the tumult in a great measure sub [ ... ] ded  for , not being joined , as they expected , by either the English or Portuguese , they could not pursue their advantage by carrying the dis [ ... ] der into those quarters to which they had given the Spaniards , who thereby gained time  for recollection  and , on finding none concerned in the plot but the India [ ... ] , they resolved [ ... ] them in [ ... ] quarter-deck .
[ ... ] .


[ ... ] the Herm [ ... ] [ ... ]  the Guipuscoa [ ... ] the coast of Brazil  [ ... ] Esperanza , being [ ... ] .


VOLUME THE THIRD .


LONDON : Printed for F. NEWBERY , the Corner of St. Paul 's Church Yard .
MDCCLXXIII .


 CHART of the Track of the Dolphin , Tamar , Swallow  Endeavour , through the SOUTH SEAS   of the Track of M. Bougainville , round the WORLD .
1 .
COMMODORE BYRON 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD , In 1764 , 1765 , and 1766 .


 HIS present Majesty having formed a design of prosecuting the discovery of countries in the South Seas , was pleased , in the year 1764 , to give orders for the carrying this design into execution : in consequence of which , the Dolphin ship of war and the Tamar frigate were fitted , manned , and victualled for this expedition .


Mr. Byron was commander in chief , and Captain Mouat had the honour of commanding the frigate under him .
They sailed from the Downs on the 21st of June , 1764 , but the Dolphin running a-ground , she was put into Plymouth Dock and examined : she had however sustained no injury , and on the 3d of July the Commodore hoisted his broad pendant , and sailed in prosecution of his voyage .
On the 30th they anchored in the road of Fonchiale , at the island of Madeira  the Governor of which saluted the Captain with 11 guns , and the compliment was returned .
They sailed on the 19th , and on the 21st were in sight of Palma , one of the Canary Islands .
Their water having become foul and stinking , they purified  it , by forcing a stream of air through it , by means of a [ ... ] nd of ventilator constructed for that purpose .
On the 27th and 28th they saw the Canary Islands , and anchored in the bay of Port Praya on the 30th .
- Having taken in water , and purchased some fresh provisions , they sail [ ... ] d with all possible expedition , for fear of the tornadoes , which are very common on this coast from August till November .


Most of the crew had purchased monkies , lean goats , and fowls , in exchange for their old jackets , shirts , c..
It had been remarked before , and was now again observed , that no fish would come near the ship , which was attributed to her being sheathed with copper  this was a mort [ ... ] fying circumstance , as there were immense numbers of fish within sight .


On the 13th of September they came to an anchor in the road of Rio de Janeiro , on the coast of Brazil , when the Commodore paid a visit to the Governor , who received him in state , being attended by some persons of distinction , and having many officers , and a Captain 's guard under arms before the palace .
Fifteen guns were fired in honour of the English flag  and the Governor afterwards return [ ... ] the Commodore 's visit on board the Dolphin .
M [ ... ] y of the people on board the Tamar [ ... ] , l [ ... ] gings were provided for them on [ ... ] , where they soon recovered  but the [ ... ] of the Dolphin kept their health ,  through the plentiful use of fresh meat and greens .


While the ship lay in this harbour , the Portuguese enticed away nine of the crew of the Tamar , and five from the Dolphin .
The former were recovered , by a party sent after them in the night  but the Commodore could never learn where his men were secreted .
This practice of kidnapping the English tars is here carried on with impunity  and when all other methods fail , the poor fellows are generally made drunk , and then sent up the country , till the ship to which they belong is sailed .
They weighed anchor on the 16th of October , and on the 22d the Commodore informed the crew that they were not bound , as they thought , directly to the East Indies , but on a voyage to make discoveries  and that , on their behaving well , the Lords of the Admiralty had ordered them double pay , and other emoluments .
They were transported with this news , declared their willingness to serve their country , and promised obedience to the orders of the Commodore .
On the 29th they encountered so violent a storm , that they were obliged to throw four guns overboard : it continued very tempestuous all night , but dying away in the morning , they made sail , and , in 35 degrees 50 minutes south latitude , found the weather most intolerably cold , though it was now the latter end of October , and November in that climate answers  to May in England .
The sailors now repented the having bartered their old cloaths for eatables  but they were soon re-furnished with the slops that were on board .


The Commodore , on the 2d of November , delivered their commissions to his officers , after they had taken the customary oath .
They now beheld vast numbers of pintadoes , and other birds , in flocks about the ship .
Observing the colour of the water to be changed , they stood in for land on the 11th of this month , and found ground at the depth of 45 fathom .
The next day the men on the forecastle called out , at the same instant , ' `` Land right a-head . '' '
The Commodore looked forward , and saw what he thought an island , composed of two hills , and land joining to it , which ran far to the south-east  but in the end this proved to be only a fog-bank , which vanished on a sudden .
These deceptions are not unfrequent : not long since the master of a vessel made oath , that he had seen an island , and trees growing on it , between Newfoundland and the west coast of Ireland  in consequence of which some ships were sent in search of it , but it could never be found .


In the afternoon of the 13th the wind shifted , the sky grew black to windward , and a strange noise was heard , resembling the roaring of the sea on a shallow coast .
Hundreds of birds were observed flying from the storm ,  and shrieking through dreadful apprehension .
At length it reached the ship before she was prepared for it , and laid her on her side .
The first Lieutenant was beat down by the main sheet , by which some of his teeth were knocked out , and he was otherwise terribly bruised .
The main-sail of the Tamar was split  but as she was to leeward of the Dolphin , she had more time to prepare for the threatened storm .
The wind continued violent all night , but abated in the morning , when the sea was observed to be covered with a small red fish , like cray-fish , great numbers of which were catched by the ship 's crew .


On the 16th they steered for Cape Blanco , shaping their course agreeable to the chart of it laid down in Anson 's Voyage .
On the 17th they saw the Cape , and for two days struggled hard to reach Port Desire  but the description given of it in Narborough 's Voyage is so perplexed , that they were much at a loss .
They stood into a bay south of the Cape , but could find no port .
On the 20th they saw Penguin Island , and as Port Desire was said to be a few leagues north-west of it , a boat was sent out , which found it .
In these seas there were thousands of seals and penguins near the ship .
On the 21st they entered the harbour of Port Desire , and the Commodore in his boat , attended by two other boats , went to sound it .
Mr. Byron landed , and found the country all one continued  down , having neither shrubs or trees .
They had a sight of four beasts , near 13 hands high , and in shape like a deer , which they took to be guanicoes .
The Commodore having returned to his boat , went higher up the harbour , to an island abounding with seals , more than 50 of which they killed , some of them exceeding the size of an ordinary bullock .
They likewise killed a variety of birds , one with a head like an eagle , with a large comb on it , and a white ruff , like a lady 's tippet , round the neck  the feathers on the back were black , and of a most exquisite polish  the legs were large and strong , with talons somewhat like the eagle  the wings being extended , measured no less than 12 feet from their extremities .


On the 21st the Tamar sailed into the harbour with the rising of the tide  but the Dolphin waiting for a wind , ran on shore , where she remained all night , and the next day , in very tempestuous weather .
On the 23d they saw the track of a tyger , and several other beasts , and found a nest of ostriches eggs , which proved to be good eating .
On the 24th the ships were both properly moored in the harbour , where the water rises no less than 27 feet at spring tides .


The Commodore went on shore this day , and shot a hare weighing 26 pounds , and saw several others as large as fawns .
On the 25th he landed again , and found the barrel of an old  musquet , with the King 's broad arrow on it , and an old oar of a singular form .
The musquet-barrel was so decayed , that it would crumble to dust with the touch .
These things , it is probable , were left by the crew of the Wager , or , possibly , by Sir John Narborough .


They here saw the remains of fires , but met with no inhabitants .
The only vegetable they found was wild peas .
They killed several wild ducks , and shot a ball through the body of a hare , which ran two miles before he dropped : the flesh of this animal is delicious , and as white as snow .
Two old guanicoes and a fawn were killed by another party  and some of the former were seen of 300 weight .


The skull and bones of a man having been found , were brought on board  as was likewise a young guanicoe , which was very beautiful , and grew quite tame  but died in a short time .
Happily , on the 2 [ ... ] th , two springs of tolerable water were found  and on the next day a tun of it was brought on board .
The Commodore went again on shore , where such an immense number of birds took flight , as actually darkened the sky , and it was impossible to walk without treading on their eggs .
These eggs the men are , though there were young birds in the greater part of them .


On the 30th some men being sent on shore for water , two of them , who first came to it , saw  a tyger lying on the ground , who taking no kind of notice of them , they threw stones at him : still , however , they could not provoke his rage  he waited till the rest came up , and then walked leisurely off .
The country near this bay abounds with geese , ducks , widgeon , and sea-pies , besides several birds , the names of which are unknown .


On the 5th of December the ships got under sail , and , during that and the following day , had pleasant weather and a fine gale .
They now steered for Pepys ' Isle , which is described as lying in 47 degrees south latitude .
The weather was now very clear , and the ships , by spreading from each other , could , between them , command a prospect of 20 leagues .
They thus continued their search for this supposed island till the 11th of the month , when the Commodore , convinced that there was no such place , resolved to stand in for the main , to take in wood and water , which began to be much wanted .


Large whales now swam frequently about the ship , and birds flew round them in great numbers .
On the 15th the wind blew a perfect hurricane , before which it would have been safest to have ran  but the fear of being driven too far from land , while they were in want of water , determined them to endeavour to weather it , which they did till it abated , which was at eight o'clock the next morning .
On    the 18th they saw land , which , like that near Port Desire , was of the downy kind without trees .
They now observed porpoises , which were milk white , with black spots , pursuing the fish in the sea , of which there were great numbers .
On the 20th they ran close in shore to Cape Virgin Mary  and having observed a smoke on shore , and a number of guanicoes feeding in the vallies , they came to an anchor .
The next day they again sailed , and at length anchored about two miles from the shore , near the place where they had seen smoke the preceding day .
The Commodore observed a number of men on horse-back , riding to and fro , opposite the ship , and waving something white , which he took to be an invitation to land  and as he was anxious to know what people these were , he went in one boat with a party of men well armed  the first Lieutenant with a separate party following in another .
When they came near the shore , they saw a great number of people on horseback , and some on foot , the whole amounting , as they judged , to five hundred  who were drawn up on a stony point of land that ran far into the sea .
Though the Commodore did not observe that they had any weapons , he made signs for them to retreat a little , which they readily did , and kept shouting very loud while the crew were landing  which was no sooner done , than they were mustered on the beach , with their officers at their head .


 Mr. Byron now advanced alone , but as he approached , the Indians retreated  he therefore made signs , that one of them should come forward , which was complied with .
The person who advanced appeared to be a chief , and was very near seven feet in heighth : round one of his eyes was a circle of black paint , and a white circle round the other  the rest of his face was painted in streaks of various colours .
He had the skin of a beast , with the hair inwards , thrown over his shoulders .
The Commodore and the Indian having complimented each other , in language equally unintelligible to either , they walked together towards the main body of the Indians , few of whom were shorter than the height abovementioned , and the women were large in proportion .
Mr. Byron made signs for them to sit on the ground , which they did , chanting in a most serious and melancholy tone .
The eyes of any one face were never painted with the same colours  some being white and red , some black and red , and some black and white : their teeth were white and even  they were all dressed much alike  but that some of them wore a sort of boots , having a spur of peaked wood fastened to each heel .


The Commodore having prevailed on some , who were still galloping about , to alight and sit down with the rest , he distributed some white and yellow beads among them , which they very  Figure 1 .
Commodore Byron Conversing with a Patagonian Woman .
 gladly accepted .
He then took a piece of ribband , and giving the end of it into the hands of the first Indian , he continued it to the next , and so on as they sat , to the end of the ribband .
He then cut it with a pair of scissars between every two of them  and tied each man 's share round his head , which they did not attempt to remove .
It was remarked , that though the presents were insufficient to supply them all , no one pressed forward from the station assigned him , nor seemed to envy the superior good fortune of his neighbour .
Among these gigantic people , one woman , who was of the largest size , and most disagreebly painted , had her hair adorned with beads of blue grass , hanging , in two divisions , down before her shoulders  and she had bracelets of pale gold or brass , on her arms  but there was no learning how she obtained this finery .
One of the men shewed Mr. Byron the bowl of a tobacco pipe , made of red earth , and made signs that he wanted some tobacco , none of which they had among them .
On this the Commodore beckoned to the seamen , who still remained drawn up on the beach , three or four of whom instantly running forward , the Indians were alarmed , and jumping up in an instant , were preparing to retire , as it was supposed , to fetch their arms .
Mr. Byron therefore ran and stopped the sailors , directing one of them only to come forward , when he had got all the tobacco  they could muster among them .
This restored peace , and all the Indians resumed their places , except an old man , who sung a long song to Mr. Byron  at nearly the conclusion of which Mr. Cumming , the first Lieutenant , brought the tobacco .
This gentleman , tho ' six feet two inches high , was himself astonished at the diminutive figure he cut among the strangers , who were broad and muscular in proportion to their height .
The Commodore having distributed the tobacco , they made signs for him to ride to their huts  but he intimated , that he must return to the ship  on which they sat down again , apparently much concerned .
Their horses , though not large , were active , and much under command : their saddles were like an English pad , and the bridle was formed of a thong of leather , with the bit made of wood  they had no stirrups , and both men and women rode astride .
When the Commodore left them they kept their seats , not once offering to follow him .


On the 21st of December they began sailing up the Streight of Magellan , with a view to take in a proper stock of wood and water , as the finding Falkland 's Islands was yet a matter of uncertainty .
They remarked a single Indian on this shore , who waved his hand to them till he lost sight of the ship  they likewise saw several guanicoes on the hills .
On the evening of the 22d six Indians came on the beach , hallooing ,  and making signs that they wished an acquaintance with the crew  but , as the seamen were fatigued , the Commodore would not send off a boat to them .
On the 25th they saw a point of land near St. George 's Island , to which Mr. Byron gave the name of PORPOIS POINT .


Having anchored at ten at night , the Commodore went the next morning in quest of wood and water , plenty of which they found on the point abovementioned .
A fine level country lies over the point , the soil of which appeared to be very luxuriant , producing innumerable flowers of several kinds , the smell of which was extremely fragrant  there was also a plenty of good grass , among which grew peas that were then in blossom .
They saw hundreds of painted geese , ( so called from their beauty ) which were feeding among this variety of sweets : they likewise found an abundance of plants , and wild celery in great quantities .
Many Indian wigwams were seen , situated in the woods , near streams of water  these had been lately occupied , as the fires appeared but just burnt out .
In a walk of twelve miles they saw no place proper for a boat to land , the sea breaking high on the shore .
Mr. Byron returned in the evening , and found that some of the men had been shooting geese , teal , and snipes , while others had employed themselves , with equal success , in fishing : these employments indeed became necessary , as the men  could have eaten thrice their allowance , owing to the keen air of the country .


On the 26th they steered for Port Famine , and came to an anchor , close to the shore , the next day at noon .
In this place they found drift wood enough to have supplied a thousand vessels .
The Commodore went four miles up Sedger river , but could proceed no farther , the trees which had fallen across the stream impeding the boat 's way  one of the stumps of them having made a hole in her bottom , she was immediately filled with water : but they made shift to get her on shore , and stopped the leak , so as to return in her to the mouth of the river .
The banks of this stream are furnished with the noblest trees , sufficient in number to supply masts for the whole navy of Great Britain .
Some of these were so large , that four men joined hand in hand could not enclose them  and , among the rest , the pepper tree was found .
These woods abound in parrots , and other beautiful birds .
The quantity of fish that was daily taken was equal to the supply of both the crews  and the Commodore shot as many geese and ducks as furnished several tables besides his own .


While the ships lay at anchor here , Mr. Byron and a party went on shore  but being catched in a violent rain , they stopped where some Indians had left a fire , the wood of which was yet warm  and kindling a fire to dry their  cloaths , another fire was instantly made on Terra del Fuego , the opposite shore , which they imagined to be a signal , on a supposition they were Indians .
The hills were craggy , of an amazing height , and wholly covered with snow  but the plains were adorned with flowers , equal in fragrance and beauty to those in the gardens of England .


The Commodore having ordered a tent to be erected on the borders of a wood , and adjoining to a rivulet , three of the sailors were there stationed to wash linen , and they laid in the tent .
One evening , soon after they had retired to rest , they were awakened by the deep and hollow roarings of some wild beasts , which came nearer them every moment .
Terrified with apprehension , they made and kept up a blazing fire , round which the beasts walked at a small distance till the dawn of the morning , when they retired .


Near where the ships rode at anchor was a hill cleared of wood , which they imagined to have been a Spanish settlement , mention of which is made in Captain Wallis 's Voyage , as will be seen in the course of this work .
Both ships having taken in sufficient wood and water by the 4th of January , 1765 , they sailed at four o'clock in the morning , in quest of Falkland 's Islands  but the wind dying away , they were obliged to come to an anchor the day following .


 On Sunday the 6th they again made sail , and the Commodore , who had been twenty-four hours on deck , retired to sleep  but he was soon awakened by the vessel beating on a bank .
Happily , at this instant , it was a perfect calm , so that the rising of the tide soon carried the ship safe off again .
On the 8th the officer of the watch discovered that the head of the mainmast was sprung , which they supposed to have happened in a violent gale some time before  but effectual methods were immediately taken to repair the damage .


On the 12th they saw land , which was taken for De Wert 's Islands , and at the same time other land to the south , which was judged to be what is called New Islands in the charts .
This land consists chiefly of mountainous and barren rocks , on which were great numbers of birds .
Seals abound here , and large whales were seen spouting round the ship .
On the 14th they saw a flat island , covered with tufts of grass as large as bushes  and on the following day the Commodore sent a boat from each ship , to examine an opening which had the appearance of an harbour  which being discovered , they stood in for it in the afternoon , and found it excellent beyond their most sanguine hopes .
Soon after this they entered another harbour , to which Mr. Byron gave the name of Port Egmont , from the title of the nobleman at that time First Lord of the Admiralty .
This harbour    is represented to be the finest in the world , and capacious enough to contain the whole navy of England , in full security : there is plenty of fresh water in every part of it  and geese , ducks , snipes , and other edible birds , abound in such numbers , that the sailors were tired with eating them .
The geese were knocked down with stones , so that it was no unusual thing for a boat to bring off sixty or seventy of those birds , without the necessity of shooting a single one .
Seals and penguins abound here  sea lions of a prodigious size are found on the coast  and there is plenty of muscles , cockles , clams , and limpets .
The woods produce sorrel and wild celery in great abundance .
The Commodore was once unexpectedly attacked by a sea lion , and extricated himself from the impending danger with great difficulty : they had many battles with this animal , the killing of one of which was frequently an hour 's work for six men  one of them almost tore to pieces the Commodore 's mastiff dog , by a single bite .
The Master having been sent to sound the coast , four very fierce animals ran after the boat 's crew till they were up to their bellies in water  so that they were obliged to put from the shore , as they had no fire-arms in the boat .
The next day , on the opposite shore , Mr. Byron and his company saw a sea lion of an enormous size  and the crew , being well armed , instantly engaged him .
While they were thus  employed , one of the other animals posted towards them  but a ball being lodged in his body , he was instantly dispatched .
Five of these beasts were killed this day , in their attempts to seize the men , whom they always pursued the moment they got sight of them .
They were of a mixed shape , between a wolf and a fox  most like the latter , but of the size of the former .
They burrow in the ground like a fox , feed on seals and penguins , and are very numerous on the coast .
The sailors , in order to be rid of such disagreeable companions , set fire to the grass , which burnt so rapidly , that the country was all in a blaze for some days , and these animals were seen running to seek shelter from its fury .


While they lay in this harbour the crew breakfasted on portable soup and wild celery , thickened with oatmeal , which made a very nutritive mess .
The soil of the island was a light clay under a black mould .
The Commodore thinks this the same place which , in Cowley 's Voyage , is called Pepys ' Island  but he took possession of the harbour , and all the adjacent islands , by the name of FALKLAND 'S ISLANDS , for George the Third , King of Great Britain .
It is to the honour of the Surgeon of the Tamar frigate , that during their stay there , he made a fence of turf near the watering place , round a tract of land , which he planted with  vegetables , for the use of those who may hereafter touch at this port .


On Sunday , January the 27th , they left Port Egmont , and the same day saw a remarkable head-land , which was named CAPE TAMAR  soon after which they passed a rock , which Mr. Byron called the EDISTONE , and then sailed between that and a head-land , to which he gave the name of CAPE DOLPHIN .
The distance from Cape Tamar to Cape Dolphin is about eight leagues , and , from its appearance , was called CARLISLE SOUND , though it is since known to be the northern entrance of the streight between the two principal islands .
The land seen during the course of this day was all downs , having neither trees nor bushes , but large tufts of grass in various places .


Having anchored during the night , they sailed again the next day , when the Commodore gave the name of BERKLEY 'S SOUND to a deep sound between the islands .
About four miles to the southward of the south point of this sound the sea breaks very high , on some rocks that appear above water .
The coast now wore a dangerous aspect , rocks and breakers being at a considerable distance from the shore , and in all directions  and the country appeared barren and desolate .
The sea now rising high , the Commodore sailed to the northward , to prevent being driven on a lee-shore .
He imagines the whole  circumference of Falkland 's Islands to be little less than 700 miles .


At eight in the evening they stood to the westward , and held their course till the 6th of February , when they saw , and stood in for , Port Desire , at the mouth of which they came to an anchor , and had the pleasure of seeing the Florida , a store-ship , which they had expected from England .
On Thursday the Master of the storeship went on board the Dolphin , and informed the Commodore of the extreme bad condition of his ship  on which it was resolved to attempt the unloading her in the harbour , though a place very ill calculated for the purpose .
They therefore entered the harbour  but the night proving very tempestuous , the Tamar and the Florida both made signals of distress , having been driven from their moorings up the harbour .
On this and the following night they were both saved from driving on shore  and as the store-ship was in constant danger of being lost , Mr. Byron sent hands on board to assist in repairing her , and resolved to take her with him into the Streight of Magellan before he unloaded her .
In this harbour the rudder of the Dolphin was likewise repaired , there being no timber proper for making her a new one .


On the 13th the Florida put to sea , with orders to steer directly for Port Famine  and on the next day she was followed by the Dolphin and Tamar .
The three following days they saw  Figure 2 .
A CHART of the STRAITS of MAGELLAN  a strange vessel following them , which shaped her course , and sailed faster or slower , exactly as they did , a circumstance that caused much speculation .
The Commodore being obliged to wait for the Florida , which was far a-stern , imagined the stranger would speak with him , and therefore made the necessary dispositions to give her a proper reception .
When he came to an anchor the stranger did the same , four miles to windward of him  but in the morning she was seen three leagues to the leeward .
She now got under way , and approached the Dolphin  on which the Commodore got eight guns , which were all that could be come at , to one side of the ship , as he lay at anchor .
Neither party hoisted any colours  but about this time the store-ship running a-ground , the strange vessel hoisted French colours , and sent two boats , with an anchor , to assist her .
The Commodore now sent a boat from each of his ships to the assistance of the Florida , with positive orders not to let the French boats board her  but to acknowledge , in a proper manner , the offer of assistance .
These orders were obeyed , and the storeship was got off .
They weighed anchor at six in the evening , and anchored again at eleven  at which time the French vessel did the same , but in a situation that shewed her ignorance of the channel they were in .


 On the 19th they again sailed  and as the French vessel steered after them , Mr. Byron thought they came from Falkland 's Islands , where there was then a French settlement , to take in wood , or that they were on a survey of the Streight of Magellan , in which they were now sailing .
On the 20th they reached Port Famine , when the Dolphin and Tamar having taken as much provision out of the store-ship as they could find room for , the Master received orders to sail for England as soon as possible  it being determined to navigate the other ships through the Streight .


On the 25th they passed the French ship , which was in a small cove , and near her a large quantity of wood , which the Commodore had no doubt was intended for their new settlement .
On Mr. Byron 's return to England this appeared to be the fact  and that the ship was commanded by Mons .
Bougainville , and called the Eagle .


The rest of the account of their passage thro ' the Streight of Magellan , consists chiefly of the names of places , and descriptions of soundings , bearings and distances , which could not fail of proving unintelligible , if not disgusting , to the generality of readers .
Whatever is really worth the notice of those who read either for instruction or entertainment , shall be faithfully recited in the following pages .


The mountains on both sides of the Streight are covered with snow from the top to the bottom   are steep and craggy , and of a most desolate appearance .
On the 1st of March two or three canoes of Indians followed the ship , one of which went on board .
This canoe was of bark , and wretchedly made : it contained some men , women , and a boy , who had bows and arrows , which they exchanged for beads and other trinkets : the cord of the bow was made of the gut of some beast dried , and the arrows were formed of a reed , pointed with a green stone .
These people had no other garment than a seal-skin thrown over their shoulders , and they made , on the whole , a most wretched appearance .
When the ship came to an anchor , several of the Indians went on board , and gladly accepted some ribbands , beads , and other trifling matters , with which the Commodore presented them .
These people subsist chiefly on muscles and berries , some of the latter of which they gave Mr. Byron , when he returned their visit on shore .


Having narrowly escaped the dreadful effects of a storm on the 3d of March , boats were repeatedly sent out till the 6th , in search of a proper place to anchor in  and at length the Dolphin was moored in a little bay opposite Cape Quod  and the Tamar , which could not work up so far , about six miles to the eastward of it .
This part of the Streight being only four miles over , its appearance is dreary and desolate beyond imagination , owing to the prodigious mountains on each side of it , which rise above  the clouds , and are covered with perpetual snow .
On the 8th they met with a large number of shell-fish  and on this day the Commodore went up a deep lagoon under a rock , at the head of which was a fine fall of water , and on the east side of it several small coves , calculated for the secure reception of ships of the greatest burden .


On the 12th an officer was sent in a boat , in search of an harbour  and in two days he returned with an account , that there were five bays between the ship and Cape Upright , in any one of which they might anchor securely .
While this officer was absent , he met with some Indians , who made him a present of a dog , and one of the women having a sucking child , offered to give it him !
At this time winter commenced with all its severity , and the hills were soon covered with snow .
The cold became so intense that the seamen , whose clothes were continually wet , suffered severely : to fortify them against this inclemency of weather , the Commodore gave a warm jacket of woollen stuff , called fearnought , to the crews of both ships , officers included .


On the 16th perceiving they lost ground on every tack , they came to an anchor  but finding the ground to be rocky , they weighed again , and every man on board was on deck the rest of the day and the whole night , during which time the rain poured down on them in unremitting torrents .
Notwithstanding this incessant labour ,  Figure 3 .
The Wolf Fox of Faulklands Islands .
 they found , in the morning , that they had been only losing way , owing to the rapidity of the current .
They were now glad to anchor in the very bay they had left two days before .
As it continued to rain and blow violently for two days longer , the Commodore sent a boat to sound the bay on the north shore  but no anchorage could be found .
On the 20th the vessel was driven from her moorings , but by heaving up the bower-anchor , and carrying out another , they soon restored her to her situation .
After labouring all day on the 21st , they had gained only two miles on the current , when they came to an anchor  but the sea running high , they sailed the day following  and the current now running to the westward , they made great way , and , in the evening , anchored in a commodious bay , where the Tamar had arrived before them .
It is remarkable that , notwithstanding the late severity of the weather added to their incessant labour , the crew retained both health and spirits .


On the 23d they again set sail , and in a few hours had sight of the South Sea , which rolled a prodigious swell on them .
On the 25th two boats which had been sent in search of anchoring-places , returned with an account , that they had found two , but neither of them very eligible  they , however , made sail the next morning , and at four in the afternoon found themselves within a mile of the south shore , which  the thickness of the weather prevented their seeing sooner  but as there was no place to anchor in , they stood for the opposite shore .
Between six and seven the Tamar was ordered under the stern of the Dolphin , and then directed to keep a-head of her during the night to show lights , and as often as she varied her tack to fire a gun .
At seven in the evening the weather cleared for a minute , so that they had sight of the north-shore , bearing west by north , on which they instantly tacked-about .
The wind now blew a perfect hurricane  the rain descended in torrents  some of the sails were torn to rags  and during this tempestuous night , in which the sea was continually breaking over them , the ships parted company , and were encompassed with rocks and breakers : however , they happily weathered the storm , and at seven in the morning both ships came to an anchor .
They had now been twice within four leagues of Tuesday 's Bay , at the western mouth of the streight , and twice driven ten or twelve leagues back again by storms  so dangerous is the navigation of this streight at an improper season of the year .


On the 28th the Tamar narrowly escaped being dashed to pieces against the rocks , by the parting of the cable to her best bower-anchor .
The Dolphin weighed anchor the next morning , and got under sail , which she had no sooner done , than signals of distress were made on  board the Tamar , the anchor of which could not be purchased .
The Dolphin , therefore , stood again into the bay , and sent her the proper assistance , after which they both anchored for the night  a night the most dreadful they had yet known .
The winds were so violent as perfectly to tear up the sea , and carry it higher than the heads of the masts : a dreadful sea rolled over them , and broke against the rocks with a noise as loud as thunder .
Happily , they did not part their cables , or they must have been dashed in pieces against these rocks .


On the following day ( April 1st ) it was almost a perfect calm  but in the evening it rained much , and the wind blew violently : they therefore remained in their station till the 4th , when the cutter , which had been sent in search of a proper anchoring-place , returned with an account , of having found such place to the west of the north-shore .


The officer who commanded the cutter had met with a party of Indians , whose canoe was of a construction not observed before , being composed of planks sewed together .
These Indians had no covering but a piece of seal-skin thrown over their shoulders .
Their food , which was of the most indelicate kind , was eaten raw : one of them tore a piece of stinking whale 's blubber with his teeth , and then gave it his companions , who followed his example .
One  of these Indians observing a sailor asleep , cut off a part of his jacket with a sharp flint .


The ships soon came to an anchor in the bay which had been discovered , proposing to take in wood and water .
While they remained here , several of the natives made a fire opposite the ship  on which signals were made for them to come on board  but as they would not , the Commodore went on shore , and gave them some trifles , which pleased them highly  he likewise divided some biscuit among them , and was surprized to remark , that if a bit of it fell to the ground , not one of them would stoop to take it up without his permission : some of the sailors being at this time cutting grass for a few sheep which the Commodore had on board , the Indians instantly ran to their assistance , and tearing up the grass in large quantities , soon filled the boat .
On Mr. Byron 's return , they followed in their canoe till they came near the ship , at which they gazed with the most profound astonishment .
Four of them were at length prevailed on to go on board  and the Commodore , with a view to their diversion , directed one of the midshipmen to play on the violin , while some of the seamen danced  the poor Indians were extravagantly delighted  and one of them , to testify his gratitude , took his canoe , and fetching some red paint , rubbed it all over the face of the musician  nor could the Commodore , but with the utmost difficulty ,  escape the like compliment .
When they had been diverted for some hours , it was hinted to them , that they should go on shore  which they at length did , tho ' with evident reluctance .


They sailed from this bay on the 7th , and on the 8th again encountered very bad weather , as it rained and snowed , while the wind blew a hurricane .
On the 9th they passed some dangerous rocks , which in Narborough 's Voyage are called the Judges , and on which the surf beats with prodigious violence .
This day , contrary to expectation , a steady gale at south-west carried them at the rate of nine miles an hour , so that by eight in the evening they were 20 leagues from the coast on which they had encountered so many perils .


The Commodore recommends it to future navigators , to be at the eastern entrance of the Streight of Magellan in December  in which case he thinks even a fleet of ships might navigate it safely in about three weeks .
He observes , that the facility with which wood and water are to be obtained  the vast plenty of vegetables on the coast , and the abundance of fish which may be almost every where procured , are advantages highly in favour of this passage .
It is remarkable , that in seven weeks and two days , the time they were in passing it , not a single man was sick of the scurvy , or any other disorder .


 On the 26th they sailed westward , bearing away for the Island of Masafuero , which they were within seven leagues of the same evening .
The next day they bore away for the north of the Island , and then lay by for the boats , which had been sent to found the eastern side , but could not land for the violence of the surf .
The boats returning , brought a number of fine fish , which had been catched with the hook and line : and the officer reporting , that he had found a bank where they might anchor , and opposite to which was plenty of fresh water  they made sail for this bank , on which they anchored at 7 o'clock on Sunday morning .
The boats were now sent out for wood and water , their crews having put on cork-jackets , to assist them in swimming , and prevent their being bruised against the rocks .
In these seas were a great number of very large sharks , which were frequently very near the swimmers  but they providential escaped them .
One of these voracious fish seized a large seal close to one of the watering-boats , and devoured it in an instant  and the Commodore saw another do the same , close to the stern of the ship .
The island abounds in goats , many of which were killed and sent on board , and they were deemed equal in flavour to the finest venison .
One of the goats had his right ear slit , so as to make it evident that some person had caught him , given him that mark of distinction , and let him go  again .
Various sorts of excellent fish were now so plenty , that they could catch sufficient to supply the whole crew two days , in a few hours , with hook and line only .


The gunner and one of the seamen , who were , with others , on shore for water , were left behind all night , being afraid to venture in the boat , as the sea ran high .
The Commodore being informed of this circumstance , sent them word , that as blowing weather might be expected , the ship might be driven from her moorings in the night , in which case they would infallibly be left behind .
This message being delivered , the gunner swam to the boat  but the sailor saying , he had rather die a natural death than be drowned , refused to make the attempt  and taking a melancholy farewell of his companions , resolved to abide his fate  when , just as the boat was going to put off , a midshipman took the end of a rope in his hand , and swam on shore , where he remonstrated with the poor tar on the foolish resolution he had taken , till having an opportunity of throwing the rope , in which was a running knot , round his body , he called to the boat 's crew , who instantly dragged their companion on board  but he had swallowed so much water that he appeared to be dead .
They recovered him , however , by holding up his heels , and on the day following he was perfectly well .


 The Commodore now made a promotion among the officers , he appointed captain Mouat , captain of the Dolphin under him , making Mr. Cumming , the first lieutenant of the Dolphin , captain of the Tamar , and advancing some other inferior officers .


They sailed on the 30th of April , steering in various directions till the 10th of May , on which , and the day following , they saw several dolphins and bonettas round the ship , and observed a few birds which had a short beak  all their bodies being white , except the back and the upper part of the wings .
They saw several grampuses the next day , and more of the birds just mentioned  from whence they concluded , that they approached some land .
Two remarkable birds , as large as geese , with white bodies and black legs , and which flew very high , were observed on the 16th , from whence it was conjectured , that they had passed some main-land , or islands .
On the 22d they saw several tropic birds , and caught two bonettas  and on the 26th two large birds , the beak and neck of which were white , and all the rest black , flew about the ship .
On the 28th two other birds , one black and white , and the other brown and white , would have settled on the yards , but were intimidated by the working of the ship .
For several days after they saw great numbers of birds , and on the 7th of June they discovered land , being then in fourteen degrees  five minutes south latitude , and 144 degrees 58 minutes west longitude .


The Commodore now steered for a small island , the appearance of which was pleasing beyond expression , being surrounded by a beach of fine white sand , and covered with lofty trees , which extending their shade to a considerable distance , and having no underwood , formed the most elegant groves that the imagination can paint an idea of .
Several of the natives soon appeared , having long spears in their hands , who made large fires , which were answered by corresponding fires on an island to the windward .
A boat was sent to look out for an anchoring-place , but none was to be found .
At this time many of the best hands were confined to their hammocks with the scurvy  while those who were able to keep the deck , looked and languished for those re-invigorating delicacies which were unhappily beyond their reach .
The shells of turtle were strewed along the shore , and they beheld numbers of cocoa-nuts , to the milk of which fruit the scurvy seldom fails to yield .
The inhabitants of this island kept a-breast of the ship , dancing and shouting : they sometimes shook their spears , and then falling backwards , lay motionless , as if dead , which was understood to be a threat of destruction to such as should presume to land .
They likewise fixed two spears in the sand , on the top of which were fastened some things which  waved in the air : before these they kneeled , and appeared as if invoking the assistance of the Deity against the supposed invaders .
The Commodore was tempted , from its very appearance , to sail round the island  while he was doing which , he again sent out boats to sound  on which the natives made a most hideous out-cry  took up and balanced large stones in their hands , and pointed to their spears .
The sailors , on the contrary , made every possible sign of friendship , throwing bread and other things on shore  which they would not touch , but retired to the woods , dragging their canoes after them .
This being done , they ran into the water , watching as for an opportunity to drag the boat on shore .
The seamen , irritated at this behaviour , would have fired on the Indians , but were restrained by command of the officer on board .


The crew of the boats having again reported , that no anchorage could be found , the Commodore proceeded to the other island , and on the next morning brought to , at three quarters of a mile from the shore .
Several other islands were now seen , covered with the cocoa-nut-tree .
The natives again ran to the beach , armed with clubs and spears , using threatening gestures .
The Commodore fired a cannon-shot over their heads , on which they retreated to the woods .
The boats having been again sent out , returned with an account , that no  landing-place could be found  on which Mr. Byron named this paradise in appearance , the ISLANDS OF DISAPPOINTMENT .
The natives are stout , and well made , very quick runners , and their complexion is that of the deep copper .


Having sailed on the 8th of June , they discovered an island on the day following , which laid low , and was covered with various kinds of trees , among which was the cocoa-nut  the island was surrounded with a rock of red coral .
The inhabitants on the coast having made large fires , as supposed to alarm the more inland natives , they ran along the shore in multitudes , armed like those of the Islands of Disappointment .
The vessels now brought to , at a small inlet , opening into a lake of salt water , which appeared more than two leagues wide .
At this place was a little town , under the shade of a grove of cocoa-nut-trees .
The ships advancing to the mouth of the inlet , some hundreds of the natives , headed by a kind of officer , who carried a pole , on which was fastened a piece of mat , ranged themselves up to the waists in water , making a hideous noise , till they were joined by a number of large canoes which came down the lake .
At this time two boats were out in search of soundings , and the crews of them making every possible sign of friendship , some of the canoes drew towards them , not , indeed , as we hoped , with a peaceable intention , but with a view to haul the boats on  shore : several of the natives , leaping from the rocks , swam to the boats  and one of them sprang into the Tamar 's boat , snatched up a seaman 's jacket , and instantly dived from the boat to the shore : another of them laid violent hands on a hat , but lost his prize through his ignorance , as he pulled it downwards , instead of lifting it from the head .


They now sailed westward , and soon discovered another island , distant four leagues .
The natives pursued them in two large double canoes , in each of which were about thirty armed men .
At this time the boats were at a considerable way to leeward of the ships , and were chaced by the canoes  on which the Commodore making a signal , the boats turned towards the Indians , who instantly pulled down their sails , and rowed away with great rapidity : they drove through the violent surf on the shore , and were followed by the boats  when , apprehending the invasion of their country , they armed themselves with stones and clubs  on which the boat 's crew fired , and killed two or three of them , one of whom died as he was throwing a stone at his enemy , after three balls had gone thro ' his body * .
This poor fellow dropping close to the boats , his body was brought to the ship  but the Indians carried off the rest of their  companions .
The boats carried the two canoes with them , as the trophies of their scandalous victory .
These vessels consisted of planks sewed together , with a strip of tortoiseshell fixed over each seam : they had sharp bottoms , and were very narrow  and two of them were fastened a-longside each other by two timbers , which left a space of full six feet between the canoes : a sail , made of neat matting , passed from one vessel to the other , being fixed to a mast which was hoisted in each of them : when they sail , several men sit on the timbers which lay from boat to boat : their cordage appeared to be formed of the outer covering of the cocoa-nut , and was exquisitely well made .


As no refreshments could be obtained , owing to the violence of the surf , the Commodore returned to his former station at the inlet , and again sent the boats in search of an anchoring-place .
A number of the Indians were on the spot were he had left them , and were loading some large canoes , most probably to attack the boats  on which a shot was fired over their heads , and they instantly ran away and secreted themselves .
The boats returned in the evening , with a few cocoa-nuts  and in the morning were sent out again , with all the invalids who were able to go in them .
The Commodore went on shore this day , and saw many Indian huts , which were covered with the branches of the cocoa-nut-tree : they were mean buildings , but finely situated  among groves of lofty trees .
The men went naked  but some women were seen , who wore a kind of cloth from the waist to the knee .
The shore abounded with coral , and the shells of large pearl oysters  and 't is probable a valuable pearl-fishery might be established here .
There were many dogs in the huts , who kept barking constantly till our adventurers went on board .


The next day the seamen found , in one of the huts , the carved head of a rudder , which had evidently belonged to a Dutch long-boat : they likewise found a piece of brass , another of iron , and some iron tools  but by whom these things were left is wholly unknown .


The burial-places of the natives were under high trees , near their houses  and their tombs consisted of fl [ ... ] st [ ... ] laid on perpendicular side stones , like those in the church-yards of England .
On the branches which shaded these repositories hung baskets of reeds , containing the heads and bones of turtle and other fish , and near the graves were several boxes filled with human bones .


The flies on this island were extremely troublesome , but no venomous creature was seen .
Parrots and other birds were very plentiful , and they saw some beautiful doves , so tame as to follow them into the huts of the Indians .
The water of the island is good , and the surface of the ground is almost covered with scurvy-grass .
 This part of the island is situated in 14 degrees 29 minutes south , and 148 degrees 50 minutes west .


On Wednesday , June the 12th , they sailed to another island , and as they coasted along it , the natives , armed as those of the other islands , kept even with the ship for some leagues .
They frequently plunged into the sea , or fell on the sand , that the surf might break over them , to cool and refresh themselves .
The boats being near the shore , the crew made signs that they were in want of water  on which the natives pointed farther along the shore , where , when the boats arrived , they saw a number of houses , and whither they were followed by the Indians , many more of whom joined them at this place .
The boats having got close in shore , and the ships laying at a small distance , a venerable old man , with a white beard , advanced from the houses to the beach , attended by a young fellow .
Having made a signal for the other Indians to retire , he came forward to the edge of the water , pressing his beard to his breast with one hand , and holding a branch of a tree in the other .
He now made a kind of musical oration , during which the people in the boat threw him some trifling presents , which he would neither take up , nor permit his attendant to touch , till he had finished his harangue , when he walked into the water , and throwing the branch to the boat 's crew , he retired , and picked  up their presents .
Most of the natives having complied with a sign made for them to lay down their arms , one of the Midshipmen swam ashore  on which they flocked round him , admiring his cloaths  as his waistcoat pleased them most he gave it to them , which he had no sooner done , than one of them untied his cravat and ran away with it .
He now thought it time to retreat to the boat , whither several of the natives swam after him  some bringing each a cocoa-nut , and others fresh water in the nut-shell .
The boat 's crew had taken with them some shells of the pearl oyster , in order to learn of the natives how to procure some pearls  but they could not possibly make them comprehend their meaning .
This island is situated in 14 degrees 41 minutes south latitude , and 149 degrees 15 minutes west longitude  and both the islands the Commodore called KING GEORGE 'S ISLANDS , in respect to his Sovereign .
In a lake belonging to the last island , two or three very large vessels were seen , one of which had two masts , with proper cordage .


The boats having returned on board , they sailed westward the same day  and the next afternoon descried another island , towards which they immediately sailed , and found that it was well inhabited , and had a fine appearance of verdure  but that a violent surf broke all along the coast .
It lies in 15 degrees south , and 151  degrees 53 minutes west , and received the name of the PRINCE OF WALES 'S ISLAND .


They now sailed northward .
From the vast flocks of birds they had repeatedly seen , which always winged their way to the south , on the approach of evening  and from the islands being so well peopled , the Commodore concluded that there was a chain of islands leading to a continent , the discovery of which he would certainly have attempted , but the crews of both ships were so unhealthy , as to render it impossible for us to succeed .


On Monday , June the 17th , they concluded that land was near , from the multitudes of birds which flocked about the ship  but they saw no land till the 21st , when it was discovered at eight leagues distance , having the appearance of three islands , with rocks between them .
These islands abounded with inhabitants , whose dwellings lined the coast  and the beauty and fertility of the soil , seemed to excel that of any place they had seen : but the rocks and breakers with which it was surrounded , were an insuperable bar to any attempt at landing .
On the night of the 21st all hands were on deck , as it rained hard , and the wind blew violently .
Soon after nine o'clock the Tamar fired a gun , and the crew of the Dolphin imagined they saw breakers to leeward  but it proved to be only the undulating reflection of the setting moon on the waters .


 On the 24th they discovered another island , which was named the DUKE OF YORK 'S ISLAND .
A terrible sea breaks round the coast , but the place itself had a pleasing appearance .
The boats landed with some difficulty , and brought off a large quantity of cocoa-nuts , which were a great relief to the sick .
Thousands of sea-fowls were found sitting on their nests in high trees , and were so tame as to be easily knocked down , and there were great numbers of land-crabs on the ground .
This island has a large lake in the midst of it , but has no inhabitants .


On the 29th they sailed northward , with a view to cross the equinoxial line , and then sail for the Ladrone Islands .
On the 2d of July they discovered a low flat island , abounding with the cocoa-nut and other trees , and affording a most agreeable prospect .
A great number of the natives were seen on the beach , many of whom , in above sixty canoes or proas , sailed , and formed a circle round the ships  which having surveyed for a considerable time , one of the Indians jumped out of his boat , swam to the ship , ran up its side in a moment , sat down on the deck , and began laughing most violently : he then ran about the ship , pilfering whatever he could lay hands on , which was taken from him as fast as stolen .
This man having as many antic tricks as a monkey , was dressed in a jacket and trowsers , and afforded exquisite diversion .
He devoured some biscuit with great eagerness ,  and having played the buffoon some time , made prize of his new dress , by jumping over the side of the ship , and swimming to his companions .
Several others now swam to the ship , and running up the side to the gun-room ports , committed some petty theft , swimming off with their booty with surprising expedition .
These Indians are of a bright copper , with regular and chearful features , and are tall and well-made .
Their hair , which is long and black , is either tied in three knots , or in a large bunch behind .
Their ears were bored , and they certainly had worn heavy ornaments in them , as some of them were drawn down almost to their shoulders : their ornaments were shells strung together , and worn round the waist , wrist , and neck  but they were otherwise naked .
One of them , who seemed to be of some rank , wore a string of human teeth round his waist .
Some of them carried a long spear , the sides of which , for the length of three feet , were stuck with the teeth of the shark , which are as keen as a razor .
Some cocoa-nuts being shewn them , and signs made that more were wanted , they endeavoured to steal those , instead of directing where more might be found .


The officers named this place BYRON 'S ISLAND , in honour of the Commodore .
It lies in 1 degree 18 minutes south latitude , and 173 degrees 46 minutes east longitude .
They sailed from hence on the 3d of July , on the 21st of which month the men again grew ill of the scurvy ,  having eaten up all the cocoa-nuts , which are , perhaps , the best cure for this disorder in the world Several of the people were also troubled with fluxes , owing to the extreme heat of the weather .
On the 22d they sailed for the island of Tinian , being nearly in the latitude of that place  and six days afterwards they had sight of the islands Saypan , Tinian , and Aiguigan , which lie between two and three leagues from each other .
At noon , on the 31st , they anchored at the south-west end of Tinian , in the situation where the Centurion had anchored with Commodore Anson .
The water is so wonderfully clear at this place , that , though 144 feet deep , they could see the ground .


The Commodore went on shore , where he saw many huts , which had been left the preceding year by the Spaniards and Indians .
Having chosen a spot on which to erect tents for the sick , Mr. Byron and his company , with prodigious difficulty , worked their way through the woods , in search of those elegant meadows and lawns , of which so enchanting a picture is given in Anson 's Voyage : but , to their unspeakable mortification , they found the lawns covered with reeds , in which their legs were entangled , and cut as with whipcord  and these reeds were , in some places , higher than their heads , and in none less than half that height .
From head to foot they were covered with flies , which got down their throats as often as they  opened their mouths .
In this excursion they killed a bull , and then retiring to the tents , which had been erected in their absence , they sent a party to fetch home their prize .


The invalids having been brought on shore the preceding day , they , on the 1st of August , began clearing the well , which Mr. Byron supposes to be the same that the Centurion watered at  but he says the water was brackish , and full of worms .
While they lay here the wind once drove in so violently from the west , that the ships were obliged to put to sea for a week , to avoid being dashed against the rocks .
The armourer 's forge was brought on shore , to repair the iron-work of the ships  and the Commodore had a tent erected  as he was very ill of the scurvy .
The crew recovered apace from the scurvy  but many of them were seized with fevers , of whom two died , being the first they had lost since they left England .
The rains were violent , and almost perpetual  and the heat so intense , that the thermometer on board the ship generally stood at 86 , only 9 degrees less than the heat of the blood at the human heart .
Innumerable insects tormented them  and they were perpetually infested by musquitos in the night , and flies by day .
The island swarms also with black ants , centipieds , and scorpions .


Parties were sent out to kill cattle , which , after being absent three days and nights , and killing a bullock , had seven or eight miles to drag  it through the woods and lawns , and when i [ ... ] arrived , it was commonly fly-blown , and stunk intolerably : add to this , that the extreme toil of this duty brought on fevers , which confined the men to their tents .
They killed poultry with ease  but the heat was so excessive , that it would turn green , and swarm with maggots , in less than an hour after it was killed .
They killed wild hogs that weighed 200 pounds each , which afforded them their chief supply of fresh meat .
A negro belonging to the Tamar contrived a method to ensnare these animals , so that they sent many on board alive , and were thus always certain of having fresh meat both in the ship and on shore .


A spot having been found where cattle were plentiful , a party was sent to kill them , having a tent erected for their use , and boats were sent daily to bring away what they killed : three of the crew of the Tamar were lost in this service , by the violent breaking of the sea upon the rocks .
Bread was now baked every day for the use of the sick , and , upon the whole , they were well supplied with provisions .


The island of Saypan is not only larger , but pleasanter that Tinian .
It is , in a great degree , covered with trees , and abounds with hogs and guanicoes .
It is conjectured that the Spaniards , at stated periods , carry on a pearly-fishery at this island , as there were evident signs of people  having been lately there , and large heaps of the oyster-shells were seen .


The Commodore remained at Tinian till the 30th of September , by which time the sick being tolerably well recovered , he weighed anchor , and stood to the northward .
This island produces plenty of cotton and indigo , with cocoa-nuts , bread-fruit , guavas , paupaus , sour oranges , and limes .


On the 18th of October several land-birds , apparently much fatigued , flew near the ship  one of which , of the size of a goose , rested on the booms : its legs and beak were black , but every other part white  and the beak was of a most monstrous length and thickness .
On the 30th they saw a number of trees and bamboos floating near the vessel , which was then in 23 fathom water .
On the 5th of November they came to an anchor off the Island of Timoan , on which Mr. Byron landed the day following .
The inhabitants , who are Malays , no sooner saw the boat making for the shore , than many of them came to the beach , each having a dagger by his side , a spear in one hand , and a long knife in the other .
The boat 's crew , however , made no hesitation to land , and bartered a few handkerchiefs for a goat , a kid , and a dozen of fowls .


The Malays are of a copper complexion , well made , but of small stature .
They wore turbans on their heads , and pieces of cloth , fastened  with a silver clasp , round the waist  but one old man among them was habited nearly in the Persian fashion .
Their houses , which are raised on posts eight feet from the ground , are composed of the bamboo , slit , and are very neatly constructed .
The island produces the cocoa-nut and cabbage-trees in great abundance , and there are some rice grounds on it .
While the ships lay at anchor , some of the inhabitants brought a living animal on board , which had legs like that of a deer , with a body like a hare , which proved to be very fine eating .
The crews catched large quantities of fish in this harbour , from whence they sailed on the 7th of the month .


Nothing worth notice happened till the 14th , when a sloop being seen at anchor in the harbour of an Island named Pulo Toupoa , Mr. Byron , having anchored in the same harbour , and observed that the vessel hoisted Dutch Colours , sent an officer on board her , who was received with great politeness , tea being immediately made for him and his attendants  but he could not make himself understood , the crew consisting entirely of Malays .
This vessel , which was made of slit bamboo , had a piece of timber on each quarter , which served to steer her instead of a rudder .


The Commodore sailed the following day , and held his course till the 19th , when he spoke with an English Snow , bound from Bencoolen  to Malacca and Bengal , in the East India Company 's service .
At this time their biscuit was filled with worms and rotten , and their beef and pork was stinking .
The master of the Snow being apprized of this circumstance , sent Mr. Byron two gallons of arrack , a turtle , twelve fowls , and a sheep  which is supposed to have been the half of his stock , and for which he refused to accept the slightest return .
They dropped their anchors this day in the road of Sumatra  and on the 27th , came to an anchor in that of Batavia .


Having anchored nearer the town on the following day , they fired eleven guns , which were returned  and an English ship from Bombay fired 13 guns in honour of the Commodore .


The Dutch Commodore sent his boat on board the Dolphin , under the command of his cock-swain , who made but a shabby appearance .
He put several questions to Mr. Byron respecting his voyage and destination , and took a book from his pocket to write down his answers , which Mr. Byron considering as an indignity , desired him instantly to leave the ship  which he did not think proper to hesitate at doing .


Mr. Byron visited the Dutch Commodore at his country house , was received with great politeness , and told , that he might take a house in any part of the city , or be lodged at the hotel .
Any inhabitant of Batavia permitting a stranger to sleep , though but for a single night ,  in his house , incurs a penalty of 500 dollars  the hotel being the only I censed lodging house , the Governor appoints the keeper of it , who at this time was a Frenchman .
This hotel is the most superb building in the city , having more the air of a palace than an inn .
All the streets of Batavia are well disposed , and having canals running through them , resemble the cities of Holland .
The inhabitants are a motley herd of Dutch , Portuguese , Chinese , Persians , Moors , Malays , Javanese , c. and their numbers are amazingly great .
The Chinese live in a kind of separate town without the city walls , and deal very largely , having annually ten or twelve vessels laden from China .
The roads , for several miles round the city , are very wide , and have a canal , shaded with trees , running by them , wh [ ... ] ch is broad enough for the navigation of large vessels .
Adjoining to this canal are the country-houses and gardens of the citizens .


The ships remained in this harbour till the 10th of December , when they sailed , being saluted with eleven guns by the fort , and thirteen by the Dutch Commodore .
During their run from [ ... ] ence to Prince 's Island , in the Streight of Surda , they were so abundantly supplied with turtle , by boats from the Java shore , that the common sa [ ... ] lors subsisted wholly on that fish .
They [ ... ] at Prince 's Island till the 19th , when they sailed for the Cape of Good Hope .


 On the 10th of February they saw a great smoke arising from a sandy beach , which they supposed to have been made by the Hottentots .
On the 13th they came to an anchor , and the next morning the Governor sent his coach and six for the Commodore , and received him with great politeness , offering him the accommodations of the company 's house in the garden , and the use of his coach .
The Cape is a fine country , situated in a healthy climate , and abounding with various kinds of refreshments .
In a paddock adjoining the Company 's garden , which is extremely elegant , ostriches , zebras , and other curious birds and animals are constantly kept .
The Commodore frequently gave his men permission to go on shore , and they as constantly returned - drunk with the Cape wine .


They sailed on the 7th of March , and on the 25th crossed the equinoctial line .
About this time an accident happening to the rudder of the Tamar , and it being impossible to make a perfect repair of it at sea , the Captain was ordered to bear away for Antigua  in consequence of which , they parted company on the first of April  and the Dolphin , without meeting with any other material occurrence , came to an anchor in the Downs on the 9th of May , 1760 , after having been rather above twenty-two months in the circumnavigation of the globe .


2 .
CAPTAIN WALLIS 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .


 SAMUEL WALLIS , Esq having been appointed to the command of his Majesty 's ship the Dolphin , which was destined for a Voyage round the World , he sailed down the river on the 26th of July , and came to an anchor in Plymouth Sound on the 16th of August  three days after which he received sailing orders , and directions to take under his command the Swallow sloop , and Prince Frederick store ship .
These vessels sailed on the 22d , and on the 7th of September , in the evening , came to an anchor in the road of Madeira .
The next morning Captain Wallis saluted the Governor with 13 guns , and the compliment was returned with an equal number .


They sailed thence on the 12th , after having taken in beef , wine , and onions , as sea-stores .
On the 16th , as they were sailing off the Island of Palma , at the rate of eight miles an hour , the wind suddenly died away , so that the vessels lay quite still .
On the 20th they catched several bonettas , out of a great number which surrounded the ship  and this day they saw some herons flying to the eastward .
The Swallow , which was a bad sailer , parted from the other vessels , in the night between the 21st and 22d , but she joined  company again on the 24th , within six leagues of the Isle of May .
This day the three vessels came to an anchor in Port Praya , in the above-mentioned island  and the next morning they obtained leave from the commanding officer at the fort , to get water and other necessaries .
This being the sickly season there , and the small-pox being very fatal , the Captain detained every man on board who had not had that distemper .


They here catched great quantities of fish , and having procured cattle and water , and found some wild purslain that was very refreshing , they sailed on the 28th  and , in the night , saw the burning mountain on the peak of Fuego .
Captain Wallis now ordered every man to be furnished with hook and line , that he might supply himself with fish  and likewise , to prevent infection , commanded that no man should keep his fish above twenty-four hours .
On the 20th they began to serve the crews with oil , all the butter and cheese being consumed  and orders were issued , that , during the remainder of the voyage , they should be served with vinegar and mustard once a fortnight .
On the 22d they judged that they were within 60 degrees of land , from the sight of a great number of birds .
Two days after this orders were given for serving the men with brandy , the wine being reserved for those that were ill .
On the 27th the Prince Frederick sprung a leak , and her crew were at this time so sickly , through the fatigue of  pumping , and the badness of their provisions , that her commander , Lieut Brine , was apprehensive he could not keep company much longer , except some assistance could be given him .
The Captain sent a carpenter and six sailors on board , but he was unable to supply her with better provisions .
As the carpenter found he could do little toward stopping the leak in the store-ship , the Dolphin and Swallow compleated their provisions from her stores , and put on board her the empty oil jars , staves , and iron hoops .


By the 12th of November they were in 30 degrees of south latitude , when they found the weather so cold as to have recourse to their thick jackets .
On the 19th , at eight o'clock at night , they saw a meteor , which flew horizontally from north-east to south-west , leaving a train of light , which made it as bright as at mid-day on the deck .
From the 20th to the 22d they saw whales , seals  snipes , plover , and other birds , and some butterflies .
On the 8th of December they saw land , and on the 9th remarked , that the sea appeared coloured , by the immense quantities of red shrimps that surrounded the ship .


On the 16th , being very near Cape Virgin Mary , they saw several men riding on the shore , who made signs for them to land .
Having come to an anchor , they observed that the natives remained opposite the ship all night , shouting aloud , and keeping up large fires .
In the morning the Captain went on shore , with a boat 's  crew from each ship , and having made signs for the Indians to sit down , he gave them combs , buttons , knives , scissars , beads , c. and pleased the women greatly by the distribution of some ribbands .
He then intimated that he should be glad to accept some guanicoes and ostriches , in exchange for bill-hooks and hatchets , which he shewed them  but they were either really or designedly ignorant of his meaning .
The tallest among these people was six feet seven inches , several others were from one to two inches shorter  but the general height was from five feet ten to six feet .
They were muscular and well made , but their hands and feet very small , in proportion to the rest of their bodies .
They were dressed in the skin of the guanico , with the hairy side to their bodies  and some of them wore a square piece of cloth , made of the hair of the guanico , and a hole being cut to admit the head through , it reached down to the knees : they wore likewise a kind of buskin from the middle of the leg to the instep , which was also conveyed under the heel , but the rest of the foot was bare : their hair , which was strait and coarse , was tied back with a cotton string  and their complexion was the dark copper .
They rode on horses about fourteen hands high , and had dogs of the Spanish kind  both men and women rode astride , and the men were furnished with wooden spurs : some of the men had their arms painted , the faces of others were variously marked , and others  again had the left eye enclosed by a painted circle .
Their arms were two round stones , enclosed with leather , one of which was fastened at each end of a string eight feet in length : and one stone being held in the hand , the other was swung round the head with great force for some time , and then discharged at any mark they chose to strike .
They likewise catch guanicoes and ostriches by means of this cord , which is thrown so , that the weight twists round and hampers the legs of the intended prey .
Some of them were observed to devour the paunch of an ostrich raw , having only turned the inside outwards , and shook off some of the filth .


These people , who are great talkers , were often heard to say Ca-pi-ta-ne , on which they were successively addressed in Portuguese , Spanish , Dutch , and French  but they had no knowledge of either of those languages .
When they shook hands with any of the crew , they always said chevow  and they were amazingly ready in learning English words , and pronounced the sentence ' `` Englishmen come on shore '' ' with great facility .


As they seemed desirous of going on board , the Captain took eight of them into the boats , on which they instantly began singing for joy  but when they came into the ship , they expressed no kind of surprize at the novelties they beheld , till a looking-glass being observed , they acted many antic gestures before it , occasionally  walking to and from it , talking with earnestness , and laughing immoderately .
They would drink nothing but water , but they eagerly ate every article of the ship 's provisions .
They were highly pleased with some turkies and guinea-hens which were on board , nor did the hogs and sheep escape their attention .
One of them making signs that he should be glad of some cloaths , the Captain gave him a pair of shoes and buckles , and presented the rest with a little bag each , in which he put new six-pences and halfpence , with a ribband passed through a hole in them , to hang round their necks : the remaining contents of the bag were , a looking-glass , a comb , some beads , a knife , a pair of scissars , some twine , and a few slips of cloth : being offered some tobacco , they smoked a few minutes , but did not seem to like it .
The marines being exercised before them , they were terrified at the firing of the muskets , and one of them falling down , shut his eyes , and lay without motion , as if to intimate that he knew the destructive nature of those weapons .


It was with difficulty that they were at length prevailed on to go on shore  and one of them would not leave the ship till he had sung a long kind of prayer , and even petitioned to stay till evening , by pointing to the sun , and then moving his hand round to the western horizon .
As soon as they were in the boat they began to sing , and did not cease till they reached the shore ,  where many of their companions pressed eagerly to be taken into the boat , and were highly affronted at being refused .


This day they turned into the Streight of Magellan with the flood-tide , and saw many people on horseback hunting the guanicoes , which ran up the country with prodigious swiftness .
The natives lighted fires opposite the ships , and in the morning about 400 of them , with their horses feeding near them , were observed in a valley .
This being the spot where Mr. Byron saw the Patagonians , some officers were sent towards the shore , but with orders not to land , as the ships were too far off to assist them in case of necessity .
When they came near the land , many of the natives flocked towards them , among whom were women and children , and some of the very men they had seen the preceding day : these waded towards the boat , frequently calling out , ' `` Englishmen come on shore  '' ' and were with difficulty restrained from getting into the boat , when they found the crews would not land .
Some bread , tobacco , and toys were distributed , but not an article of provisions could be obtained in return .


On the 23d the tide was so violent , that the ships were driven three several ways  but in the evening they were safely anchored .
On Christmas-day they procured a quantity of celery from Elizabeth Island , which being boiled with portable soup and wheat , the crews breakfasted  on it several days .
Many huts were found on this island , and two dogs were seen  but the Indians had quitted it for the present .
Many high mountains were observed , which , though it was then the midst of summer , were , in a great degree , covered with snow .


On the 26th they anchored in Port Famine Bay , and the sick were sent on shore , where a tent was erected for their reception , as was another for the accommodation of the sail-makers , and those who landed to get wood .
On the 28th the empty water-casks were landed  and on this day great quantities of fish were catched , among which were smelts .
When they arrived here , many of the people were very bad with the scurvy  but by the plentiful use of vegetables , and bathing in the sea , they all recovered in a very short time .


All hands were now employed in repairing and storeing the ships  and thousands of young trees were carefully taken up with the mould about them , to be carried to Falkland 's Islands , which produce no timber .


On the 17th of January , 1765 , the Master of the Dolphin , who had been in search of anchoring-places , returned with an account , that he had found such as were proper for the purpose  and this day the Prince Frederick sailed for Falkland 's Islands .


They sailed on the 18th , and came to an anchor the next day , half a mile from the shore ,  opposite a current of fresh water , that falls rapidly from the mountains .
As a more convenient anchoring-place , and at the same time better adapted for procuring wood and water , had been discovered , they sailed again the next day , and , on the 23d , came to an anchor in the bay near Cape Gallant , where they catched wild ducks in such numbers , as to afford them a very seasonable relief .
Near this spot are very high mountains , one of which was climbed by the Master of the Swallow , with the hope of getting a view of the South Sea  but being disappointed in his expectation , he erected a pyramid , and having written the ship 's name and the date of the year , he left the same , with a shilling within the structure .


On the 24th they saw an animal that was as swift as a deer , and had a cloven foot  but in other respects it was like an ass .
Near this spot the country has a most forbidding aspect : - the mountains on both sides the Streight are of a stupendous height  the lower parts of them are covered with trees , above which a space is occupied by withered shrubs  higher up are fragments of broken rock , and heaps of snow  and the tops are totally rude , naked , and desolate .


On the evening of the 28th they saw a great smoke on the southern shore , and another on Prince Rupert 's Island  and the next morning some people being sent on shore for water , they had no sooner landed , than several of the natives  came off in three canoes  and , having advanced towards the sailors , made signs of friendship , which being answered to their wish , they shouted aloud , and the English shouted in return .
When the Indians came up they were eating the flesh of seals raw , and were covered with the skins , which stunk intolerably .
They had bows , arrows , and javelins , the two last of which were pointed with flint .
These people were rather low of stature , the tallest of them not exceeding five feet six inches , and their complexion was the deep copper colour .


Three of these people being taken on board the Dolphin , they ate whatever food was offered them  but , like the Patagonians , would drink only water : - like them too , they were highly diverted with a looking-glass , in which they at first looked with astonishment , till , having become a little more familiar with it , they smiled at its effect  and finding a corresponding smile from the figure in the glass , they burst into most immoderate fits of laughter .


The Captain going on shore with them , presented some trinkets to their wives and children , and received some of their arms , and pieces of mundic , of the kind found in the tin mines of Cornwall .
These Indians went off in canoes , the sails of which were made of the seal-skin .


The ships sailed on the 3d of February , and came to an anchor in York Road on the same day .
The next morning Captain Wallis , with  a party , went on shore near Batchelor 's River , and saw many Indian huts , and several dogs , which ran away the moment they were noticed : they likewise saw ostriches , and collected various kinds of fish and vegetables .
There is a cataract near this river , the noise of which is tremendous , as it falls more than 400 yards , partly over a very steep descent , and partly in a perpendicular line .


They sailed on the 14th , and came to anchor again the same day in York Road , after having lost ground by the contrary winds .
The next morning they were driven with such violence by the current , as to be in momentary expectation of being dashed against the rocks , from which they were frequently not half the length of the ship  but they were providentially preserved , and came to an anchor in BUTLER 'S BAY , which was so called from the name of one of the mates , who discovered it .
They kept this station till the 20th , when they encountered a most violent storm attended with hail and rain , which increased till the evening , the sea breaking over the forecastle upon the quarter-deck  yet , as the cables did not part , they were again wonderfully preserved from destruction .
They remained here eight days , taking in wood and water , and repairing the little damage the ship had sustained in the storm .
They catched fish of various kinds , among which were muscles near six inches in length  and procured plenty  of vegetables .
The mountains in this neighbourhood had the most rugged and desolate appearance  but their height could not be ascertained , as their heads were lost in the clouds  and some of them , on the southern shore , were so exceedingly desolate , as not to produce even a single blade of grass  while the vallies were equally barren , and almost covered with snow .


On the 1st of March they sailed again , and anchored on the same day in a bay which they called LION 'S COVE , from whence they sailed on Monday  and on the five following days encountered such terrible weather , that they had no prospect before them but that of immediate destruction : and the crew on board the Dolphin were so prepossessed that the Swallow could not ride out the storm , that they imagined they saw some of her hands coming over the rocks towards them .


The storm at length subsided  but the weather being intensely cold , each of the men was furnished with a thick jacket , made of the woollen stuff called Fearnought .
During a week which they remained at this place , they were at two-thirds allowance , brandy excepted .


On the 15th both ships were safely anchored in a place called SWALLOW HARBOUR , from whence they sailed the next morning  and on the following day the Swallow , being driven among breakers , made signals of distress  but she was happily relieved by a breeze from the shore .


 This day the waves ran high , and there was so thick a fog , that they narrowly escaped shipwreck among a number of small islands  but the weather clearing up a little in the afternoon , they came safely to an anchor in a bay under Cape Upright .


On the 19th two canoes , having on board several Indians , came a-longside the Dolphin , who had with them a quantity of seal 's flesh , blubber , and penguins , which they ate without any kind of dressing .
A seaman having catched a fish bigger than a herring , gave it to one of them , who killed it by a bite near the gills , and instantly devoured it .
These people would not drink any liquor but water , but they eagerly ate provisions of any kind , boiled , roasted , raw , salt , or fresh .
Though the weather was very cold , they had no covering but a seal-skin , and even that they did not wear when they were rowing .
It was remarked that they had all sore eyes , probably occasioned by the smoke of their fires , and they lived in such a nasty way that they smelt as rank as a fox .
They had a kind of javelin , pointed with bone , which they used in striking fish .
The Captain presented them with a few baubles , with which they departed well satisfied .


Twenty-two of the sailors staying one night on an island , thirty of the natives hurried to their boat , and began to make free with its contents  but the sailors had just time to hinder  their depredations , which enraging them , they ran to their canoes , and armed themselves with poles and javelins  but the sailors giving them some small presents , peace and harmony were soon restored .


The 30th of the month proving a fine day , they employed themselves in drying the sails of the ships , which were damaged by having been long wet .
Several Indians went on board the next day , and proved to be the people which the boat 's crew had seen on shore .


On the 1st of April some of the natives brought several of the birds called Race-horses , which they sold to the sailors .
The next day eight Indians brought six of their children on board , whom the Captain gratified with bracelets and necklaces .
These people were exceedingly tender in the treatment of their children  and a circumstance happened which proves that they are not less delicate in other respects .
- A boat was ordered on shore to get wood and water : at this time some of the Indians were on board , and others in their canoes a-longside the ship : the latter eyed the boat attentively  and , on her putting off , called aloud to their companions , who , without speaking , instantly handed down the children , and jumped into the canoes , which were hurried after the boat , while the Indians cried out in a most distressful tone .
When the ship 's boat was near land , some women were seen among the rocks , to  whom the Indians called out aloud , and they all ran away  but the boat 's crew having remarked their jealous fears , lay on their oars , to convince them that no injury was intended .
The Indians landed , drew their canoes on shore , and hastily followed the objects of their affection .


On the 5th , at the request of the Surgeon , orders were given that no more muscles , of which they had hitherto collected plenty , should be brought on board , as the crew began to be troubled with fluxes .
On the 10th the two ships sailed in company  and on the 11th they lost sight of each other , and did not meet again during the whole voyage .
This day the Dolphin cleared the Streight of Magellan , in which she had laboured with innumerable difficulties , and escaped most imminent dangers , in a passage of almost four months , viz .
from December the 17th , 1766 , to the 11th of April , 1767 .


Captain Wallis now proceeds to a description of the places in which the ships anchored , during their passage through the Streight  but as a minute recital of bearings , distances , and soundings , would be unintelligible to most of our readers , and possibly disgusting to them all , we shall omit these particulars  extracting only such anecdotes as may furnish real improvement or entertainment .


In the year 1581 the Spaniards built a town , which they named Phillipville , and left in it a  colony of four hundred persons .
These were all starved to death except twenty-four , all of whom but one proceeded in search of the river Plata , and most probably perished , as no tidings were ever heard of them : the remaining man , whose name was Hernando , was taken on board by Sir William Cavendish , in the year 1587 , and brought to England  and the place was called Port Famine , from the melancholy fate of these unfortunate men .
Wood and water abounds at this place  geese , ducks , teal , c. are in great abundance , and there is no want of fish  so that the face of things must be greatly changed since the Spaniards died there of hunger .


Cape Holland Bay , where fish are catched in great plenty  and the adjacent country produces plenty of cranberries and wild celery , but there are no birds .
At Cape Gallant Bay there is wood , water , vegetables , and fish  as there is also at Elizabeth 's Bay , and York Road .
Butler 's Bay abounds with rock-fish , muscles , wild-fowls , c. Lion Cove and Goodluck Bay produce scarce any thing but wood and water .
Muscles and rock-fish are found at Swallow Harbour , the mountains round which are desolate beyond description .
Upright Bay produces excellent water , and some wild-fowl and fish .


On Sunday the 12th of April they held a westward course , during which a number of sheerwaters , pintadoes , gannets , and other birds ,  flew about the ship  the upper works of which being open , and the cloaths and bedding constantly wet , the sailors in a few days were attacked with colds and fevers .
The 27th of this month proving a fine day , the sick were brought on deck , and nourished with salop , and portable soup , in which wheat was boiled .
The violent gales soon returned , so that the beds were again wet through , and it was feared that the ship would lose her masts : they therefore began to think of altering their course , in hope of better weather  and the rather , as the number of sick encreased so fast , that there was danger of soon wanting hands to navigate the vessel .


Nothing material happened from this time till the 14th of May , when something appeared to the eastward , which looked like high land , towards which a flock of brown birds were observed to fly : they therefore steered all night for this supposed land  but at day-break could see no signs of it .
As the weather now mended , the people recovered very fast  and the carpenters were busied in caulking the upper-works of the ship , and repairing the boats .
On the 21st they saw a number of flying-fish , and on the day following tropic birds , bonettas , and dolphins .
About this time those who had recovered from colds were attacked with the scurvy  on which some sweet-wort was extracted from malt for their use , and they were supplied with pickled cabbage , and wine instead of  brandy .
Two grampuses were seen on the 26th , and on the day following variety of birds , one of which was taken for a land-bird , and resembled a swallow .
Every method of cleanliness , and change of food , was now taken to prevent the scurvy , which began to encrease very fast .


On the first of June they saw several men of war birds , and the next day observed some gannets  and the weather being at this time very various , they conceived hopes that they drew near the land .
On the 4th a turtle swam close by the ship  and the next day a great variety of birds were seen .


The long wished-for relief was now fast approaching  for on Saturday the 6th the man at the mast-head cried , ' `` Land in the west-north-west . '' '
This proved to be a low island , distant five or six leagues , and was soon seen from the deck , to the great joy of every one on board .
When they came within five miles of this island , they discovered another to the west-north-west .
Two boats were sent to the first discovered island , under the command of the second Lieutenant , the crews being well provided with arms .
When the boats came near the island , two canoes were observed to put off to the other island .
The crews having landed , gathered some cocoa-nuts , and collected a quantity of scurvy-grass , with which they returned to the ship , bringing with them some fish-hooks which the islanders had formed of oyster-shells .
In this excursion  they saw three huts , supported on posts , and open all round , but thatched with cocoa-nut and palm leaves , ingeniously wrought together .
As no anchorage was to be found , and the whole island was encompassed with rocks and breakers , the Captain resolved to steer for the other island , giving the name of WHITSUN ISLAND to this , because it was discovered on the eve of Whitsunday .


Having approached the other island , about 50 of the natives , armed with pikes , and some having fire-brands in their hands , were observed running on the coast .
Two boats were sent out , manned and armed , and the Lieutenant was instructed to steer for that part of the shore where the people had been seen  to avoid offending them , and to try to procure water and fruit in exchange for such commodities as he took with them .
When the boat came near the shore , the natives put themselves in a position as if they would defend it with their pikes  but the crew making signs of friendship , and exposing their trinkets , some of the Indians walked into the water  to whom it was hinted , that some cocoa-nuts and water would be acceptable  which was no sooner done , than they fetched a small quantity of each , which they ventured to bring to the boats , and received some nails and other trifles in exchange .
While they were dealing , one of the Indians stole a silk handkerchief  with its contents , but the thief could by no means be discovered .


The next morning the boats were again dispatched , with orders to land , if they could do it without offence to the natives .
As they approached the shore , they observed seven large canoes , each with two masts , laying ready for the Indians to embark in them : these having made signs to the crew to proceed farther , and this being done , the Indians embarked , and sailed westward , being joined by two canoes at another part of the island .
These canoes , two of which were lashed together , appeared to be 30 feet in length , four in breadth , and three in depth .
The people had long black hair hanging over their shoulders , were of a dark complexion , and of the middle size .
They were dressed in a kind of matting made fast round the middle  and it was remarked , that the women were beautiful , and the men justly proportioned .


The Lieutenant being again sent on shore , the Captain commanded him to take possession of the island in the king 's name , and to call it QUEEN CHARLOTTE 'S ISLAND .
The boats returned loaded with cocoa-nuts and scurvy grass , after having found two wells of excellent water .
Provisions for a week were now allotted for a mate and twenty men , who were left on shore to fill water  the sick were landed for the benefit of the air  and a number of hands were appointed  to climb the cocoa-trees , and gather the nuts .


On the 10th the water was brought on board the ship , but the cocoa-nuts , and vegetables which the cutter was bringing off , were lost by the rolling of the waves , which almost filled her with water .
On this island were found several tools , resembling adzes , awls and chissels , which were formed of shells and stones .
The dead bodies were not buried , but left to decay above ground , under a kind of canopy .


The ship sailed this day , after taking possession of the islands for the king  in testimony of which they left a flag flying , and carved his majesty 's name on a piece of wood , and on the bark of several trees .
For the use of the natives they left shillings , sixpences , halfpence , bottles , nails , hatchets , and other things .
It should be remarked that , on this island , they found the very people who had fled from Queen Charlotte 's Island , with several others , in the whole near one hundred .
It lies in 19 degrees 20 minutes south latitude , and 138 degrees 30 minutes west longitude  and received the name of EGMONT ISLAND .


On the 11th they observed about sixteen persons on an island which was called GLOUCESTER ISLAND  but , as it was surrounded with rocks and breakers , they did not attempt to land .
This day they likewise discovered another , which was called CUMBERLAND ISLAND  and , on the  day following , a third , which received the name of PRINCE WILLIAM HENRY 'S ISLAND .


On the 17th they again discovered land , and at ten at night saw a light , which convinced them that it was inhabited  and remarked , that there was plenty of cocoa-trees , a certain indication that there was no want of water .


The day following an officer was sent to the shore , with instructions to exchange some toys for such things as the island produced .
He saw a great number of the people , but could find no place in which the ship might anchor .
Some of the Indians , who had white sticks in their hands , appeared to have an authority over the rest .
While the Lieutenant was trafficking with them , an Indian diving into the water seized the grappling of the boat , while his companions on the shore laid hold of the rope by which she was fastened , and attempted to draw her into the surf : but their endeavours were frustrated by the firing of a musket , on which all parties let go their hold .
These Indians were dressed in a kind of cloth , a piece of which was brought to the ship .


From the number of the people seen , and their having some large double canoes on the shore , it was thought that there were larger islands at no great distance : the Captain , therefore , having named this place OSNABURGH ISLAND , made sail , and having soon discovered  high land , came to an anchor , because the weather was very foggy .


Early the next morning they saw land , distant 4 or 5 leagues  but after having sailed towards it some time , thought it prudent again to anchor , on account of the thickness of the fog : but it no sooner cleared away , than they found the ship encompassed by hundreds of canoes , in which were many hundreds of people .
Having approached the ship , they behold it with wonder , and talked with great earnestness .
Some baubles were now shewn them , and signs were made for them to come on board , on which they rowed the canoes towards each other , and a general consultation took place  at the conclusion of which they all surrounded the ship with an appearance of friendship , and one of them delivered an oration , at the conclusion of which he threw into the sea the branch of a plantain-tree which he had held in his hand .
This being done , a young Indian , of more apparent courage than the rest , ventured on board the ship .
The Captain would have given him some baubles , but he refused the acceptance of them till those in the canoes came a-longside , and , having held a consultation , threw on board several branches of the plantain-tree .
Others now ventured on board  but it was remarked , that they all got into the ship at some improper part , not one of them , even by accident , finding the right place of [ ... ] cent .


 A goat belonging to the ship having ran his horns against the back of one of the Indians , he looked round with surprize , and seeing the animal ready to renew the attack , he sprang over the ship 's side , and was instantly followed by all his countrymen .
Their terror , however , soon subsided , and they returned to the ship  and the sheep , hogs and poultry being shewn them , they intimated that they possessed the two latter species .
The Captain now gave them nails and other trifles , and made signs that he wanted hogs , fowls and fruit  but they could not comprehend him .
They were detected in several attempts to take away any thing they could lay hold of  but one of them , at length , jumped overboard with a laced hat snatched from one of the officers .


The inner parts of the island abound in hills cloathed with timber trees , above them are high peaks , from which large rivers descend to the sea .
The houses , when seen at a distance , resemble a barn , having no shelter but a roof : the land towards the sea is level , and produces the cocoa-nut , with variety of other fruits  and the face of the whole country is picturesque beyond description .


They now sailed along the shore , while the canoes , which could not keep pace with them , made towards the land .
In the afternoon the ship brought to , and the boats being sent to sound a bay that promised good anchorage , the  Indian canoes flocked round them .
The Captain , apprehensive that their designs were hostile , made a signal for the boats to return to the ship , and fired a gun over the heads of the Indians .
Though they were frightened at the report , they attempted to prevent the return of the cutter , but she easily out-sailed them .
This being observed by some canoes in a different station , they intercepted her , and wounded some of her people with stones , which occasioned the firing a musket , and some shot were lodged in the shoulder of the man who began the attack  which the Indians observing , they all made off with the utmost precipitation .


The boats having reached the ship , preparations were made for sailing  but a large canoe being observed to make towards her at a great rate , it was resolved to wait the event of her arrival  on which an Indian , making a speech , threw a plantain-branch on board , and the Captain returned the compliment of peace , by giving them a branch , which had been left on board by the other Indians : some toys being likewise given them , they departed with much seeming satisfaction .


They now sailed  and the next morning were off a peak of land which was almost covered with the natives and their houses .
On the 21st the ship came to an anchor , and several canoes came a-longside of her , bringing a large quantity of fruit , with fowls and hogs , for which  they received nails and toys in exchange .
The boats having been sent to sound along the coast , were followed by large double canoes , three of which ran at the cutter , staved in her quarter , and otherwise damaged her  the Indians , at the same time , armed with clubs , endeavouring to board her .
The crew now fired , and wounding one man dangerously , and killing another , they both fell into the sea , whither their companions dived after them , and got them into the canoe .
They now tried if they could stand or sit  but as the one was quite dead , they laid him at the bottom of the canoe  and the wounded man was supported in a sitting posture .
The ships boats now kept on their way , while some of the canoes went ashore , and others returned to the ship to renew their merchandize .


While the boats continued out in search of soundings , the natives swam off to them with water and fruit .
The women were particularly urgent for the sailors to land , and , pulling off all their cloaths , gave hints , of the most indelicate nature , how acceptable their company would be .


The boats being sent on shore with some small casks to get water , the Indians filled two of them , and kept all the rest for their trouble .
When the boats came off , the shore was crouded with thousands of men , women , and children .
During this time several canoes remained a-longside the ship  but the Captain would not  permit a single Indian to go on board , as there was no guarding against their artful disposition .


On the 22d the natives brought hogs , poultry , and fruit to the ship , which they bartered for knives and other things  so that the whole crew was supplied with meat for two days , by means of this traffick .
The boats having been this day sent for water , every inducement was used by the inhabitants to persuade them to land : and the behaviour of the women was still more lascivious than before .
Having procured a small quantity of water , the boats put off  on which the women shouted aloud , pelted them with apples and bananas , and shewed every mark of contempt and detestation .


The ship made sail the day following , with intention to anchor off the watering-place  but the man at the mast-head discovering a bay a few miles to the leeward , they immediately stood for it .
The boats , which were a-head , making a signal for anchorage , they prepared to bring to  but when the ship had almost reached the boats , she suddenly struck , and her head remained immoveably fixed on a coral rock  in which situation she remained near an hour , when she was happily relieved by a breeze from the shore .
During the whole time that she was in danger of being wrecked , she was encompassed by hundreds of Indians in their canoes  but not one of them attempted to board her .
The  ship was now piloted round a reef , into an harbour , where she moored .


The Master was then sent to found the bay , and found safe anchorage in every part of it .
In the mean time some small canoes brought provisions on board  but as the shore was crouded with large canoes , filled with men , the Captain loaded and primed his guns , supplied his boats with musquetoons , and kept a number of the men constantly under arms .


On the 24th the ship sailed up the harbour , and was followed by many canoes , bringing provisions , which were exchanged for nails , knives , c..
In the evening a number of very large canoes advanced , laden with stones  on which the Captain ordered the strictest watch to be kept .
At length some canoes came off , with a number of women on board , who , being brought almost under the ship , began to practise those arts of indelicacy already mentioned .
During this singular exhibition the large canoes came close round the ship  some of the Indians playing on a kind of flute , others singing , and the rest blowing a sort of shells .
Soon after a large canoe advanced , in which was an awning , on the top of which sat one of the natives , holding some yellow and red feathers in his hand .
The Captain having consented to his coming a-longside , he delivered the feathers  and while a present was preparing for him , he put back from the ship , and threw the branch  of a cocoa-tree in the air .
This was , doubtless , the signal for an onset  for there was an instant shout from all the canoes , which , approaching the ship , threw vollies of stones into every part of her .
On this two guns , loaded with small shot , were fired , and the people on guard discharged their muskets .
The number of Indians now round the ship were full two thousand  and though they were at first disconcerted , they soon recovered their spirits , and renewed the attack .
Thousands of the Indians were now observed on shore , embarking as fast as the canoes could bring them off : orders were therefore given for firing the cannon , some of which were brought to bear upon the shore .
This firing put a stop to all hostilities , on the part of the Indians , for a small time : but the scattered canoes soon got together again , and , having hoisted white streamers , advanced , and threw stones of two pounds weight from slings  by which a number of the seamen were wounded .
At this time several canoes approached the bow of the ship , from whence no shot had been yet discharged .
In one of these was an Indian , who appeared to have an authority over the rest : a gun was therefore levelled at his canoe , the shot of which split it in two pieces .
This put an end to the contest  the canoes rowed off with the utmost speed , and the people on shore ran and concealed themselves behind the hills .


 The Captain now failed for his intended anchoring-place , and moored the ship within a small distance of a fine river .
The next morning some persons , who had been sent to survey the shore , returned with an account that the river produced fresh water , and that there was not a single canoe to be seen .


This day a Lieutenant was dispatched , with all the boats manned and armed , and a number of marines , with orders to land under cover of the ship and boats  which being effected , he turned a piece of turf , and having hoisted a pendant on a staff , he took possession of the place , for his Sovereign , by the name of KING GEORGE THE THIRD 'S ISLAND .
He then mixed some rum with the river water , and every person present drank the King 's health .
At this time the Lieutenant observed two old men on the opposite side of the river , who seemed much terrified , and assumed a posture of supplication .
Signs were made for them to cross the river , which one of them having done , he crawled on his hands and knees towards the Lieutenant  who , shewing him some stones that had been thrown at the ship , hinted that the Indians should receive no harm if they were not the aggressors .
Some hatchets were now produced , to intimate that they wished to barter for provisions  and some trifling matters were given to the Indian , who testified his joy and gratitude by dancing round the pendant .
He then plucked  some branches of trees , which he laid on the ground , and retreated  but soon returning with several others , they advanced towards the pendant , which happening to be shaken by the wind , they ran back with evident signs of astonishment .
They soon recovered from their surprize , and procuring two hogs , laid them down at the foot of the flag-staff , and danced round it  after which they put the hogs into a canoe , and the old Indian rowed it to the ship : when he came a-longside he delivered a serious oration , in the course of which he handed up a number of plantain-leaves , one at a time : this being done , he rowed back , after refusing several presents that had been offered him .


In the night a number of lights were seen on the coast , and the noise of drums and other instruments of music was heard .
Soon after daylight it was observed that the Indians had left the coast , and taken away the pendant .
This day , while a party was engaged in filling the water casks , the old man , who had been seen the day before , crossed the river , and brought with him some fowls and fruit .
The Captain , who was indisposed on board the ship , employed himself in remarking what was going forward on shore  and , by the help of glasses , he saw many of the Indians creeping behind the bushes towards the watering-place , while incredible numbers were coming through the woods , and a large party descending a hill , all advancing to the same  spot  and two divisions of canoes were making round the opposite points of the bay .
The Lieutenant , seeing his danger , got his party on board the boats  but not before he had sent the old Indian to prevail on the others to keep at a proper distance , as he wanted only water : - but this had no effect  and , as soon as the crews were in the boats , the natives possessed themselves of the casks as lawful prize .
Those at some distance from the watering-place pushed forward with all speed , keeping pace with the canoes , which were rowed at an extraordinary rate  while a great number of women and children were seated on a hill , from whence they could command a view of all that passed .


When the canoes came near that part of the bay where the ship rode , they took in many people from the shore , who were laden with bags filled with stones .
All the canoes now approached the ship  on which the Captain gave orders to fire on the first cluster of them that should assemble  this had such an effect , that they all rowed off with the utmost speed .
They then fired into several parts of the wood , on which the Indians all fled to the hill where the women and children were  so that several thousands were now on that spot .
The Captain being resolved to make this action decisive , fired towards the hill  and two balls falling near a spot where many of these poor Indians had stationed  themselves , they were all terrified beyond descr [ ... ] ption , and disappeared in an instant .


When this disagreeable skirmish was ended , the boats were hoisted out , and a strong guard sent with the carpenters , who had orders to destroy every canoe they could find  and this service was performed with such alacrity , that in a few hours a great number of these vessels were cut in pieces , several of which were of the largest size .
Some fruit , fowls , and hogs , were found in a few of the smallest  but the rest were laden with stones and slings .


It was not long before a small party of Indians advanced to the sea-shore , and sticking up some small branches of trees , went back to the woods : but they came again repeatedly , bringing with them a quantity of the cloth they wear , and some dogs and hogs with their legs tied  all which they laid on the shore , making signs to the sailors to take them .
A boat being sent on shore , the hogs were conveyed on board , but the other articles left .
In return for these presents , several hatchets and nails were left on the beach , and signs made to some of the Indians within sight to come and take them  which they neglected to do for some time , till the Captain having sent for the cloth , the natives then accepted his presents with apparent satisfaction .


On the 27th , while a party was getting water , the old man before-mentioned appeared on the opposite side of the river  and having harangued  them some time , he came over  when the officer , pointing to the bags and stones which had been brought down , tried to convince him that his countrymen had injured the English , who had acted only on the defensive .
His meaning seemed to be well understood , but the old Indian could not admit the force of his arguments : - on the contrary , he expressed very forcibly , by his countenance , voice , and actions , the high sense he had of the injury offered his unhappy friends .
At length a reconciliation took place  the old man shook hands with , and accepted some presents from the Lieutenant , who tried to convince him of his good-will  hinted that the natives should not appear but in small parties , and that while the boats crews were on one side of the river they should remain on the other .
The old man departed with evident signs of being content with these terms  and in a few hours the natives began a traffic , which proved highly advantageous to the ship 's company .


The sick were now sent on shore , and lodged in a tent near the watering-place , under the care of the Surgeon .
This gentleman having snot a wild-duck , it dropped near some Indians on the opposite side of the river , who were so terrified that they instantly fled , but stopping within a short space , he prevailed on one of them to bring over the duck , which he at length complied with , and laid it at the Surgeon 's feet ,  while his looks expressed the fear and agitation of his mind .
At a second shot three ducks were killed  which gave the natives such an idea of the effects of a gun , that to this circumstance is chiefly attributed the regularity of their behaviour in all their transactions , while the English remained among them .


Orders were now issued , that the gunner should transact all matters of trade between the Indians and the sailors , with a view to prevent pilfering and quarrelling : the natives , indeed , would sometimes steal a trifle , but the very sight of a gun procured instant restitution of it .
The old Indian , having been attached to the English , was very useful in the recovery of the stolen goods .
One day an Indian swam over the river , and took a hatchet , on which the gunner made preparations as if he would go in search of the thief  but this being intimated to the old man , he immediately went after the lost goods , which he brought back .
The gunner now demanded that the culprit should also be produced , and the old Indian complied , though much against his inclination .
The prisoner , who had committed other robberies , was sent on board the ship whence the Captain discharged him , without farther punishment than the terror arising from his situation .
His countrymen were transported with joy to see him come back  and he was conducted into the woods , amidst the applausive shouts of his friends .
This man had  the gratitude to bring a roasted hog and some bread fruit to the gunner next day , as an acknowledgment for the lenity shewn him .


The Captain , First Lieutenant , and Purser , were at this time very ill  so that the care of the vessel , and the superintendance of the sick , were committed to the Second Lieutenant , who discharged his duty with such zeal and fidelity , that all was order and decorum .
Fruit , fowls , and fresh pork , were procured in such plenty , that at the end of fourteen days almost every man had perfectly recovered his health .


On the 29th a piece of saltpetre , of the size of a small egg , was found on shore  but whether it had been brought from the ship , or not , could not be learnt , after the most diligent enquiry  but no other piece was found on the island .


On the 2d of July they began to want fruit and fresh meat , owing to the absence of the old Indian  but they had still a sufficient supply for the sick .
On the 3d the ship 's bottom was examined , when its condition was nearly the same as when she left England .
This day a shark was caught , which proved an acceptable present to the Indians .


The old Indian , who had visited the interior parts of the island , in quest of provisions , returned on the 5th , and brought with him a roasted hog as a present for the Captain , who , in return , enriched him by putting him in possession of a looking-glass , an iron pot , c. His  return was soon followed by some of the natives who had never yet visited the market  these brought some hogs that were larger than any yet purchased .


A traffick of a singular kind was now established between the Indian girls and the sailors .
The price of a lady 's favour was a nail or two  but as the tars could not always get at the nails , they drew them out from several parts of the ship  nor could a single offender be discovered by the strictest enquiry .
The damage done to the ship could be easily repaired  but one ill consequence arose from this traffick , which could not have been foreseen : for on the gunner 's offering small nails for hogs , the Indians produced large spikes , demanding such as those .
Some of the men made use of a singular device to gratify their passions  for , when they could procure no more nails , they cut lead into the shape of nails , and passed it as sterling on their unsuspecting fair ones .
When the Indians discovered the fraud , they demanded nails for the lead  but this just demand could not be granted , because it would have promoted the stealing of lead , and thereby injured the traffic with iron .


The sailors , in consequence of their connection with the women , became so impatient of controul , that the Captain ordered the articles of war to be read , to awe them into obedience  and a Corporal of marines was severely  punished , for striking the master at arms .
The Captain 's health being now nearly restored , he went in his boat to survey the island , which he found extremely delightful , and every where well peopled .


On the 8th the wood-cutters were entertained in a friendly manner by some Indians , who seemed to be of a rank above those they had yet seen : and some of these visiting the Captain , he laid before them a thirty-six shilling piece , a guinea , a crown-piece , a dollar , some shillings , new halfpence , and two large nails  and having intimated that they might take their choice , they eagerly seized the nails , and then took a few halfpence  but left all the other pieces untouched .


The Indians now refused to supply the market , unless they could get large nails in exchange : the Captain therefore ordered the ship to be searched , when it was found that almost all the hammock-nails were stolen , and great numbers drawn from different places : on which every man was ordered before the Captain , who told them , that not a man should go on shore till the thieves were discovered  but no good consequence arose from his threats .


Three days after this , the gunner conducted to the ship a lady of a portly figure and agreeable face , whose age seemed to be upwards of forty .
This lady had but lately arrived in that part of the island  and the gunner , observing  that she seemed to have great authority , presented her with some toys  on which she invited him to her house , and gave him some fine hogs .
She was afterwards taken on board at her own desire , where her whole behaviour indicated the woman of fine sense and superior rank .
The Captain presented her with a looking-glass and some toys , and gave her a handsome blue mantle , which he tied round her with ribbands .


Having intimated that she should be glad to see the Captain on shore , he signified his intention of visiting her on the following day .
Accordingly on Sunday the 12th , Captain Wallis went on shore , where he was met by his fair friend , who was attended by a numerous retinue , some of whom she directed to carry the Captain , and others who had been ill , over the river , and thence to her habitation : the procession was closed by a guard of marines and seamen .
As they advanced , great numbers of Indians crowded to see them  but , on a slight motion of her hand , they made ample room for the procession to pass .


Having come near her habitation , many persons of both sexes advanced to meet her , whom she caused to kiss the Captain 's hand , while she signified that they were related to her .
Her house was above 320 feet in length , and about 40 in breadth .
The roof , which was covered with the leaves of the palm-tree , was supported by a row of pillars on each side , and another in the middle .
The highest part of the thatch  on the inside was about 30 feet from the ground , and the space between the sides of the building and the edge of the roof being 12 feet , was left entirely open .


The Captain , Lieutenant , and Purser , being seated , the lady helped four of her female attendants to pull off their coats , shoes , and stockings  which being aukwardly performed , the girls smoothed down the skin , and rubbed it lightly with their hands for more than half an hour  and the gentlemen received great benefit from the operation .
The Surgeon , being heated with walking , having pulled off his wig , one of the Indians screamed out  the eyes of the whole company were instantly fixed on the miraculous sight , and they remained some time in the most profound astonishment .
When they had recovered from their surprize , the lady ordered several bales of cloth , the produce of the island , to be brought out , in which she dressed the Captain and all his attendants .
Orders had been given , that the Captain should be carried as before  but as he chose to walk , she took hold of his arm , and when they came near any wet or dirty places , she lifted him over , with as much ease as a man would a child .
She attended them to the shore , when she took her leave  having presented the Captain with a fine sow , big with young .


On the following day the gunner being dispatched to this lady , with a compliment of billhooks ,  hatchets , c. found her entertaining many hundreds of the natives , who were seated in order round her habitation .
A mess was ordered for the gunner , who reported , that it was of an agreeable flavour , and seemed to be a compound of fowls and apples , shred in small pieces , and mixed with salt-water .
The lady herself distributed the provisions , which were served in cocoa-nut shells , and those shells brought in trays by her servants .
When the company were all fed , the lady took her seat somewhat above the rest , and was fed by two female servants , one standing on each side of her .
She received the Captain 's presents with evident signs of satisfaction .


From this period the crew was much better supplied with refreshments , hogs and fowls being brought to the market daily  but they could not be purchased at the former prices , owing to the commerce before-mentioned , between the sailors and the Indian women : the Captain therefore ordered , that not one woman should be permitted to come over the river , and that no man should leave the ship till he had first been searched .


The gunner , who was on shore on the 14th , met with the following affecting incident .
He saw an old woman , on the opposite side of the river , weeping in a most lamentable manner .
When she found he regarded her distress , she sent a youth to him , who , having made a long  oration , laid a branch of plantain at his feet , and then retired , and brought over the woman and two hogs .
The youth now made a still longer speech , after the conclusion of which this unfortunate woman made the gunner understand , that when the English fired on her countrymen , her husband and three of her sons had been killed .
Her agitation of mind was such , that before she had finished her tale , she sunk speechless to the ground  nor were two lads , who attended her , in a much better situation .
The gunner pitied her distress , and endeavoured to comfort her .
At length she became somewhat calmer , offered him her hand , and directed the hogs to be given him : in return he would have given her much more than their value , but she would not take the most trifling article .


On the 15th a large party , in all the boats , rowed round part of the island , in order to take a view of it , and purchase provisions .
They returned with a number of hogs and fowls , and some plantains and cocoa-nuts .
The island was found to be every where very pleasant , and to abound with various necessaries of life .
Great numbers of canoes were seen , and several not quite built .
The tools of the natives were formed of bones , shells , and stones .
Dogs and hogs were the only four-footed beasts .
The inhabitants ate all their meat either roasted or baked , having no vessel in which water could be boiled  nor , indeed , did they seem to have the least idea that  water could be heated by fire  this will be proved by the following circumstance .
While the lady so frequently mentioned was at breakfast on board the ship , a person that attended her , having observed the cock of an urn turned to fill the tea-pot , he also turned the cock , and the scalding water falling on his hand , he cried out , and danced about the cabin , while the other Indians gazed at him with terror and surprize .


On the 17th Captain Wallis received another visit from the lady  ( whom he calls his Queen ) and this day plenty of refreshments were purchased of some Indians , whom they had never dealt with before .
The Queen repeated her visit on the following day , and gave the Captain two hogs : and the Master being sent to attend her home , she clothed him in the dress of the country , as she had done the Captain and his retinue .
On the 19th a great number of hogs and pigs , with fowls and fruits in the greatest abundance , were purchased and sent on board by the gunner .
The next day one of the sailors was sentenced to run the gauntlet three times round the deck , while the crew whipped him with nettles , for drawing nails from the ship  but the tars were so well disposed to spare a brother in iniquity , that his punishment was rather nominal than real : this gave rise to an order , that no person should go on shore but those appointed to procure wood and water .


 Captain Wallis 's Queen paid him another visit on the 21st , and presented him with some hogs .
On her departure she invited the Captain to her house , who , taking some officers with him , attended her home .
On their arrival , she tied round their hats some wreaths of plaited hair , and distinguished the Captain 's by the additional ornament of a tuft of feathers of different colours .
When they returned she went with them to the water-side , and ordered some presents into the boat .
Just before they put off Mr. Wallis intimated , that he should finally depart in seven days  when she made signs that he should stay twenty : but his resolution to depart within the first-mentioned time being repeated , she wept incessantly for a considerable time .


By the 22d the ship was so well stored with hogs and fowls that the deck was covered  but , as they would eat little else than fruit , they were killed faster than was otherwise intended .
A boar and sow of this breed were brought to England , and given to Mr. Stephens , secretary of the admiralty  the former of which was living when this account was printed , but the latter died in farrowing .


On the 24th the Captain presented his friend , the old Indian , with cloth and other matters  and sent a variety of things to the Queen , among which were a cat with kitten , turkies , geese , hens , and various kinds of garden seeds  which compliment she returned by a present of  fruit and hogs .
While they remained here they sowed peas and garden seeds , and staid long enough to see them come up , and likely to thrive .


The Captain having sent a party on shore on the 25th to examine the country minutely , caused a tent to be erected to observe an eclipse of the sun , and when it was ended , he took his telescope to the Queen 's house to shew her the use of it  and her surprize is not to be expressed , on her beholding several objects which she was very familiar with , but which were too distant to be seen by the naked eye .
On the conclusion of this mental feast , the Captain invited the Queen and her attendants on board the ship , judging that no insult would be offered to the party he had sent out , while the principle people were in his power .
The Queen 's attendants ate heartily of an elegant dinner , and drank water only  but the Queen would neither eat nor drink .
When the party returned from their excursion , the Captain gave orders for landing the Queen and her train .
She made signs to be informed , if he held his resolution as to the time of his departure  and being answered in the affirmative , her tears witnessed the agitation of her mind .


The following is an account of the transactions and observations of the party which was sent out this day .
- When they first landed they called on the old Indian , and taking him with  them , they walked some on each side of the river about two miles , observing that the soil was blackish and rich , and that on the borders of the valley , through which the river flowed , were many houses with gardens walled in , and plenty of fruit , hogs , and fowls .
They now all walked on one side , as the ground rose nearly perpendicular on the other .
Channels were cut in many places , to conduct the water from the hills to the gardens and plantations , and the ground being fenced off had a pleasing effect to the eye .
There was good grass , but no underwood beneath the trees : the cocoa-nut and plantain grew on level ground  while the breadfruit and apple trees were set in rows on the sides of the hills .


The stream now became a perfect meander , and the crags of mountains which rose on its borders hung over the heads of our travellers .
After walking four miles , they sat down to breakfast under an apple-tree , when they were alarmed by the shouts of a great number of the natives .
They would have had recourse to their arms , but the old Indian making signs for them to sit still , went to his countrymen , who became at once silent , and instantly retired : but they soon returned with variety of refreshments , which the old Indian divided among our travellers  and for which the Lieutenant gave the natives some buttons , and other trifles .


 They then proceeded , and looked diligently for metals and ores , in every place likely to produce them  but found nothing of any consequence .
The old Indian growing weary , hinted , that he should return , having first directed his countrymen to clear a passage for the travellers over a mountain .
When the old man was gone , the Indians cut branches from the trees , and laid them in a ceremonious manner at the feet of the seamen : they then painted themselves red with the berries of a tree , and stained their garments yellow with the bark of another .
By the assistance of the Indians , the most difficult parts of the mountain were climbed  and they again refreshed themselves on its summit , when they saw other mountains so much above them , that they seemed as in a valley .


Towards the sea the prospect was inexpressibly beautiful , the sides of the hills being covered with trees , and the vallies with grass  while the whole country was interspersed with villages .
They saw but few houses on the mountains above them , but as smoke was observed in many places , it was conjectured , that the highest parts were inhabited .
Many springs gushed from the sides of the mountains , all of which were covered with wood on the sides , and with fern on the summits .
The soil even on the high lands was rich , and the sugar-cane grew without cultivation  as did likewise ginger and turmerick .


 Figure 4 .
The Queen of Otaheite taking leare of Capn .
Wallis .
 Having a third time refreshed themselves , they descended towards the ship , occasionally deviating from the direct way , tempted , by the pleasant situation of several houses , the inhabitants of which entertained them in the most hospitable manner .
They saw parrots , parroquets , green doves , and ducks .
The Lieutenant planted the stones of cherries , peaches and plums , several kinds of garden-seeds , and oranges , lemons and limes .
In the afternoon they rested on a delightful spot , where the inhabitants dressed them two hogs and several fowls .
Here they staid till the evening , when they rewarded the diligence of their guides , and repaired to the ship .


On the 26th the Queen visited the Captain , with her usual presents  and on this day they discontinued taking in wood and water , and prepared for sailing .
A greater number of Indians now came to the sea-shore than they had ever yet seen  and of these , several appeared to be persons of consequence .
In the afternoon the Queen visited captain Wallis , and sollicited him to remain ten days longer  but being informed that he should certainly sail on the following day , she burst into tears .
She now demanded when he would come again , and was told in 50 days .
She remained on board till evening , when being informed that the boat waited for her , she wept with more violence than she had yet done .
At length this affectionate creature  went over the ship 's side , as did the old Indian who had been so serviceable to the crew .
This man had signified , that his son should sail with the Captain  but when the time of departure came , the youth was not to be found  and it was thought , that parental affection had got the better of the old man 's promise .


Early the next morning two boats were sent to fill a few casks of water  but the officer , alarmed at finding the shore crouded with people , was about to return .
This brought the Queen forward , who commanded the Indians to retire to the opposite side of the river , and then made signs for the boats to land .
While the water was filling , she ordered some presents into the boat , and entreated to go once more to the ship  but the officer having it in charge not to bring off a single native , she ordered her double canoe out , and was followed by many others .
When she had been on board , weeping bitterly , for an hour , advantage was taken of a breeze , and the ship got under sail .
She now tenderly embraced the Captain and Officers , and left the ship  but the wind falling , the canoes all put back , and once more reached the ship , to which the Queen 's being made fast , she advanced to the bow of the canoe , and wept incessantly .
The Captain presented her with several articles of use and ornament , which she received in silent sorrow .
After some time a breeze springing up , the Queen and her attendants  took their final leave , with many tears , which drew corresponding tears from the eyes of our countrymen .


The place where the ship had lain was called PORT ROYAL HARBOUR , and is situated in 17 degrees 30 minutes south-longitude , and 150 degrees west-latitude .


Captain Wallis now proceeds to give a more accurate account of the inhabitants of Otaheite , with their customs , manners , c. - The men are from five feet seven to ten inches high , well proportioned , alert , and of good countenances .
The women from five feet to five and a half , handsome in general , but some of them as beautiful as can be imagined .
The complexion of those men who are much on the water is rather red  but the natural colour of them all is the tawny .
They are remarkably distinguished from all the other natives of Asia , Africa , and America , by the colours of their hair  for that of the former is universally black , while the people of Otaheite have the various colours of black , brown , red and flaxen  most of the children having the latter : when left loose , it has a strong natural curl , but it is usually worn tied in two bunches , one on each side the head , or in a single bunch in the middle .
They anoint the head with the oil of the cocoa-nut , mixed with a root of a fragrant smell .


 It has been mentioned , that the ladies do not consider chastity as a virtue  but the price of their favours is always proportioned to their charms .
When a man offered a girl to the caresses of a sailor , he shewed a stick of the size of the nail that was to purchase her company .


Their cloaths are formed of two pieces of cloth , not unlike coarse China paper , in one of which a hole is made for the head to pass thro ' , and this hangs to the middle of the leg  the other piece is wrapped round the body , and the whole forms an elegant drapery .
This cloth is composed of the inner bark of a tree .
They adorn themselves with pearls , shells , feathers and flowers .
They mark the hinder part of the thighs and loins of both sexes with black lines in different forms  which is done by striking the teeth of an instrument through the skin , and rubbing soot mixed with oil into the holes : some few men , who appeared to be persons of distinction , had their legs marked  but neither boys nor girls are marked till after they are twelve years old .


An Indian who attended the Queen appearing to be fond of imitating the English , was presented with a suit of the Lieutenant 's cloaths , which became him extremely well .
As it was shoal-water at the landing-place , the English officers were carried on shore  and this man , unwilling to be out of the fashion , was carried in the same manner by the Indians .
In his attempt  to use a knife and fork at first , his hand always went to his mouth , while the food remained stuck on the end of the fork .


Besides the articles already mentioned , these people eat the flesh of dogs .
Rats abound on the island , but are not eaten .
The river produces parrot-fish , groopers , cray-fish and mullet , and conchs and muscles are found on the rocks : the inhabitants use nets , and hooks and lines .


There is something singular in their way of dressing their food : having produced a fire by rubbing two pieces of dry wood together , they dig a pit , which being paved with stones , they make a fire in it .
The stones being properly heated , they rake away the ashes , and covering the stones with green leaves of the cocoa nut-tree , they put their meat in plantain leaves , and place it in the pit , covering it over with the hot ashes , on which they lay bread-fruit and yams enclosed in plantain leaves : these again they cover with the embers intermixed with the hot stones : to this succeeds a layer of cocoa-nut leaves , and upon the whole is a covering of earth .
In this manner a small hog is dressed whole , but a large one is cut in two  and Captain Wallis asserts , that this method of cookery exceeds every other he has known , the meat being extremely tender , and full of gravy .
Their only sauces are salt water and fruit , and their knives are made of shells .


 They were astonished when they first saw meat boiled in a pot  but the Captain having given iron-pots to the Queen and some of her chiefs , they were often used  and the old Indian fed on boiled meat almost constantly .
The only liquor they drink is water : they occasionally pluck and chew a bit of the sugar-cane  but have no idea of extracting any spirit from it .


From the scars with which many of these people were marked , it seems evident , that they sometimes waged war with each other .
- That they have skill in surgery is evident from the following circumstance : a splinter having got into the foot of one of the sailors , his messmate tried in vain to extract it with a pen-knife : on this one of the natives , having formed an instrument , with his teeth , out of a shell , extracted the splinter in an instant  and the old Indian applying a piece of the gum of the apple-tree to the wound , the man 's foot was quite well in two days .


There are several sheds on the island , enclosed within a wall , on the outside of which several posts are fixed in the ground , on which are rude resemblances of men , women , dogs and hogs .
The enclosed place is paved with large stones , between which the grass grows .
These were supposed to be burial-places , from the natives being sometimes seen to enter them with an air of solemn sorrow .
- It could not be discovered  that these people had any kind of religious worship among them .


They have three kinds of canoes - one formed out of a single tree , in which they go a fishing  a second , made of planks sewed together , and large enough to hold 20 or 30 men  in which they sail round the island , and come laden home with fruits  and a third sort , which are not unlike the Venetian gondolas , and used when they sail on parties of pleasure .
In these they make a kind of procession two or three times in a week , with their streamers flying , attended by the small canoes , while hundreds of the natives accompany their motions on the shore .
On these occasions they put on their best cloaths , and while some are under a large awning , others sit upon it : - these are clothed in red and white  two men in red sit on the prow of each vessel  while the rowers and steersmen are in white .


The people of Otaheite use bows and arrows , which last are headed with a round stone .
They have likewise bludgeons , and slings for the throwing of stones .


The inhabitants being shewn some small turtles , hinted that they had some which were much larger  but not one was seen by any of the ship 's crew .


Captain Wallis represents this island as one of the most pleasant in the universe  being blessed with a pure air , abounding in wood and herbage ,  harbouring no venomous animal  and its inhabitants being happy in a constant flow of health .
The south-east part of the island , which produces fruit in vast abundance , is better peopled than the spot near where the ship lay .


When captain Cook , in the Endeavour , visited this island , he found the venereal disease among the natives  which must have been contracted from some of the crew under the command of M. Bougainville  for not one of captain Wallis 's men were infected with that disorder for several months before and after his arrival at Otaheite .


The Dolphin sailed from this harbour on the 27th of July 1767 , and passed the Duke of York 's Island , the coast of which abounds with plantain-trees , cocoa-nut , bread-fruit , and apple-trees .
On the 28th they discovered land , which was called SIR CHARLES SAUNDER 'S ISLAND .
It had a few inhabitants , who lived in small huts  and the cocoa-nut and other trees grew on the shore .
On the 30th they again made land , which received the name of LORD HOWE 'S ISLAND , on which smoke was seen , but no inhabitants .
Their next discovery was of some dangerous shoals , to which captain Wallis gave the name of the SCILLY ISLANDS .


They now steered westward till the 13th of August , when they saw two small islands , one of which was named KEPPEL 'S ISLE , and the other BOSCAWEN 'S ISLAND  on the latter of  which were several inhabitants  but they steered for the former , as its appearance promised the most convenient anchorage .
By the help of glasses they now discovered the natives on the shore  but they did not attempt to anchor that night , on account of some breakers at a considerable distance from the island .


The boats being dispatched to the island , brought on board some cocoa-nuts and other fruit , and a couple of fowls .
The officer reported , that the inhabitants were not unlike those of Otaheite  that some few of them ventured into the boat , but soon jumped out and swam back to the island .
These people were remarkable for having the first joint of their little fingers cut off  and they were dressed in a sort of matting .


As there was no convenient watering-place at this island , and as the ship had received some damages that had rendered her unfit to encounter a rough sea , the Captain determined to sail for Tinian , from thence to Batavia , and so to England by the Cape of Good Hope .
He therefore passed the island , which is well inhabited , abounds in timber , and is of a circular form .


On the 16th they again discovered land , to which the officers gave the name of WALLIS 'S ISLAND .
The coast of this island is very rocky , and the trees grow almost to the edge of the water .
The inhabitants wore no covering but a mat round the waist : each man had a very  large club , two of which were purchased by the boat 's crew .
These people attempting to steal the cutter , by hauling her upon the rocks , a gun was fired close to one of their faces , the report of which so terrified them , that they decamped with the utmost speed .
When the boats were returning to the ship , they were impeded by the points of rocks , which being observed by the Indians , they followed in their canoes till they got into deep water , and then they rowed back .


Captain Wallis remarks , as an extraordinary circumstance , that although no sort of metal was seen on any of the lately discovered islands , yet the natives were no sooner possessed of a piece of iron than they began to sharpen it , but did not treat copper or brass in the same manner .


They now sailed to the north-west , and on the 28th observed a number of birds flying about the ship , one of which they catched .
It was web-footed , but in all other respects resembled a dove .
On the 3d of September they saw land , which was thought to be two of the Piscadore Islands  and on this day an Indian Proa ( a description of which is given in Anson 's Voyage ) made towards the ship , on which they hoisted Spanish Colours  but she came no nearer than within about two miles .
On the 7th and 9th they saw several birds , one of which was taken , and judged to be a land-bird .
On the 18th they discovered the island of Saypan ,  and soon afterwards that of Tinian , off which they anchored on the day following .


No time was lost in sending the boats on shore , and they returned in a few hours , with oranges , limes , and cocoa-nuts .
Tents were erected for the sick , who were sent on shore with all expedition .
The smith 's forge , and carpenter 's chest were also landed  and the Captain and first Lieutenant , who both continued ill , went on shore , with a party of men to hunt for cattle .
A young bull of great weight was soon catched  and they found plenty of oranges , limes , and bread-fruit .
On the 21st they began the necessary repairs of the ship .
The fatigue sustained by those who went to hunt for cattle was so great , by going many miles thro ' thickets , that one party was ordered to relieve another  and the second Lieutenant with several of the men , being sent to reside on the north part of the island , where cattle were most plentiful , a boat was sent daily to bring in what they catched .
In this island they procured beef , pork , poultry , papaw-apples , and all the other refreshments , of which an account is given in Anson 's Voyage .


By the 15th of October the fruit and water was carried on board , and all the sick being recovered , preparations were made for sailing  and on the next day they left the bay , and sailed to the west .


 On the 21st and 22d they saw several gannets , and other birds  and on the 23d and two following days it blew a violent storm , the effects of which were the more dreaded , as the ship admitted more water than she had done at any time during the voyage .
The bad weather continued on the 26th , when they saw several landbirds .
They had now to encounter the united horrors of thunder , lightning , rain , darkness , and such a violent sea , as broke even the iron work on the gun-whale , and washed over-board many heavy things .
On the 27th they were blest with a sight of the sun , and the day following the weather became more temperate .
In the middle of the night one Morgan , a taylor , was suddenly missed , and it was thought he fell over-board in a fit of intoxication .


On the 3d of November they discovered three islands , which were named SANDY ISLE , SMALL KEY , and LONG ISLAND  and on the day following they saw another , to which captain Wallis gave the name of NEW ISLAND  all of which islands are in ten degrees odd minutes north-latitude , and 247 degrees odd minutes west-longitude .
The ship held her course till the 8th , on which day the log and journal-books of the voyage were taken from the inferior officers and foremast-men .


They now altered their course , and on the 13th saw the islands of Timoun , Aros and Pelang .
On the 16th they crossed the equinoctial  line , and came again into south-latitude .
The next day they saw the islands of Pulo Toté , and Pulo Weste  soon after which they had sight of the seven islands .
A singular incident happened in the succeeding night , which was very tempestuous , and so dark , that they could not see across the ship .
During the full violence of the wind , a flash of lightning afforded them light enough to see a ship of considerable size , which was so near , that it was with difficulty they steered clear of her  but they could not get information to what nation she belonged , as the wind was too loud for them to hear each other .
This was the first ship they had seen since they parted from the Swallow .
In the morning they saw the Island of Pulo Taya , near which they came to an anchor in the evening  and the next morning sailed again , and saw two ships a-head of them , but the current was so strong that they lost ground , and therefore they again anchored in the evening .
The next day they lost an anchor , the cable of which was cut away by the rocks .
On the 22d they saw the coast of Sumatra , and came to an anchor in the road of Batavia , on the 30th of November 1767 .


On the following day captain Wallis saluted the Dutch governor with 13 guns , and the compliment was returned from the fort with one additional gun .
Permission having been obtained to purchase necessaries , they were soon  supplied with beef and vegetables .
The crew were now threatened with punishment , if any attempt should be made to bring liquor aboard  and no man was permitted to leave the ship , but those who were called by duty  and even those were not suffered to go into the town .
- The intemperate use of arrack is highly pernicious to strangers who visit Batavia .


His Majesty 's ship the Falmouth was at this time laying in the road , but in so shattered a condition , that it was thought she could not hold together during the next monsoon  nor were the few of her crew which remained alive in any better condition than the vessel .
On the 5th of December captain Wallis received a petition from the warrant officers of the Falmouth , setting forth , that their powder had been thrown into the sea , by order of the Dutch , and that the gunner was dead  that their misfortunes had deprived the boatswain of his senses , and that he was then a lunatic in the Dutch hospital  that his stores were all spoiled  that the cook had been wounded , and remained a cripple  and that the carpenter was near death .
- They therefore petitioned that the Captain would carry them to England , or , at all adventures , dismiss them from the ship , as there was now nothing left for them to take charge of Captain Wallis was obliged to refuse their request , however reasonable , and informed them , that as they had taken charge of stores , they  must wait for orders from England .
To this they answered , that they had not received a single order since they were left in the road of Batavia : that they had ten years pay due , and would rather go home sweepers , than remain in their present wretched situation .
That they were never permitted to sleep on shore , and when sick , no person had the humanity to visit them : that the Malays frequently robbed them , and that they expected destruction at the hands of those people , as they had burnt the Siam Prize not long before the arrival of the Dolphin .
They entreated the Captain to make their case known in England , which he readily promised to do .


On the 5th the Captain went on shore , to buy such stores as he thought necessary to carry the ship home with safety .
He visited the different store-houses and arsenals  but the demands of the Dutch were so exorbitant , that he determined to make shift with such materials as he had , rather than be imposed on by people who wished to take every advantage of his necessity .
Accordingly , he sailed on the 8th of December , without losing a single man , and having only two on the sick list .


On the 11th the crew began to be afflicted with colds and fluxes  and the following night they saw the Coast of Java , on which was placed an amazing number of lights , intended , as they imagined , to entice the fish near the beach .
- They anchored off Princes Island on the 14th ,  and began to take in wood and water  at which place they remained till the 20th , during which time they purchased turtle , poultry , and other refreshments .


While they lay here one of the seamen fell from the main-yard into the barge , which was a-longside the ship , and struck down two other men , one of whom was bru [ ... ] sed so much that he died in four days  but the other escaped with a broken toe : the man who fell had several bones broken , and was otherwise shockingly bruised .
They buried three men here , and many others were seized with fluxes , and putrid fevers  the contagi [ ... ] n of which last disorder constantly attacked , in a day or two , those who attended the sick .
At th [ ... ] s time too the ship made above three feet water in four hours .


They struggled with these accumulated misfortune till the 1 [ ... ] th of January , when the sickness began to abate - On the 2 [ ... ] th they encountered a dreadful storm , wh [ ... ] h tore the sails to pieces , [ ... ] ke a [ ... ] , and carried several of the beams ever [ ... ] : yet , during this storm , they observed a [ ... ] of birds and butterflies .
- On the 3 [ ... ] th they saw land , and came to an anchor in Table B [ ... ] y , at the Cape of Good Hope , on the 4th of February .


Captain Wallis having saluted the Governor , and the Commanders of [ ... ] in the harbour , and they having [ ... ] salute in retu [ ... ] n , he lost no time [ ... ] p [ ... ] uring fresh meat  and vegetables for the use of the crew .
The surgeon was sent on shore to hire lodgings for the sick  but as the rate demanded was very high , and as the small-pox ( which many of the seamen had not had ) raged prodigiously , the Captain obtained the Governor 's permission to erect tents on a plain about two miles from the town .


This being done , the sick were sent on shore  positive orders being given that no liquor should be brought to the tents  that no one should be permitted to go into the town  and that extra provisions should be procured for those who were most reduced by sickness .
The Captain was so very ill , that , as long as the ship lay here , he was at a country-house several miles distant .


Every man who was able to do any kind of work , was now employed in the necessary repairs of the ship , which being nearly compleated by the 10th of February , several of the men , who had had the small-pox , were permitted to visit the town  and those who had not had that distemper , were allowed to take daily walks in the country  and as they did not abuse this liberty , it was continued to them as long as the ship remained there .


The necessaries which could not be purchased of the Dutch at Batavia , were bought reasonably at this place  and fresh water was procured by distillation , with a view to convince the  commanders of the Indiamen that lay here , how easily wholesome water might be procured at sea .
This method of distillation is as follows : 56 gallons of salt water being put into the still at five in the morning , thirty-six gallons of fresh water was obtained by about a quarter after ten  thirteen gallons and a half remaining in the still .
This fresh water was procured at the expence of sixty-nine pounds of coals , and nine pounds of wood .


On the 25th all hands were ordered on board , when it was found that every man , except three , was able to do duty .
A number of sheep were purchased for sea stores  and the ship sailed on the third of March .


On the 17th they anchored in the bay of St. Helena , and sent persons on shore to get water , and others to gather purslain , of which there is great plenty .
The Captain going on shore , was saluted by the guns of the fort  and requested to make that place his residence during his stay on the island : but their water-casks being soon filled , and the wind serving the next day , they then sailed for England .


On the 28th they crossed the equinoctial line , getting once more into north-latitude .
On the 24th they saw the Cape of Pico .
- On the 11th of May they had sight of the Savage sloop of war , captain Hammond , in chace of a sloop , at which he fired several guns .
On this captain Wallis fired , and brought the vessel to , which  proved to be laden with brandy , tea , c. from Roscoe in France  she was of Liverpool , and was commanded by Robert Christian .
Captain Wallis detained her , in order to her being sent to England  as she was judged to be a smuggler , pretending to be bound to Bergen , in Norway , tho ' she was sailing to the south-west .


No material incident happened from this time to the end of the voyage , which was happily compleated by the Dolphin coming to an anchor in the Downs on the 20th of May 1768 .


3 .
CAPTAIN CARTERET 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .
In 1766 , 1767 , 1768 and 1769 .


 MR. Carteret having already circumnavigated the globe with Commodore Byron , was appointed to the command of the Swallow sloop , soon after his return to England  and , on the 22d of August 1766 , sailed from Plymouth , in company with his Majesty 's ship the Dolphin , and the Prince Frederick store-ship .


Nothing material happened till the morning of the 9th of September , ( when the ship lay in the road of Madeira ) at which time nine prime seamen left the vessel privately , and swam on shore naked , having only their money tied in handkerchiefs round their bodies .
While Captain Carteret was writing to the Consul to assist him in the recovery of these brave , but imprudent fellows , he received a message , that they had been found naked on the shore .
A boat was instantly dispatched to bring them on board , where they cut a most ridiculous figure , and seemed heartily ashamed of what they had done : it appeared , however , that they had ran this risk only to get a skinful of liquor ( as they said ) knowing they were bound on a long voyage ,  and it being uncertain who might live or die .
Captain Carteret endeared himself very much to the crew by pardoning these men , whose future services amply repaid this well-timed lenity .


It will be needless to recite any particulars which happened till the 11th of April , when the Swallow parted company with the Dolphin and Prince Frederick , as already related in the account of Captain Wallis 's Voyage .
At nine o'clock on this day the Swallow had totally lost sight of the Dolphin , which Captain Carteret judged to be then clear of the mouth of the Streights  and as the Swallow was then under land , where she had not the advantage of any considerable breeze , they entertained no hope of seeing their consort during the remainder of the voyage .


At this time all the cloth , linen , cutlery wares and trinkets were on board the Dolphin  a circumstance which aggravated Captain Carteret 's distress , as he had not any thing proper to barter with the Indians  yet he encouraged the crew not to despair  and was happy to find that they were in high spirits for the voyage .


A few hours after the ships parted company , the Swallow encountered a violent storm , during which there was so thick a fog , that they could not see mountainous land which they were within half a mile of .
At this time the boat was out in search of an anchoring-place   and when night came on , it was so dark , that they could not see half the length of the ship : they therefore hoisted lights , and fired a gun every half hour  and at length the boat reached the ship in safety .
The next morning the boat was again sent in search of a place to anchor in , and in the afternoon , when the Captain despaired of her returning in time , he saw her sounding a bay , and instantly making towards her , came to anchor in safety .


The Captain now retired to rest , but he was disturbed in a few minutes by the shouting of the crew upon the deck , and the noise of those below running to join them .
His fears brought him instantly on the deck , where he heard the universal cry of the Dolphin !
the Dolphin !
but this flattering appearance soon vanished , and proved to be only water forced up , and whirled in the air by a gust of wind from the mountains .
Mr. Carteret says , that as the current sets continually into the harbour where they lay , he has no doubt but it has another communication with the sea to the south of Deseada .
The borders of the bay abound with muscles and wild geese , and afford plenty of wood and water .


They sailed from this place early in the morning of the 15th of April , and soon afterwards , by the sudden shifting of the wind , they encountered so violent a storm , that they were in danger of sinking  yet they did not dare to take  in any sails , for fear of running foul of some rocky islands , which in Narborough 's Voyage are called the Islands of Direction  nor could they go back into the Streight , without the danger of running foul of a lee-shore  yet , notwithstanding their best endeavours , the ship made hastily towards this lee shore .
Thus circumstanced , they were compelled to stave the water-casks on and between the decks , that she might carry better sail  and by this expedient they at length escaped the threatened destruction .
They now got into the open sea , after a very providential deliverance , for , had the wind again shifted , the ship must have been unavoidably lost .


They now steered a northward course along the Coast of Chili  but as the water on board was deemed insufficient for the length of the voyage , the Captain proposed touching at the Island of Juan Fernandes , or Masafuero , to take in a proper quantity .
On the 18th the wind , which had hitherto been favourable for their sailing northward , and consequently getting into a more temperate climate , suddenly shifted , and continued contrary till the 18th of April , blowing violently all the time , accompanied at intervals with dreadful thunder , lightning , rain and hail .


During this time they saw abundance of sea-birds , among which were two sorts , one like a pigeon , which the seamen called the Cape of Good Hope Hen  and the other Mother Carey 's  Chickens  but the true name of these latter is the Peterel .


From the 27th of this month till the 1st of May they had continual storms  and on this day a prodigious sea laid the whole ship under water for some time , while the wind blew a hurricane , and the rain poured down in torrents .
The wind now shifted , so that the head of the vessel came right against a mountainous sea , which repeatedly broke over the forecastle as far as the main-mast , so that it was almost a miracle that she was not sunk .


When the weather became something more moderate , they repaired in some degree the damage the ship had sustained during the storm  but they had much bad weather afterwards till the 9th of May , when they were in sight of the Island of Masafuero : and on the 10th they saw Juan Fernandes , and sailed round to Cumberland Bay , on the east-side of it .


The Spaniards having fortified this island ( a circumstance till then unknown to Captain Carteret ) a number of men were seen on the shore , and two large boats lying on the beach .
A house and four pieces of cannon were observed near the sea side , and on the brow of a hill , at a small distance , was a fort with Spanish colours flying on it .
Many cattle were seen on the hills , and above 20 houses on different parts of the island .
The wind blew so strong out of the bay , that it was impossible to get  very near it : they therefore sailed westward , and were followed by one of the Spanish boats  but she soon returned , on observing that the wind kept them out of the harbour .
On the eastern side of the west bay they saw a kind of guard-house , with two pieces of cannon , on carriages , near it .
They now returned towards Cumberland Bay , when the boat again put after them  but night coming on , they lost sight of her .
As Captain Carteret had only English colours on board , he did not hoist any during all this time .


Thus disappointed of the refreshments they so very much wanted , they sailed for Masafuero , where they anchored on the 12th , but were unable to land , as the beach was full of rocks , and the surf ran so violently , that the best swimmers could not get through the breakers : the next morning , however , the boats landed , and filled some water-casks .


On the 15th they anchored on the east-side of the island  but were driven from their moorings , and kept out at sea all night .
In the morning the cutter was sent for water , and the ship got near the shore , where she soon received several casks , and sent the cutter back for more .
The long-boat was likewise dispatched on this service , as well as to carry provisions to those on shore .
In the afternoon the boats being observed running along the shore , the ship followed and took them in , but not without their  sustaining so much damage by the violence of the sea , that the carpenters were obliged to work all night in repairing them .


On the 17th the cutter was again sent for water  and , when she returned , the Lieutenant reported , that the violent rains which had fallen in the night , had brought down such a deluge of water , that the people on shore narrowly escaped drowning , after losing several of the casks .
Mr. Gower , the Lieutenant , having seen many rivulets of water produced by the rain which had fallen in the night , proposed to go and fill the casks  but he had not been long gone , before the weather began to wear a very threatening appearance , and it thundered and lightned to a degree beyond description .
The ship now kept as near the shore as possible , and as it was grown quite dark , they were very apprehensive that the long-boat was lost , but she happily came a-longside just in time to prevent the destruction of her whole crew  for she had scarce been hoisted over the ship 's side a moment , before such a violent squall came on , as must inevitably have sunk her .
Mr. Gower reported , that three of the sailors having swam on shore with the casks , just before the storm began , he was under a necessity , however unwilling , of leaving them behind , exposed , naked as they were , to thunder , lightning , rain and hunger .


These men returned to the ship , on the evening of the 19th , and gave an account how they had passed the melancholy interval .
- While  day-light continued they hoped for an opportunity of regaining the boat  but when the darkness and cold of the night advanced , they began to consider how they should abide the inclemency of the weather  when necessity suggested an expedient that ingenuity might have sought in vain : - they laid , alternately , each between the two other , thus procuring at once the partial comforts of a house and a fire .
As soon as the day broke they proceeded by the sea-shore towards the tent : but being repeatedly impeded by high points of land , they swam round them , at such a distance , to avoid the rocks , that they were scarcely in less danger from the sharks : happily , however , they escaped every danger , and were received at the watering-place with a degree of pleasure that does honour to the humanity of their brother tars  part of whose cloths and provisions were instantly appropriated to feed the hungry and clothe the naked .
When these men returned on board , they were indulged with a whole night 's rest , and the next morning were perfectly well .
The reader will no doubt be pleased to be informed , that these were three of the nine men who swam ashore at Madeira , for a skinful of liquor .


This day such a quantity of fish was taken by the boat , with hooks and lines only , as was equal to the consumption of the whole crew .
On the 20th the ship , which had been some time standing off and on near the shore , came again  to an anchor , when the long-boat being sent out , procured , in a short time , an ample supply of fish .
During the night , and all the following day , they had extreme bad weather  but , as soon as it became moderately calm , three seamen were sent on shore to kill seals , and make oil of their fat , for the use of the lamps .


On the 22d in the morning ( after a stormy night ) the boats being sent on shore , returned with a number of pintado birds , which were obtained from the inhabitants , who said that , when the wind blew briskly in the night , these birds flew into the fire in amazing numbers  so that they catched several hundreds the preceding night .
On the 23d as much water was got off as the weather would permit of , but several casks were lost by the violence of the surf .
The weather now grew so bad that the Captain was impatient to sail : he therefore gave orders for all the people on shore to come on board .
At this time the ship drove from her moorings , dragging the anchor after her , till she got into deep water .
They now lay to under bare poles , waiting for the boats , while the violence of the wind carried the water higher than the mast-head .
In the evening the long-boat with ten of the men were taken on board  but there yet remained the cutter , with the Lieutenant and eighteen men .
The weather becoming more moderate about midnight , the ship stood in for land , and at ten the next morning was  near the shore , but the cutter was not to be seen  about noon however she was discovered close under land , and in three hours time her crew got on board .
These people endeavoured to come off in the evening , but had no sooner left the shore than their cutter was almost filled with water , and narrowly escaped sinking : at length she regained the shore , where she remained all night : in the morning it was concluded , that the ship had perished in the storm , and the crew , having taken proper methods to secure the boat , proposed to wait till the summer , when they hoped she might be able to carry them to the Island of Juan Fernandes : - but these thoughts were now lost in the joy of their happy deliverance .


The island of Masafuero is of a triangular form , about 22 miles in circumference , and , at a distance , has the appearance of a single rock  there is good anchorage on many parts of the coast , and the island abounds with goats .
Wood and water are plenty , but difficult to be procured , on account of the violence of the surf .
Cod , hallibut , coal-fish , and cray-fish are to be catched in great numbers  and seals are so numerous , that Captain Carteret thinks , the killing of thousands could make no apparent difference in their numbers .
The mountain cabbage grows on the island , which likewise abounds in birds , among which are hawks of a very large size .


 Captain Carteret having left the Island of Musafuero , sailed to the north , with the hope of getting the south-east trade-wind  and , having got more to the north than he first proposed , he looked out for the Islands of St. Ambrose and St. Felix , which he missed through the erroneous printed accounts of their latitudes and longitudes .
They likewise searched for the continent , which in the charts is called Davis 's Land  but which Mr. Carteret gives many reasons for supposing has no existence .


This search was continued till the 17th of June , which is the depth of winter , when the weather was dark and cold , with sleet , rain , thunder and lightning .
The gloom was so constant , that they had seldom sun-shine enough to make an observation , yet were necessitated to carry all the sail possible , that they might not perish with hunger before the ship should reach some port , where they might procure a supply of necessaries .


On the 2d of July they discovered an island , which was well clothed with trees , and down the side of which ran a stream of fresh water .
It appeared to be about five miles in circumference , and was called PITCAIRN 'S ISLAND , from the name of a young gentleman who first saw it .


On the 4th the ship admitted a great quantity of water , and was otherwise in a very shattered condition , from the rough seas she had encountered .
 The crew now likewise began to be much afflicted with the scurvy  though they were , happily , well supplied with water , an abundance of the rain-water being catched by means of an awning lined with painted canvas .


On the 11th Captain Carteret gave the name of the BISHOP OF OSNABURGH 'S ISLAND , to a low piece of land discovered this day , which was well cloathed with verdure .
On the 12th they saw two other small islands , on one of which the boat 's crew landed , and found birds so tame , as to be taken without the least difficulty .
The other island was about 15 miles distance  but neither of them afforded either water or vegetables .
They were called the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER 'S ISLANDS  and Captain Carteret supposes them to be the same land which was seen by Quiros .


From this period till the 22d of the month they had alternate storms and calms  and on this day judged themselves five thousand four hundred miles from the continent of America  yet in all this run they had seen no signs of a southern continent .


As the scurvy was now daily encreasing among the seamen  and as the weather was bad , and the ship in a crazy condition , the Captain determined to steer such a course as might most probably tend to the preservation of the vessel and the crew .
In consequence of this resolution he stood to the northward , in the hope of having  the advantage of the trade-wind , and reaching some island , where he might be furnished with the necessary refreshments .


On the 25th they saw great flocks of birds , which induced them to think that they were near land , but they could not discover any .
On the 3d of August great numbers of sea-birds were seen  and on this day the current was observed to set strongly to the southward , though it had hitherto ran in a contrary direction  whence the Captain concluded , that the passage between New Zealand and New Holland opened in this latitude , which was ten degrees eighteen minutes south , and the longitude 177 degrees 30 minutes east .


On the 10th of this month the ship sprung a leak , in a part which they could not come at to repair  so that their situation was truly alarming  but two days afterwards they discovered land , which gave fresh spirits to the almost desponding crew .
The Captain observed seven islands , and sailed towards two of them , which lay very near together : in the evening they came to an anchor near the largest of them , on which were seen two of the natives , who were negroes , with woolly heads , and wore no kind of clothing .


A boat being sent on shore , an account was brought back that there was fine fresh water opposite where the ship lay , but that it would be diff [ ... ] cult to procure it , as the whole country was covered  with thick wood quite to the sea shore .
This circumstance , added to the danger there might be of the natives attacking them from the woods , determined the Captain to look for a more convenient anchoring-place .
- On the day following , therefore , the cutter , with the master and a party of seamen , was sent to the westward , to search for a place to procure wood and water , to seek for refreshments for the sick , and to discover a place where the ship might be repaired .
He received orders to be strictly on his guard against any attack from the natives , and took with him a few trinkets that happened to be on board , to procure their good will .
The longboat being likewise sent off , she soon returned laden with water : she was dispatched a second time , but the people on board the ship observing some of the natives advancing to the landing-place , a signal was made for her to return .


Soon after this three of the Indians sat down on the shore , looking stedfastly at the ship for several hours .
The Lieutenant was now sent towards them  but , when they saw the boat approaching , they moved along the coast , where they were soon met by three others .
When they had conferred together , the former went on , while the latter advanced hastily towards the boat .
This being observed from the ship , a signal was made for the boat 's crew to act with caution .
The Lieutenant now proceeded to the shore , and offered his presents to the Indians ,  who , regardless of his trinkets , discharged their arrows , and immediately ran off  though the boat 's crew received no injury , they fired at the natives  but these , likewise , escaped unhurt .


In a short time after this the cutter came on board  the Master , who commanded her , having three arrows sticking in his body .
The account he gave of his expedition was , in substance , as follows .
Being arrived at a place about fifteen miles from the ship , he saw some houses , but only a very few of the natives , and landed with four of the crew well armed : the first fears of the Indians being dispelled , they accepted his presents with pleasure , and , in return , gave him some fish , yams , and cocoa-nuts .
He then went to the houses  but soon observing a number of the natives among the trees , and several canoes coming round a point , he hastened towards the boat  but before he could embark , a general attack with bows and arrows was made , as well on those in the boat , as on those on shore .
Thus situated , the crew fired repeatedly , killing and wounding many of the Indians : still however the latter continued the fight , some of them running into the water as high as the breast  and when the boat got f [ ... ] rther off she was pursued by the canoes , which did not retreat till one of them was sunk , and many of the people in the others were killed .


 Some of the crew gave an account of this transaction less favourable to the Master than his own : they said , that the Indians behaved in the most friendly manner , till he exasperated them by cutting down a cocoa-nut tree , after they had strongly intimated their wishes that he would not destroy it .
The instant the tree fell they all left the spot but one man , but they were soon observed to assemble in great numbers among the trees  on which a Midshipman entreated the Master to go on board  but he slighted the advice , nor even retired till the attack was commenced .
The Master and three of the seamen died of the wounds received from the arrows of the Indians .


The Captain now determined to attempt the reparation of the ship in her present situation  and succeeced so far that the leak was greatly reduced .
On the 14th the wind setting full into the bay , the ship was driven near the shore , and many of the Indians were observed in the woods , as if in expectation of her running aground .


On the 15th a party was sent on shore to get water , a shot having been previously fired into the woods , to disperse any of the natives that might be lurking in them .
The Lieutenant was likewise dispatched in the cutter to keep the coast clear for the waterers , by repeated firings into the woods  yet , in spite of these precautions , a flight of arrows was soon discharged among  them , by which one of the seamen was dangerously wounded .
The crew now incessantly fired to that part of the wood from whence the arrows came  but the Captain made a signal for the boats to come off  and as soon as he had taken them on board , fired several canon into the woods  on which a great number of the natives left their retreat , and ran away along the shore .


In a short time another large party was observed on a point of the bay , at whom a ball being fired , it fell in the midst of , and dispersed them .
The people now took in water with safety  but a constant firing was kept up , both from the ship , and from a party on shore  and it appeared that our countrymen had been dreadfully successful , for repeated groans , as of dying men , were heard from several places in the woods .


As the Master was now dying of the wounds he had received by the arrows  as the Captain and Lieutenant were so ill that their recovery was doubtful  and as there was no chance of procuring proper refreshments at this place , all intentions of pursuing the voyage farther to the southward were laid aside : the Captain , therefore , having named the place EGMONT ISLAND , and the harbour where the ship had lain SWALLOW BAY , sailed from it on the 17th of August 1767 .


 On the same day an island was discovered , which received the name of PORTLAND 'S ISLAND , four miles from which they saw an harbour , which was called BYRON 'S HARBOUR .
Having sailed three leagues from the harbour , they had sight of the bay where the Indians had attacked the crew of the cutter .
This was called BLOODY BAY  on its borders were a number of houses well constructed , and one much longer than the others , which had the appearance of a kind of hall for the transaction of public business .
In this place , which was well built , and covered with a kind of thatch , the Master and his party had been received by the natives , before the wanton cutting down of the cocoa-nut tree .
A large number of arrows were hung in bundles round the room , the floor and sides of which were covered with matting .
In this neighbourhood were many gardens , surrounded by stone walls , and planted with vegetables .
Three miles from this village a large town was seen , in the front of which , towards the sea , was an angular kind of fortification , built of stone , and near five feet high .


About three miles from hence they saw a bay , into which a river empties itself , which they called GRANVILLE 'S RIVER , and it appeared to be navigable for small vessels far up the country .
The point of this bay was called FERRERS 'S POINT  and from hence the land forms a large bay , near which is a considerable town ,  inhabited by an incredible number of people , who , while the ship was sailing by , came out of their houses , holding something like a bundle of grass in their hands , with which they appeared to stroke each other , running in rings , or dancing , all the while .


Sailing onwards a few miles they saw another point , which was called CARTERET POINT , on which was a large canoe , with an awning over it  at a small distance was another town , fortified as that before-mentioned .
The inhabitants of this place likewise advanced before their houses , and danced as the others had done .
The dance being ended , many of them came off in canoes towards the ship : but having got near enough to have a good view of her , they would advance no farther .


They soon saw another small island , which was named TREVANION 'S ISLAND , and the north part of it was called CAPE TREVANION .
Both the main land and this island abounded with inhabitants  and a boat being sent to sound the passage , they no sooner observed that she had left the ship , than several canoes advanced to attack her .
The Indians having let fly their arrows , the boat 's crew fired , and killed one man , and wounded another .
A gun laden with grape shot was at the same time fired from the ship , on which all the canoes pulled hard for the shore , except the one with the wounded man in it , which being taken to the ship , the surgeon  was ordered to examine his wounds , One of this poor fellow 's arms was broke , and a shot had gone through his head  and the Surgeon being of opinion that the latter wound was mortal , he was placed in his canoe again , and with one hand rowed towards the shore .
His canoe was formed only of the hollow trunk of a tree : he was a young fellow , almost as black as the negroes of Guinea  his features were good , his hair woolly , and he went quite naked .
- It may be fairly asked here , if it would not have been an act of humanity to have attempted the cure of this unfortunate youth , if it had been only by a single dressing , before he had been dismissed .


As they sailed along the shore they saw plantains , bananas , and cocoa-nut trees , and observed great numbers of hogs and poultry : but the Captain being yet very ill , and having not officers sufficient to direct the men in the common business of the ship , he had no opportunity of establishing a friendly traffick with the Indians  and was unable to obtain by force those refreshments which the crew became every hour more and more in want of .


Thus situated  unable to proceed farther to the south , and in danger of being too late for the monsoon , he gave immediate orders to proceed northwards , in hope of discovering the country , which Dampier has distinguished by the name of Nova Britannia .


 To all the islands they had now left , Captain Carteret gave the general name of QUEEN CHARLOTTE 'S ISLANDS  and , besides those already mentioned , he saw several , which he named as follows , viz .
LORD HOW 'S ISLAND  KEPPEL 'S ISLAND  LORD EDGCOMBE 'S ISLAND  OURRY 'S ISLAND  and VOLCANO ISLAND  this last being so denominated from a smoke that issued from its top , which is of an amazing height , and shaped like a sugar loaf .


The canoes of the inhabitants are formed of the trunk of a tree hollowed , are large enough to contain ten or twelve people , and are furnished with out-riggers , but have no sails .


The people of Egmont Island are very expert at swimming and diving  and active and vigorous in a high degree .
Their arrows are so sharp , and discharged with such strength , that one of them wounded a man in the thigh , after passing through the wash-board of the boat .
The points of these arrows are flint , and no metal was seen among the natives .
There are good harbours on the coasts of these islands , which likewise abound in rivers , and have some vallies , but for the most part they are mountainous , and covered with trees .


Captain Carteret sailed on the 18th of August , and holding a west-north-west course , he on the 20th discovered a small island , which was called GOWER 'S ISLAND , the people of which did not differ in any thing material from  those of the islands he had lately left .
Some cocoa-nuts were here procured in exchange for nails  and the inhabitants had intimated , that they would furnish a farther supply the next morning  but it was then found , that the current had carried the ship considerably to the south during the night , and brought them within sight of two other islands , one of which was called SIMPSON 'S ISLAND , and the other CARTERET 'S ISLAND .


As both these islands were to windward of the ship , they sailed again to Gower 's Island , which abounds with fine trees , many of which are the cocoa-nut .
A boat being sent on shore , the Indians attempted to seize her  and in return the crew made prize of a canoe , in which was a number of cocoa-nuts .
The arms of the natives were spears , bows and arrows .


As a strong current set to the southward , they now steered a north-westerly course , because the bad condition of the ship , and sickness of the crew , would have rendered it impossible for them ever to have got to sea again , if they had been driven into any gulph or deep bay .
On the 22d one of the marines sell overboard , and was drowned , notwithstanding every effort was used to save him .


The ship fell in with nine islands in the night of the 24th , which Captain Carteret supposes to be the same that were discovered by Tasman , and are named Ohang Java : eight of  these are very small , but the other is more extensive , and they are all inhabited by blacks , whose heads are woolly , like those on the coast of Africa .
The next day they had sight of an island covered with verdure , which was called SIR CHARLES HARDY 'S ISLAND , and from the number of fires that were seen on it , they supposed it to be inhabited .
This day they likewise had sight of a large island , formed of three high hills , which took the name of WINCHELSEA 'S ISLAND .
On the 26th they saw a large island to the north , which Captain Carteret imagines to have been the island of St. John , that was discovered by Schouten .


This day they were within sight of Nova Britannia , and the next morning the current drove the ship into a deep bay , which , in Dampier 's Voyages , is called St. George 's Bay .
On the 28th they gave the name of WALLIS 'S ISLAND to a small island in a bay , off which they came to an anchor , and were now 7500 miles due west from the main land of America .
The cutter was sent out to catch fish  but not succeeding , she returned with a considerable number of cocoa-nuts .


On the next day , after great fatigue , they weighed the anchor , and sailed to a place which they called ENGLISH COVE , where they immediately began to take in wood and water .
They now attempted to catch fish with hooks and lines , but none of them would bite  nor were  they much more successful with their nets : turtle likewise were very plentiful , yet they could not take any of them  but at low water they picked up some large cockles and rock oysters .
From the shore they procured cocoa-nuts , and the cabbage of the cocoa-tree , which is crisp and juicy  this , when eaten raw , tastes like a chesnut  but , when boiled , has a more agreeable flavour than the parsnip .
It was found to be excellent when boiled with portable soup and oatmeal .
They likewise gathered some plumbs , which tasted like those of the West Indies , which are called Jamaica plumbs  and by this supply of vegetables , they had soon reason to rejoice in the blessing of returning health .


This island seemed to have been lately inhabited , as several wretched huts were seen , in which were the remains of fires , and the shells of fish , which did not appear to have been long catched : they had likewise a sight of two animals , which were supposed to be dogs .
This place produces palm-trees of various kinds  aloes , canes , bamboos , rattans , beetle-nut , and the nutmeg-tree  with a variety of other trees , and many shrubs and plants of which the names were not known .
In the woods was a large black-bird , whose note was not unlike the barking of a dog : there were likewise parrots , rooks , pigeons and doves : they also saw centipieds , serpents and scorpions .


 Having taken in wood and water , and repaired the ship in the best manner they were able , the Captain took possession of the country , with all the neighbouring islands , for the King of Great Britain .
This was done by nailing on a lofty tree a piece of board faced with lead , on which was engraved the name of the vessel , and of the Captain , the time of entering and leaving the harbour , and a representation of the union flag of England .


They left this cove on the 7th of September , and anchored on the same day almost close to a grove of cocoa-nut trees , where they supplied themselves with the fruit and the cabbage in very great abundance  and called the place CARTERET 'S HARBOUR , which being formed by the main and two islands , one of them was named LEIGH 'S ISLAND , and the other COCOA-NUT ISLAND .


Nothing now remained but to attempt the reaching Batavia while the monsoon continued favourable : on the 9th of September , therefore , the anchor was weighed , and when they were about four leagues from land , the wind and current being both against them , they steered round the coast into a channel between two Islands , which channel was divided by another island , to which Captain Carteret gave the name of the DUKE OF YORK 'S ISLAND , and near which are several smaller islands .
To the south of the largest island are three hills of singular  form , which were called the MOTHER AND DAUGHTERS , one of which was supposed to be a volcano , from the large clouds of smoke that were seen issuing from it .
A point they called CAPE PALLISER , lies to the east of these hills , and CAPE STEPHENS to the west  north of which last lies an island , which took the name of the ISLE OF MAN .
The country in general is mountainous and woody , and was supposed to be inhabited , from the number of fires seen on it in the night .
On the Duke of York 's Island the houses are situated among groves of the cocoa-nut tree , and form the most enchanting prospect .


Having brought to for the night , they sailed again in the morning , when some of the Indians put off in canoes towards the ship  but the wind being fair and blowing fresh , it was not thought prudent to wait for them .
Steering north-west by west , they lost sight of New Britain on the 11th , and it being now found , that what had been taken for a bay was a streight , it was called ST. GEORGE 'S CHANNEL , and the island on the north of it received the name of NEW IRELAND .
In the evening they discovered a large island , well clothed with vendure , which was denominated SANDWICH ISLAND , off this island the ship lay great part of the night , during which time a perpetual noise was heard , resembling the sound of a drum .
When they had almost cleared the Streight , the weather falling calm ,  a number of canoes approached the ship , and , though they could not be prevailed on to go on board , they exchanged some little matters with the crew , receiving nails and bits of iron , which they preferred to every thing else that was offered them .
Though the canoes of these people were formed out of single trees , they were between 80 and 100 feet in length .
The natives are negroes , and their hair is of the woolly kind , but they have neither thick lips nor flat noses .
They wore shell-work on their legs and arms , but were otherwise naked , except that their hair and beards were powdered with white powder , and a feather was stuck into the head above the ear .
Their arms consisted of a long stick and a spear  and it was observed , that they had fishing-nets and cordage .


They now sailed west , and coming in sight of the south-west point of the island , it was called CAPE BYRON  near which is an island of considerable extent , which received the name of NEW HANOVER .
The Streight they had now passed was called BYRON 'S STREIGHT , one of the largest islands they had seen , BYRON 'S ISLAND  and the south-west point of New Hanover , QUEEN CHARLOTTE 'S FORELAND .
On the following day they saw several small islands , which received the name of the DUKE OF PORTLAND 'S ISLANDS .


When they had compleatly navigated St. George 's Channel , the whole length of which  is about one hundred leagues  they sailed a westward course , and on the 14th of September discovered several islands .
The next morning some hundreds of the natives came off in canoes towards the ship , and were invited on board by every token of friendship and good will  notwithstanding which , when they came within reach , they threw several lances at the seamen on the deck .
A great gun and several muskets were now fired at them , by which some were killed or wounded  on which they rowed towards the shore  and after they had got to a distance , a shot was fired so as to fall beyond them , to convince them that they were not out of the reach of the guns .


In a short time other canoes advanced hastily from a distant part of the island  and one of them coming nearer than the rest , the people in it were invited on board the ship  but instead of complying with the invitation , they threw in a number of darts and lances .
This assault was returned by the firing of several muskets , whereby one of the Indians was killed  on which his companions jumped over-board , and swam to the other canoes , all of which rowed to the shore .
This canoe being taken on board , was found to contain a turtle , some other fish , and a fruit between the apple and plumb , of a species hitherto unknown to Europeans .
These people were almost negroes , with woolly hair , which they powdered  and  they went naked , except the ornaments of shells round their arms and legs .


Captain Carteret now coasted along the islands , to which he gave the general name of the ADMIRALTY ISLANDS .
He describes them as having a most enchanting appearance , being covered with woods , groves of cocoa-nut trees , and the houses of the natives .
The largest of these islands is computed to be above 50 miles in length  and he supposes that they produce many valuable articles , particularly spices .


They discovered two small verdant islands on the 19th , which were called DUROUR 'S ISLAND , and MATTY 'S ISLAND , the inhabitants of which last ran along the coast with lights during the night .
They had sight of two other small islands on the 24th , which were called STEPHENS 'S ISLANDS , and which abounded with beautiful trees .


On the evening of the 25th they had sight of three islands , the natives of which came off in canoes , and went on board the ship .
They bartered cocoa-nuts for some bits of iron , with which metal they did not seem unacquainted , and appeared extravagantly fond of it .
They called it parram , and intimated , that a ship sometimes touched at their islands .
Those people were of the copper colour , and had fine black hair  but their beards were very small , as they were continually plucking the hair from their faces .
Their teeth were even and white ,  and their countenances agreeable  their activity was such , that they ran to the mast-head even quicker than the seamen .
They ate and drank any thing that was given them  and had not the least degree of reserve in their behaviour .
Their dress consisted only of a piece of fine matting round the waist .
- As the current carried the ship at a great rate , the Captain had no opportunity of landing , though the Indians offered , that some of their people should remain on board , as a security for the safe return of such of the seamen as might be sent on shore .
One of the Indians , on finding that none of the crew were to land , absolutely refused to leave the ship , and was therefore carried to the island of Celebes , where he died .
This man was named Joseph Freewill , and the largest of the islands was called FREEWILL ISLAND  but the natives called it Pegan  and the names of the other two are Onata and Onello .


On the evening of the 28th they discovered an island from the mast-head  but they neither visited nor gave name to it .
On the 12th of October they got sight of a small island , which was named CURRENT ISLAND , from the great strength of the southerly current  and on the following day they discovered two more small islands , which were called ST. ANDREW 'S ISLANDS .


On the 26th they had sight of land , which , on the day following , they knew to be the Island of Mindanao , and coasted the south-east  part of it , in search of a bay described in Dampier 's Voyages  but they could not find it .
A boat being sent out , found a little nook at the southern extremity of the island , near which was a town and a fort .
The boat being seen from the shore , a gun was fired , and some canoes came out after it  on which the Lieutenant retreated towards the ship , and , when the canoes came in sight of her , they retired in their turn .


They now sailed eastward , and , on the 2d of November , anchored in a bay near the shore , whither the boats immediately went , and took in water  they saw no signs of that part of the island being inhabited , but a canoe being observed to come round a point of the bay , as if to watch their motions , the Captain hoisted English colours , in the hope of tempting her crew on board  but they only took a survey of the ship , and rowed off .


In the night a loud noise was heard from the shore , very much like the war-whoop of the savages of America  which , inducing Captain Carteret to think that the intentions of the islanders were hostile , he ordered up his guns from the hold , and made all preparations to repress force with force .
The next morning one of the boats was sent on shore for water , while the other was held in readiness to assist in case of danger .
As soon as the crew had landed , many armed men advanced from the woods ,  one of whom holding up something white , the Captain , who had no white flag on board , sent the Lieutenant on shore , with orders to display a table-cloth as a signal of peace .
This being done , two Indians came down to the Lieutenant , one of whom addressed him first in Dutch , and then in Spanish , in which latter tongue he was with difficulty understood .
His enquiries were , if the ship was a Dutch vessel  what number of men and guns she carried  if she had been to Batavia , or was bound thither  and whether she was designed for war or trade .


These questions being answered , he said they might go to the town , and he would introduce them to the Governor .
The Lieutenant now desired that some armed Indians might retreat , and that the seamen might be permitted to fill water  which was readily granted .
This being done , the Lieutenant presented the Indian with a silk handkerchief , and received a coarse neckcloth in return .
The boats soon returned to the ship , with a good supply of water  and Captain Carteret was congratulating himself on the prospect which these amicable appearances promised , when he observed some hundreds of Indians , armed with targets , hangers , broadswords , pikes , bows , arrows and muskets , range themselves opposite the ship : - they brandished their swords , and held up their targets , in token of defiance , at the same time discharging their lances and arrows towards the ship .


 Captain Carteret , still resolved to avoid coming to extremities if it were possible , and sent the Lieutenant again on shore , to display the table-cloth , as an ensign of peace .
The natives seeing that the boat had reached the shore , yet that no person landed , one of them advanced , and beckoned them to come to the spot near where he stood  which the Lieutenant declined doing , as he would then have been within reach of their arrows .


The Captain having formed a resolution of visiting the town , sailed from hence the next morning , after having called the place DECEITFUL BAY : but the wind soon blowing violently in shore , he altered his resolution , and steered for Batavia .


The south of Mindanao is a fine country , interspersed with woods , lawns and plantations  and abounds with inhabitants , as do likewise its neighbouring islands .
Captain Carteret was of opinion , that there were Dutchmen in the town , or persons in the Dutch interest , who , finding the Swallow to be an English vessel , had irritated the inhabitants against the crew .


On the 14th of November , 1767 , they reached the Streight of Macassar , situate between the islands of Borneo and Celebes , to a point of which latter island they gave the name of HUMMOCK POINT  to the westward of which a number of boats were seen fishing on the  shoals .
They were in sight of two very small islands on the 21st , which are well clothed with verdure , and deemed by Captain Carteret to be the same that are called Taba Islands in the French charts .


On the 27th they crossed the equinoctial line , and got into southern latitude , at which time they found the current setting against them , and the tornadoes became violent .
The crew was now diminishing by death , and weakened daily by sickness  so that there were hardly hands sufficient to navigate the vessel .
On the 3d of December they had sight of the islands called the Little Pater-nosters , which lie something more than two degrees south of the line  but it was out of their power to land any where for refreshment , as the winds and currents were against them .
Not a man on board was now free from the scurvy  and when it was imagined that nothing could have aggravated their distress , they were attacked by a pirate in the middle of the night of the 10th of December .
It was so very dark that they could not see their enemy , who attacked them with swivel guns and small arms  but they returned the salute so warmly , that the pirate was sunk , and all her crew perished , after having wounded two persons on board the Swallow , and done some very trifling damage to the ship .
The pirate had been seen in the dusk of the evening  and Captain Carteret afterwards heard that she belonged  to a Freebooter , who had upwards of thirty vessels engaged in the dangerous business of piracy .


By the 12th of this month they had lost thirteen of the crew  and the death of thirty others was hourly dreaded .
At this time too the westerly monsoon was set in , so that it was impossible to reach Batavia  and as they must speedily make some land , or inevitably perish , it was resolved to attempt the getting to Macassar , a Dutch settlement on the island of Celebes .
On the 13th they saw several trees floating , and birds sitting on them : and two days afterwards they came to an anchor , at little more than a league from Macassar .


Late that night the Governor sent a Dutchman on board the Swallow , who was greatly alarmed to find that she was an English man of war , no such vessel having ever anchored there before  and so apprehensive of danger was the Dutchman , that he would not venture to enter the cabin .
Very early the next day the Captain sent a letter to the Governor , requesting permission to buy provisions , and asking shelter for the ship , till the proper season returned for sailing to the westward .
When the boat arrived at the wharf , not one of her crew was permitted to land  and on the Lieutenant 's refusing to deliver the letter , except to the Governor himself , the Shebander and the Fiscal ( two officers of the town ) came to him , and said that the Governor was sick , and that they came for  the letter by his command .
Though this sickness was believed to be mere pretence , the Lieutenant at length delivered the letter , which they took with them .
When the boat 's crew had waited several hours in the burning heat of the sun , and without the least refreshment , the Lieutenant was informed , that the Governor had given orders to two gentlemen to wait on Captain Carteret , with an answer to his letter .
While the boat lay off the wharf , it was observed that there was a great hurry on shore , all hands being engaged in fitting out such vessels as were proper for war .


Soon after the boat came back , Mess .
Le Cerf and Douglas brought a letter , intimating , that ' `` the ship should instantly depart from the port , without coming any nearer to the town  that she should not anchor on any part of the coast , and that the Captain should not permit any of his people to land on any place that was under the Governor 's jurisdiction . '' '


As the most forcible answer to this letter , the Captain shewed his dying men to the gentlemen , and again pleaded the urgent necessity of the case .
They could not but see and feel the propriety of granting refreshments and shelter to persons in such a situation  but still , they said , their orders were absolute , and must be obeyed .
Provoked at this treatment , the Captain declared he would anchor close to the town  and if they then refused him necessaries , that  he would run the ship a-ground , and himself and his crew would sell their lives as dearly as possible .
Alarmed at this declaration , they begged the Captain to remain in his present station , till the Governor should give further orders  and this he promised , provided that he had an answer before the sea breeze set in on the day following .


Early in the morning a sloop of war , and another vessel , with many soldiers on board , came and anchored under the ship 's bows .
The Captain sent to speak with them , but they would not answer a single question : and as the sea-breeze set in at noon , he then sailed towards the town , the other vessels weighing anchor , and keeping even pace with him .


A vessel now approached from the town , in which were several gentlemen , among whom was the Mr. Douglas above-mentioned  but none of them would go on board till the Swallow had dropped her anchor .
On their expressing some surprize that the Swallow had sailed from her former station , Captain Carteret told them , that he had only acted agreeable to his declaration to them the preceding day , in which he was fully justified by his present situation .
These gentlemen brought with them two sheep , some fowls , fruit , and other provisions , which were highly acceptable .


After they had made several propositions , which Captain Carteret could not but reject ,  he again declared his resolution of putting his threats in execution , and to convince them that he was in earnest , shewed them the body of a man who had expired within a few hours  but who would probably have been then alive , if the refreshments had been brought in time .
They now enquired if the ship had touched at the Spice Islands  and being answered in the negative , it was at length agreed , that she should sail to a bay at a small distance , where an hospital might be built for the sick , and where provisions were plenty , and that if any thing farther was wanted , it should be sent from Macassar .


This proposal was readily embraced , on the condition that the Governor and Council should ratify it , which they afterwards did .
The Captain now enquiring why the two vessels had anchored under the ship 's bows , was told , that it was only to protect her from any outrages on the part of the natives of the country .
Mr. Carteret had nothing to treat his guests with , but bad salt meat and rotten bread : but , during their treaty , a very elegant dinner having been dressed in the gentlemen 's vessel , it was served up on board the ship  after which they parted good friends .


An officer from the town coming on board the next day , the Captain applied to him to procure money for his bills on the English government .
This he promised to attempt , and went on shore for that purpose , but , returning in the evening ,  brought word , that there was not a person in the town , who wanted to remit any money to Europe  and that the Company 's chest was totally drained : but this difficulty was at length surmounted , by an order to the Resident at Bonthain , who had money to remit to Europe , to take the Captain 's bills for any thing he should want .


On the day following Mons .
Le Cerf , who was an Ensign , brought a pilot on board , to carry the ship round to Bonthain  and Le Cerf had the command of some soldiers , who were on board two guard-boats that attended the ship : and he was likewise to act as a check on the Resident .


All things being thus settled , they sailed early on the 20th of December , 1767 , and anchored in the road of Bonthain on the following day .
The guard-boats were now moored close to the shore , to prevent all communication between the ship 's boats and those of the country .
Captain Carteret having attended the Resident , to settle the price and mode of procuring provisions , a house was appropriated to his use , situated near a small fort .
This being fitted up as an hospital , the sick were landed and placed under a guard , which was commanded by M. Le Cerf , who would not permit them to go above thirty yards from the hospital , nor the natives to traffic with the seamen  so that the profits of traffic fell into the hands of the Dutch soldiers , whose gains were immoderate  so great ,  indeed , that some of them sold at a profit of more than a thousand per cent .
after having extorted the provisions from the natives at what price they pleased .
Captain Carteret having remonstrated with the Resident on the injustice of this procedure , he spoke to the soldiers on the subject  but this produced no good effect  and it was known that , after this , Le Cerf 's wife sold provisions at more than double the prime cost , while it was suspected that he sold arrack to the seamen .


On the 26th and 27th three vessels arrived , one of which had troops on board , destined for the Banda Islands  but their boats not being allowed to go on board the ship , the Captain prevailed on the Resident to purchase , for his use , four casks of salt provisions .
Above one hundred sail of proas arrived at Bonthain Bay on the 28th .
- These vessels , which fish round the island , carry Dutch colours , and send the produce of their labours to China for sale .


On the 18th of January a letter from Macassar informed Captain Carteret , that the Dolphin , his old consort , had arrived at Batavia .
Ten days after this the Secretary , who had been sent with Le Cerf , had orders to return to Macassar : on the 19th of February , Le Cerf himself was recalled  and on the 7th of March the largest of the guard-boats was likewise ordered back .
On the 9th the Resident received a letter from the Governor of Macassar , enquiring  when Captain Carteret would sail for Batavia , though he must know it could not be before the eastern monsoon set in , which would not be till May .
All these were suspicious circumstances  and toward the end of the month it was observed , that a canoe frequently paddled round the ship several times in the night , and retired as soon as she was seen .


While every one was speculating on these matters , the Captain received a letter , informing him that a design was formed for his destruction  that the Dutch were at the bottom of this affair  but that the ostensible person was to be the son of the King of Bony , who was on terms of friendship with the Dutch , as they had often assisted him in attempts to reduce the inhabitants of the other parts of the island of Celebes , and had been as often repulsed .
The pretended grounds for this proceeding were , that the English might form connections with these unsubdued natives of the island .


Whether the information contained in this letter was true or false , Captain Carteret put his ship in the best posture of defence possible .
He even suspected that the Resident was privy to the horrid scheme  but he had afterwards reason to be convinced to the contrary : though it appeared that one of the Princes subject to the King of Bony , and a minister of that monarch , had been privately at Bonthain  but of  eight hundred men , who were said to be there , no traces could be found .


On the 7th of May the Captain received , through the hands of the Resident , a letter from the Governor of Macassar , denying his having any knowledge of the above-mentioned project , and requiring that the writer of the letter might be given up  but this requisition was not complied with , as the Captain knew he would be equally punished , whether his information was or was not true .


At this place they purchased plenty of fresh provisions at moderate prices  and , among the rest , beef of an excellent quality .
The bullocks of this place are those that have the bunch on the back  and it likewise abounds in buffaloes , horses , sheep , deer , and goats .
The natives neither eat pork nor turtle  but they sold the latter , as well as other fish , to Captain Carteret .


Having taken in wood and water , they sailed hence on the 22d of May , and , steering along the shore , came to an anchor the same evening , between the islands of Celebes and Tonikaky .
They sailed again in the morning , and at night saw the southernmost of the islands of Salombo .
On the 26th they saw the island of Luback  and on the 29th a number of small islands called Carimon-Java .


On the 2d of June they had sight of the land of Java , and on the following day came to an anchor in the road of Batavia , after having  with difficulty prevented the ship from sinking , by the constant working of the pumps , during her whole passage from Celebes .
Having fired guns of salutation , the Captain attended the Governor , requesting permission to repair the defects of the ship  but he was directed to petition the Council .


The Council met on the Monday following , when the Captain sent a letter , stating the defects of the ship , and requesting permission to repair her .
The time from this day till the 18th of the month was lost in altercations respecting the affair at Bonthain Bay  the Governor and Council insisting , that Captain Carteret should sign a formal declaration , that he believed the report of an intention formed at Celebes , for cutting off the ship , was false and malicious  and the Captain on his part resolutely persisting in his refusal to sign any such paper .


On the 18th the Captain learnt that orders had been given for repairing the ship at Onrust , whither a pilot attended her , and where she came to an anchor on the 22d of June  but as the wharfs were pre-engaged by other ships , the repairs did not commence till the 24th of July .
On examination , the vessel was found in so very rotten and decayed a condition , that the Dutch carpenter would not undertake her repair , without shifting her whole bottom , till the Captain had certified under his hand , that what should be done was in consequence of his own  express direction .
This the Dutchman thought necessary , lest the ship should never reach England , and the blame consequently rest with him .


During Captain Carteret 's stay at this port , he frequently visited M. Houting , an Admiral in the service of the Dutch , a gentleman remarkable for his politeness and affability , from whom the Captain received several distinguishing marks of kindness .
- The Governor of Batavia lives with the state of a sovereign Prince .
When he goes publicly abroad he is escorted by horse-guards , and has two black footmen who run before his coach .
When any other coach meets that of the Governor , it is drawn on one side , and the persons in it get out to pay their respects  nor , if a coach is behind , must it be driven by the Governor 's , whatever necessity may require its greater speed .
The like homage is paid to the members of the Council , only that the person does not quit his carriage , but salutes them standing in it  one black man , with a stick in his hand , runs before the coach of a member of the Council , and thinks himself at liberty to punish those who do not make a proper obedience .


It was hinted to Captain Carteret , by the landlord of the hotel where he lodged , that his carriage must stop , if he should meet the Governor 's , or those of the Council  but the Captain disdaining to pay a degree of homage to  the servants of the States of Holland , which is not paid to the King of Great Britain , refused to comply  and when the black men were mentioned , he said he knew how to defend himself , and pointed to his pistols .
In a few hours afterwards he was told , from the Governor , that he might act as he pleased .


Captain Carteret having engaged some English seamen , sailed from Onrust on the 15th of September , and came to an anchor off Princes Island , in the Streight of Sunda , on the following day .
Having here taken in wood and water , they sailed on the 25th with a fine gale of wind , which held them during a passage of 700 leagues  and on the 23d of November they came to an anchor in Table Bay in the Cape of Good Hope .
The Captain having received numberless civilities from the Governor and other gentlemen of this place , sailed on the 6th of January , and on the 20th anchored off the Island of St. Helena , from whence he again sailed on the 24th .
On the 31st of January they anchored in a bay off the Island of Ascension , where they found an abundance of turtle , many of which were taken  and the ship sailed again on the following day .


It had been accustomed to leave on this island ( which is uninhabited ) a letter in a bottle , containing an account of the name and destination of any ship which might touch there  and with this custom Captain Carteret complied .


 On the 20th of this month a ship which had been seen the preceding day far to the leeward , but had out-sailed the Swallow in the night , tacked and stood towards her .
A boat was sent on board , in which was a young officer , who , by many artful questions , endeavoured to learn from Captain Carteret all the most important particulars of his voyage  and this piece of ill manners was aggravated , by his inventing a tale to disguise those of his own voyage  for the vessel he had just left was no other than that of M. Bougainville , which was then returning from a voyage round the world .
Captain Carteret learnt this circumstance afterwards from the Lieutenant  for the boat 's crew , which had brought the French officer on board , had discovered every secret to one of the English crew who spoke French .
Happily , Captain Carteret had kept his own secret so well , that Monsieur Bougainville was not at all the wiser for the time he had lost in the negotiation of this illiberal business .
The Frenchman learnt the name of the English ship from the letter left in the bottle at the island of Ascension .


Our adventurers had sight of the western islands on the 7th of March 1769 , and came to an anchor at Spithead on the 20th of the same month , without meeting with any accident worth recording .


Considering the extreme unfitness of the Swallow to perform such a voyage  the length  of time she was in doing it  the amazing dangers she escaped  and the apparently insurmountable difficulties she went through  to what can we ascribe her arriving safe in England at last , but the merciful interposition of a particular providence .


4 .
CAPTAIN COOK 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .
In 1768 , 1769 , 1770 and 1771 .


 MR. Banks , a gentleman of considerable fortune in Lincolnshire , was induced to undertake this voyage from his natural curiosity , and invincible desire of attaining knowledge .
He had already visited the banks of Newfoundland and Labradore , and was now happy in having an opportunity of observing the transit of Venus in the southern part of America .
He accordingly engaged his friend Dr. Solander to accompany him in this voyage .
This gentleman , who was born in Sweden , and educated under the celebrated Linnaeus , had , from his extensive learning , been appointed to a place in the British Museum , and given the greatest satisfaction in that capacity .
Mr. Banks also took with him two draftsmen , one to delineate views and figures  the other to paint such subjects of natural history as might present themselves .
He had besides a secretary and four servants .


 On the 26th of August , 1768 , the Endeavour sailed from Plymouth , and on the 2d of September they saw land between Cape Finister and Cape Ortegal , on the coast of Gallicia in Spain .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander had , during this course , an opportunity of viewing many marine animals , hitherto unnoticed  among these was a new species of an angular figure , near three inches in length and one in thickness , having a hollow quite through it , and a brown spot at one end .
Four of these animals were joined together  but upon being put into water they separated and swam about .
They resembled a gem in brightness , and shone in the water with fine colours .
There was another animal of a more beautiful and lively colour , which was not unlike an opal .
About ten leagues from Cape Finister , various birds were observed , which had not been described by Linnaeus .


The islands of Puerto Santo and Madeira were discovered on the 12th , and the next day they anchored in Fonchial road .
In heaving the anchor , Mr. Weir , the Master 's mate , was carried overboard and drowned .
Mr. Banks found at Madeira a tree , called by the natives Vigniatico , the Laura indicus mentioned by Linnaeus .
The wood of this tree can scarce be distinguished from mahogany , which induced this gentleman to believe , that the wood  called in England Madeira mahogany , was the Laura indicus  as no mahogany is exported from this island .
The only article of trade in Madeira is wine , which is made in the following manner  the grapes are put into a square wooden vessel , the size of which is proportioned to the quantity  then the persons employed take off their cloaths , get into the vessel , and with their elbows and feet press out as much of the juice as they can  in this manner the stalks are then tied together , and pressed under another square piece of wood , by a lever and a stone , to extract the remainder of the juice .
A whole vintage is frequently spoiled by the bad grapes being mixed with the others , which the inhabitants obstinately refuse throwing out , as the quantity of wine is increased by them .


There are no wheel-carriages in this island  the only resemblance of them is a hollow board , that may be called a sledge , and which serves to carry their wine vessels .
The soil is so rich , and there is such a variety in the climate , between the hills and plains , that there is no object of luxury which grows either in India or Europe , that might not probably be cultivated here .
Walnuts , chesnuts and apples , flourish almost without culture upon the hills .
The pine-apple , the mango , the guava and the banana , grow almost spontaneously in the town .
The corn is large grained and fine , and it might be produced in great abundance  nevertheless ,  the greatest part of what is consumed is imported .
The beef , mutton , and pork , are likewise remarkably good , particularly the first , which induced the Captain to take some on board .
Foncho , which is fennel in Portuguese , gave name to the town of Fonchial , that lies in latitude 20 degrees 33 minutes north , and longitude 16 degrees 49 minutes west .
It is seated at the bottom of a bay , poorly built , though extensive in proportion to the island  the streets are narrow , and very badly paved .
In the churches there are great numbers of ornaments , with pictures and images of saints  the first are , for the most part , done by mere daubers , and the latter are cloathed in laced habits .
A better taste prevails in some of the convents , particularly that of the Franciscans  here simplicity and neatness unite , and give us a very favourable idea of these good fathers .
The infirmary is also a building that does honour to the architect , and is the most considerable edifice in the whole place .
There are many very high hills  Pico Ruivo is near 5100 feet in height , perpendicularly from its base .
These hills are covered round with vines to a certain height , above which there are great numbers of chesnut and pine trees , and above them various sorts of timber , so thick as to form forests .
The Mirmulano and Paobranco , which are found amongst them , are unknown in Europe .
The latter is very beautiful , and would  be greatly ornamental in our gardens .
The inhabitants are computed to be between 70 and 80,000  and the revenue arising from the customs is supposed to amount to 20 or 30,000 pound sterling per annum .
Water , wine , fruit and onions , are here in plenty  sweat-meats are also to be had without any difficulty  but permission must be obtained from the Governor for poultry and fresh meat .
The Endeavour sailed from Madeira September 19 .
On the 22d they saw the Islands of Salvages , northward of the Canaries .
The chief of these islands was about 5 leagues to the south one half west .
These islands appear to lie in latitude 30 degrees 11 minutes north .
On the 23d they saw the Peak of Teneriffe , bearing west by south .
This mountain is near 15,400 feet high .
On the 29th they saw Bona Vista , one of the Cape de Verd Islands , lying in latitude 16 degrees north , and longitude 21 degrees 48 minutes west .
From Teneriffe to Bona Vista they observed flying fish in great numbers , which appeared very beautiful , their sides resembling burnished silver .
Mr. Banks went out in a boat on the 7th of October , and caught what is called a Portuguese man of war , together with several marine animals of the Molusca tribe .
They had now variable winds , with some showers of rain  and the dampness of the air did great injury to their iron utensils .
October  19th Mr. Banks shot the black-toed gull , which has not been described by Linnaeus .
The dung of this bird is of a lively red .


They crossed the line with the usual ceremonies on the 25th of October .


When the Endeavour was , on the 28th of October , in the latitude of Ferdinand Noronha , and in longitude 32 degrees 5 minutes west , they looked out for the island , and the shoals which , according to the charts , lie between it and the main  but neither the island or the shoals could be discovered .
On the 29th , in the evening , they saw the luminous appearance of the sea , mentioned by navigators : it emitted rays of light , resembling those of lightning .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , not being inclined to adopt any of the opinions that had prevailed with regard to the causes of this luminous appearance ( such as its being caused by fish darting at its prey , by the putrefaction of fish and other inhabitants of the sea , and even by electricity ) threw out a casting-net , when they were confirmed in their suggestion , that it was occasioned by some luminous animal .
A species of the medusa was caught , which resembled a metallic substance greatly heated , emitting a whitish light .
Some crabs were brought up at the same time , which , though exceeding small , gave a very glittering appearance .
These animals had hitherto escaped the observation of all naturalists .


 Provisions beginning to fall short , it was determined to put into Rio de Janeiro .
They saw the coast of Brazil on the 8th of November , and spoke with the people on board a Portuguese fishing-boat , who informed them , that the land which they saw was to the south of Sancto Espirito .
Mr. Banks bought some fish of the people in the boat , and was much surprised to find that they refused Spanish silver , and wanted English shillings .


Their interpreters , who were a Venetian and Portuguese , informed them , that the crew of the fishing vessel declared , they had not seen a ship for eight years  this however they supposed to be a mistake , as they spoke such imperfect English , that it was almost impossible to understand them .


On the 13th , in the morning , we made sail for the harbour of Rio de Janeiro .
Mr. Hicks , the first Lieutenant , was sent before in the pinnace to the city , to inform the Governor , we put in there for refreshments and water , and to obtain a pilot .
The pinnance returned without the Lieutenant , who was detained by the Viceroy till the Captain came on shore .
When the Endeavour came to an anchor , a ten-oared boat filled with soldiers came up , and rowed round the ship , without any conversation taking place .
Soon after another boat came up , with several of the Viceroy 's officers  they enquired  whence the Endeavour came  what her cargo consisted of  her number of men and guns  and her destination .
These and several other questions were justly answered without equivocation  when they apologized for detaining the Lieutenant , and the other steps they had taken , pleading its being customary .


Captain Cook went on shore on the 14th , and obtained leave to purchase provisions , on condition of employing an inhabitant as a factor : to this the Captain objected , but in vain , as well as to the sending a soldier in the boat every time she went from the shore to the ship .
Having requested , that the gentlemen on board might remain on shore whilst they sojourned , and that Mr. Banks might go up the country to collect plants  these requests were peremptorily refused .
Captain Cook judging the Viceroy imagined they were come to trade , the Captain endeavoured to convince him of his mistake , by acquainting him , that they were bound to the southward , to observe the transit of Venus over the sun  a very interesting object to the advancement of navigation , of which phenomenon he appeared to be totally ignorant .
An officer was appointed to attend the Captain  this , which he was told was meant as a compliment , he would have declined  but the Viceroy was too polite to allow his dispensing with the honour .


 Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were greatly disappointed upon the Captain 's return , to find they were not permitted to reside on shore , and go up the country  and their chagrin was still farther increased , to hear they were not allowed even to leave the ship  the Viceroy having ordered , that only the Captain , and such sailors as were necessary to be upon duty , should be suffered to come on shore  probably its being reported , that these gentlemen came upon this voyage to make discoveries and observations , and possessed extraordinary abilities for such business , might occasion these rigid orders .
They attempted , nevertheless , to come on shore , but were prevented by the guard-boat  though several of the crew , unknown to the centinel , stole out of the cabin window at midnight , letting themselves down by a rope into the boat , and driving away by the tide till they were out of hearing  they then rowed to some unfrequented part of the shore , where they landed , and made excursions up the country , though not so far as they could have wished .
When the Captain went on shore to remonstrate with the Viceroy respecting these restrictions , the only answer that could be obtained was , that he acted in consequence of his Master 's orders .
Thus situated , the Captain resolved to go no more on shore , rather than be a prisoner in his own boat , as the officer , who complimented him with his company , waited  upon him both from and to the shore .
It was now resolved to draw up two memorials to the Viceroy  one was written by the Captain , the other by Mr. Banks : they produced answers no way satisfactory .
Captain Cook and Mr. Banks replied , and several written remonstrances and answers passed between them and the Viceroy , but to no purpose .
The Captain judging it necessary , in vindication of his compliance , to urge the Viceroy to some act of force in the execution of his orders , he sent Lieutenant Hicks with a packet ( on the 20th ) ordering him not to allow a guard in his boat .
The officer of the guard-boat finding the Lieutenant resolved to obey the Captain 's command , did not oppose him by force , but accompanying the Lieutenant on shore , went to the Viceroy , and acquainted him with what had passed , which induced his Excellency to refuse opening the packet , commanding the Lieutenant to return .
He found a guard had been put on board his boat in his absence , and insisted upon the soldiers quitting it .
The officer now seized the boat 's crew , and conducted them to prison , under an escorte  and the Lieutenant was sent back to the ship under a guard .
When Mr. Hicks had acquainted the Captain with these transactions on shore , the latter wrote to the Viceroy , demanding his boat and men , and inclosed the memorial , which he would not receive from the hands of the Lieutenant .
 The bearer of this express was a petty officer , in order to avoid continuing the dispute about a guard , which a commissioned officer must have kept up .
Having delivered his packet , an answer was promised .


In the interim , in a sudden gust of wind , the long-boat , with four pipes of rum ( by the rope breaking that was thrown her from the ship ) went a-drift windward of her , with a small skift of Mr. Banks 's that was fastened to her .
The misfortune was still greater as the pinnace was on shore .
The yawl was manned immediately , but did not return till next morning , when she brought all the people on board .
From them Captain Cook learnt , that the long-boat having filled with water , they had brought her to a grappling , and quitted her , and falling in with a reef of rocks on their return , they were compelled to cut a-drift the little boat belonging to Mr. Banks .
In this situation the Captain dispatched another letter to the Viceroy , acquainting him with the accident , at the same time desiring he would assist them with a boat to recover their own : this was accompanied with a fresh demand of the pinnace and her crew .
His Excellency at length complied with both the request and demand  and the same day they fortunately recovered the long-boat and skift .
In the Viceroy 's answer to the Captain 's remonstrance , he expressed some doubts of the Endeavour being a King 's ship , and accused the  crew of smuggling .
Mr. Banks 's servants had , its true , by stratagem , got on shore ( the 22d ) early in the morning , and remained till night , but brought on board only plants and insects .
In Mr. Cook 's reply , he said he was willing to shew his Excellency his commission again , the Viceroy having already seen it  and that if any attempt to carry on a contraband trade should be repeated , desired his Excellency would take the offender into custody .
Thus terminated the dispute .


Mr. Banks ( on the 26th in the morning ) artfully eluded the vigilance of the guard , and went on shore : he avoided the town , and passed the day in the fields , where the chief objects of his curiosity lay .
The people behaved with civility , invited him to their habitations , and he purchased a young pig for eleven shillings , and some other things .
But the next day it was reported , that search was making for him and Dr. Solander , which induced them to lay aside all thoughts of going again on shore .


Being prepared for sea , with water and provisions , they took on board a pilot the 1st of December , but the wind being contrary , they were prevented getting out .
The next day a Spanish packet arrived from Buenos Ayres , for Spain , when the Captain politely offered to take Mr. Cook 's dispatches to Europe  and he accordingly sent , by that conveyance , all the papers that had passed between him and the Viceroy ,  leaving duplicates with his Excellency for his court .


The Endeavour did not get under sail till the 7th , when having passed the Fort the pilot was discharged , and the guard boat quitted them at the same time .
During the last three or four days of their remaining at Rio de Janeiro , the air was covered with butterflies , chiefly of one kind .


From the observations of the writer of the first account of this voyage , we have the following description of the town and country .
Rio de Janeiro , is supposed to have been thus named on account of its being discovered on the festival of saint Januarius .
The town , which is the capital of the dominions of the Portuguese , in America , borrows its name from the river Januarius .


It is situated on the west side of the river , from which it extends itself about three quarters of a mile .
The ground on which it stands is a level plain  it is defended on the north side by a hill that extends from the river , leaving a small plain , which contains the suburbs and the King 's dock .
On the south side is another hill , running towards the mountains which are behind the town .
Some of its streets run parallel from north to south , and are intersected by others at right angles .
The principal street is near an hundred feet in width , and extends from St. Benedict to the foot of Castle-hill   the other streets are commonly twenty or thirty feet wide .
The houses adjoining to the principal street have three stories , but in other places they are very irregular , though built after the same manner as in Lisbon .
In the town are four convents  the first is that of the Benedictines , situated near its northern extremity  this structure affords an agreeable prospect , and contains an elegant chapel , which is ornamented with several valuable paintings .
The second is that of the Carmelites , which forms the centre angle of the royal square , and fronts the harbour  its church had fallen some time before , but it is again rebuilding in a very elegant manner , with fine free-stone brought thither from Lisbon .
The third is that of St. Anthony , situated on the point of a hill on the south side of the town  before this convent stands a large bason of brown granite , in the form of a parallelogram , which is employed in washing .
The fourth is situated at the eastern extremity of the town , and was formerly the Jesuits convent , but is now converted into a military hospital .


The Viceroy 's palace forms the right angle of the royal square : the palace , mint , stables , goal , c. compose but one large building , which has two stories , and is ninety feet from the water .
In passing through the palace , the first entrance is to a large hall or guard-room , to which there is an ascent of three or four steps .
 In the guard-room are stationed the body guards who attend the Viceroy , and are relieved every morning between eight and nine .
Adjoining to the hall are the stables , the prison being in the back part of the building .
Within the guard-room is a flight of stairs for ascending to the upper story  this divides at a landing-place about half way , and forms two branches , one leading to the right , and the other to the left .
The former enters a saloon , where there are two officers in constant attendance  the Viceroy 's aid-du-camp at the same time waiting in an antichamber to receive messages and deliver orders .


The left wing of the royal square is an irregular building , which consists chiefly of shops occupied by trading people .
In the center of the square is a fountain supplied with water from a spring at the distance of three miles , from which it is brought by an aqueduct .
From this fountain both the shipping and inhabitants are supplied with water , the place being continually crowded with negroes of both sexes waiting to fill their jars .
At every corner of the streets is an altar .
The market place extends from the north-east end of the square along the shore  and this situation is very convenient for the fishing-boats , and those who bring vegetables from the other side of the river to market .
Negroes are almost the only people employed in selling the different  commodities exposed in the market , and they employ their leisure time in spinning of cotton .


Without the Jesuits college on the shore is a village called Neustra Seignora del Gloria , which is joined to the town by a very few intervening houses .
Three or four hundred yards within the Jesuits convent stands a very high castle , but it is falling to decay .
The bishop 's palace is about three hundred yards behind the Benedictine convent , and contiguous to it is a magazine of arms , surrounded by a rampart .


The gentry here keep their chaises , which are drawn by mules  the ladies however use a sedan chair , boarded before and behind , with curtains on each side , which is carried by two negroes , depending from a pole connected to the top of the chair by two iron rods coming from under its bottom , one on each side , and resting at the top .
The inhabitants likewise use hammocks or rajas , supported in the same manner , and surrounded with curtains .


In this town the apothecaries shops commonly serve the purposes of a coffee-house , people meeting in them to drink capillaire , and play at back-gammon .
The gentry when seen abroad are well dressed , though at home they are but loosely covered : the shopkeepers have commonly short hair , and wear linen jackets with sleeves .
Beggars , who infest the streets of  most European cities , are not to be found in this .


With regard to the women , it is on all hands agreed , that the females of the Portuguese and Spanish settlements in South America , are less averse to granting amorous favours , than those of any other civilized part of the globe .
According to Dr. Solander 's account , as soon as the evening began , females appeared on all sides in every window , and particularized those of the male sex they liked by giving them nosegays  the Doctor and two other gentlemen received so many of these bouquets , that they threw handfuls away .


The climate of Rio de Janeiro is both agreeable and healthy , being free from many inconveniencies that are incident to other tropical countries .
The air is but seldom immoderately hot , as the sea breeze constantly begins to blow about ten o'clock in the morning , and continues until night , when it is generally succeeded by a land wind , though this does not always happen .
The seasons are divided into rainy and dry  though their stationary periods have lately be-become very irregular and uncertain : indeed the rainy seasons had almost entirely failed the four years preceding their arrival , at which time the rains had just begun , and they fell in large quantities during their stay : formerly the streets have been overflowed by the rain , and rendered impassable except with canoes .


 The adjacent country is mountainous , and chiefly covered with wood , but a small part of it appearing to be cultivated .
The soil near the town is loose and sandy , but farther from the river it is a fine black mould .
It produces all the tropical fruits , such as oranges , lemons , limes , melons , mangoes , cocoa-nuts , c. in great abundance , and without much cultivation  a circumstance which is very agreeable to the inhabitants , who are very indolent .


The mines , which lie far up in the country , are very rich  but their situation is concealed , and nobody can view them , except those who work in them .
The experiment is very dangerous , for every one found upon the road which leads to them is hung upon the next tree , unless he can give a satisfactory account of the cause of his being in that situation .
About twelve months before their arrival , the government had detected several jewellers in carrying on an illicit trade for diamonds with the slaves in the mines  and immediately after a law passed , making it felony to work at the trade , or have any tools in possession , the civil officers having indiscriminately seized on all that could be found .
Near forty thousand negroes are annually imported to dig in the mines  these works are so pernicious to the human frame , and occasion so great a mortality amongst the poor wretches employed in them , that in the year  1766 twenty thousand more were draughted from the town of Rio , to supply the deficiency of the former number .


There are several courts of justice in the town , at all of which the Viceroy presides  in criminal causes the sentence is regulated by a majority of voices in the supreme court .
The Viceroy has a Council appointed from Europe by the king , to assist him in his private department , where he has two voices .


The inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro maintain a whale-fishery , which supplies them with lamp-oil .
They import their brandy from the Azores , their slaves and East India goods from their settlements in Africa , their wine from Madeira , and their European goods from Lisbon .


The current coin is Portuguese , which is struck here  the silver pieces are called Petacks , of different value  and the copper are five and ten ree pieces .


Rio de Janeiro is very useful for ships that are in want of refreshment  the harbour is safe and commodious , and may be distinguished by a remarkable hill , in the shape of a cone , at the west point of the bay .
The entrance is not wide , but it is easy , from the sea breeze , which prevails from noon to sun-set , for any ship to enter before the wind .
The entrance of the narrow part is defended by two forts , La Cruz and Lozia  they are about three quarters of a  mile from each other .
The bottom being rocky , renders it dangerous to anchor here , but this may be avoided by keeping the middle of the channel .
The whole coast abounds with a very great variety of fish , among which are dolphins and mackrel .


On the 9th of December they took out of the sea an incredible number of atoms , of a yellowish colour , few of them more than the 50th part of an inch in length  it could not even with a microscope be determined whether they were animal or vegetable substances .
These atoms tinged the sea in such a manner , as to cover it with broad streaks of a colour similar to themselves , the greatest part of a mile in length , and several hundred yards in width .


Thursday , December 8 , 1768 , having procured all necessary supplies , they left Rio de Janeiro  they did not meet with any material occurrence from this time to the 22d , when they discovered numerous birds of the Prosillaria genus , in latitude 39 degrees 37 minutes south , and longitude 49 degrees 16 minutes west  they were also frequently surrounded by great numbers of porpoises , of a singular species , which were about fifteen feet in length , and of an ash-colour .
On the 23d they observed an eclipse of the moon  and about seven o'clock in the morning a small white cloud appeared in the west , from which a train of fire issued , extending  itself westerly : about two minutes after they heard two distinct loud explosions , immediately succeeding each other like canon , after which the cloud soon disappeared .


On the 24th they caught a large loggerhead tortoise , weighing one hundred and fifty pounds .
They likewise shot several birds , among which was an albetross , measuring between the tips of its wings nine feet and an inch  and from its beak to the tail two feet one inch and an half .
On the 30th they ran upwards of fifty leagues , through vast numbers of land insects , some in the air , and others upon the water  they appeared to resemble exactly the flies that are seen in England , though they were thirty leagues from land , and some of these insects never quit it beyond a few yards .
Captain Cook imagined he was at this time nearly opposite to the bay called Sans fond ( without bottom ) where it is supposed , by some writers , that the continent of America is divided by a passage  but it was the opinion of the gentlemen on board , that there might be a large river , which probably had occasioned an inundation .
The 31st they had much thunder , lightning , and rain : this and the three following days they saw several whales , and likewise several birds , about the size of a pidgeon , with white bellies and grey beaks .


January 4 , 1769 , they saw an appearance of land , which they mistook for Pepys ' island   but on their standing towards it , it proved , what the sailors call a Fog Bank .
The ship 's crew were about this time , on their complaining of cold , furnished with each a pair of trowsers , and a jacket made of the stuff called Fearnought .
They saw on the 11th , after passing Falkland 's Island , at about four leagues distance , Terra Del Fuego .
Smoke was perceived , which they took for a signal , as it did not continue after they had passed along the shore to the south-east .
On the 14th they entered the streight of Le Maire  but the tide being against them , they were driven out with great violence , and the waves ran so high , that the ship 's bowsprit was frequently under water  at length however they got anchorage , at the entrance of a little cove , which Captain Cook called ST. VINCENT 'S BAY .


The weeds , which here grow upon rocky ground , are very remarkable  they appear above the surface in eight and nine fathoms water  the leaves are four feet in length , and many of the stalks , though not more than an inch and a half in circumference , above 100 .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander having been on shore some hours , they returned with more than a hundred different plants and flowers , hitherto unnoticed by the European botanists .
The country in general near the bay was flat , and the bottom particularly was a plain covered with grass  here was plenty of wood , water and fowl , winter 's  bark was found in great abundance .
The trees are a species of the birch , but are neither lofty nor large  the wood is white , and they bear a small leaf .
Here are also white and red cranberries .


Sunday 15 , having anchored in 12 fathoms , upon coral rocks , before a small cove , distant from shore about a mile , two of the natives came down upon the beach , in expectation that they would land  but this situation affording little shelter , the Captain got under sail again , and the natives retired .


About two o'clock they anchored in the bay of Good Success , and the Captain went on shore , accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , to search for a watering-place , and confer with the Indians .
These gentlemen proceeded about a hundred yards before the Captain , when two of the Indians having advanced forward and seated themselves , they rose , upon Mr. Banks and the Doctor 's coming up , and each of them threw away a small stick , which they had before in their hands  this they did in such a direction , that the sticks flew both from themselves and the strangers , which they meant as a token of peace , and a testimonial of their renouncing weapons  they then returned briskly towards their companions , who had remained at some distance behind , and made signs to the strangers to advance , which they accordingly complied with .
The reception the gentlemen  met with was friendly , though the manner was uncouth .
The civility was returned , by the distribution of beads and ribbons , with which the Indians were much pleased .
After a mutual confidence had been thus established , the rest of the English party joined , and a general conversation , though of a singular kind , ensued .
Three of the Indians now returned with the Captain and his friends to the ship , whom they cloathed with jackets , and gave them bread , jerked beef , c. part of which they eat , and carried the remainder on shore .
They refused to drink rum or brandy , after tasting them , intimating by signs that it burnt their throats .
This circumstance may perhaps corroborate the opinion of those who think water the natural drink of mankind , as of all other animals .
One of these Indians made several long and loud speeches , though no part of either was intelligible to any of us .
Another of them stole the covering of a globe , which he concealed under his skin garment .
After remaining on board about two hours , they returned on shore , Mr. Banks accompanying them .
He conducted them to their companions , who appeared no way curious to know what their friends had seen , and the latter were as little disposed to relate as the others were to enquire .
None of these people exceeded five feet ten inches in height , yet their bodies appeared large and robust , though their limbs  were small .
They had broad flat faces , low foreheads , high cheeks , noses inclining to flatness , wide nostrils , small black eyes , large mouths , small but indifferent teeth , and black strait hair , falling down over their ears and forehead , which was commonly smeared with brown and red paints  and , like all the original natives of America , they were beardless .
Their garments were the skins of guanicos and seals , which they wrapped round their shoulders .
The men likewise wear on their heads a bunch of yarn , spun from the wool of guanicos , which falls over their foreheads , and ties behind with the sinews or tendons of some animal .
Many of both sexes were painted in different parts of their bodies , with red , white , and brown colours  and had also three or four perpendicular lines pricked across their cheeks and noses .
The women have a small string tied round each ancle , and wear each a flap of skin tied round the middle .
They carry the children on their backs , and are generally employed in domestic labour and drudgery .


Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , attended by servants , set out from the ship on the 16th , in the morning , with the design of going into the country as far as they could that day , and returning in the evening .
Having entered a wood , they ascended the hill through a pathless wilderness till the afternoon .
After they had reached what they had taken for a plain , they  were greatly disappointed in finding it a swamp , covered with birch , the bushes interwoven , and so inflexible they could not be divided  however , as they were not above three feet high , they stept over them  but they were up to the ancles in the boggy ground .
The morning had been very fine , but the weather now became cold and disagreeable  the blasts of wind were very piercing , and a shower of snow fell .
They nevertheless pursued their route , in expectation of finding a better road .
Before they had got over this swamp , an accident happened that greatly disconcerted them  Mr. Buchan , one of the draughtsmen Mr. Banks had brought out , fell into a fit .
It was absolutely necessary to stop and kindle a fire , and such as were most fatigued remained to assist him  but Messrs. Banks , Solander , Green and Monkhouse , proceeded and attained the spot they had in view .
Here they found a great variety of plants , that gratified their curiosity , and repaid them for their toil .


Upon returning to the rest of the company , amidst the snow which fell in greater abundance , and being pinched with the cold that was now become more intense , they found Mr. Buchan much recovered .
They had previously sent Mr. Monkhouse and Mr. Green back to Mr. Buchan , and those who remained with him , in order to bring them to a hill , which was conjectured to lie in a better track for returning  to the wood , and was accordingly fixed on as a place of rendezvous .
They resolved from this hill to pass through the swamp , which this way did not appear to be more than half a mile in extent , into the covert of the wood , in which they proposed building a hut and kindling a fire , to defend them from the severity of the weather .
The whole party accordingly met at the place appointed about eight in the evening , whilst it was still day-light , and proceeded towards the next valley .
Dr. Solander having often passed mountains in cold countries , was sensible that extreme cold , when joined with fatigue , occasions a drowsiness , that is not easily resisted  he accordingly intreated his friends to keep in motion , however disagreeable it might be to them  his words were , ' `` Whoever sits down , will sleep  and whoever sleeps , will wake no more . '' '
Every one seemed accordingly armed with resolution  but on a sudden the cold became so very intense , as to threaten the most direful effects .
It was very remarkable , that Dr. Solander himself , who had so forcibly admonished and alarmed his party , should be the first who insisted upon being suffered to repose .
In spite of the most earnest intreaties of his friends , he lay down amidst the snow , and it was with great difficulty they kept the Doctor awake .
One of the black servants became also weary and faint , and was upon the point of following the Doctor 's example .
Mr.  Buchan was therefore detached with a party to make a fire at the first commodious spot they could meet with .
Mr. Banks , with four more , remained with the Doctor and Richmond the black , who , with the utmost difficulty , were induced to come on  but when they had traversed the greatest part of the swamp , they expressed their inability of going any farther .
When the black was informed , that if he remained there he would soon be frozen to death  he replied , that he was so exhausted with fatigue , that death would be a relief to him .
Doctor Solander said he was not unwilling to go , but that he must first take some sleep , notwithstanding what he had before declared to the company .
Thus resolved , they both sat down , supported by bushes , and in a short time fell fast asleep .
Intelligence now came from the advanced party , that a fire was kindled about a quarter of a mile farther on the way .
Mr. Banks then waked the Doctor , who had almost lost the use of his limbs already , though it was but a few minutes since he sat down  he nevertheless consented to go on .
Every measure taken to relieve the black proved ineffectual , he remained motionless , and they were obliged to leave him to the care of the other black servant and a sailor , who appeared to have been the least hurt by the cold , and they were to be relieved , as soon as two others were sufficiently warmed to supply their places .
The Doctor  was with much difficulty got to the fire .
Those who were sent to relieve the companions of Richmond , returned in about half an hour , without being able to find them .
What rendered the mortification still greater was , that a bottle of rum , the whole stock of the party , could not be found , and was judged to have been left to one of the three who were missing .
There was a fall of snow , which incessantly continued for near two hours , and there remained no hopes of seeing the three absentees again , at least , alive .
About 12 o'clock , however , a great shouting was heard at a distance , which gave inexpressible satisfaction to every one present .
Mr. Banks and four others went forth and met the sailor , with just strength enough to walk  he was immediately sent to the fire , and they proceeded to seek for the two others .
They found Richmond upon his legs , but incapable of moving them  the other black was lying senseless upon the ground .
All endeavours to bring them to the fire were fruitless , nor was it possible to kindle one upon the spot , on account of the snow that had fallen , and was still falling , so that there was no alternative , and they were compelled to leave the two unfortunate negroes to their fate , making them , however , a bed of boughs of trees , and covering them very thick with the same .


As all hands had been employed in endeavouring to move the two blacks to the fire , and  had therefore been exposed to the cold for near an hour and a half , some of them began to be afflicted in the same manner as those they went to relieve .
Briscoe , another of Mr. Banks 's servants , in particular , began to lose his sensibility .
They at length reached the fire , and passed the night in a very disagreeable manner .
The party that set out from the ship consisted of twelve , of whom two were already judged to be dead : it was doubtful whether a third would be able to return on board  and Mr. Buchan , a fourth , seemed threatened again with his fits .
The ship was at the distance of a long day 's journey , through an unfrequented wood , in which they might probably be bewildered till night  and being equipped only for a journey of a few hours , they had not provisions left sufficient to afford the company a single meal .


On the 17th in the morning , at day-break , nothing presented itself to view all around but snow , the trees being equally covered with it as the ground  and the blasts of wind were so violent and frequent , that their journey was rendered impracticable , and there was much reason to dread perishing with cold and famine .
However , about six in the morning they were flattered with a dawn of hope of being delivered , by discovering the sun through the clouds , which gradually diminished .
Previous to their setting out , messengers were dispatched to the  unhappy negroes , who returned with the melancholy news of their death .


Though the sky had flattered their hopes , the snow still continued falling very fast , which prevented them beginning their journey so soon as was proposed  but a breeze springing up about 8 o'clock , added to the influence of the sun , began to clear the air  and the snow falling in large flakes from the trees , announced a thaw .
The force of hunger prevailed over every other consideration , and induced them , after having equally divided the small remains of their provisions , to set forward on their journey about 10 in the morning .


In about three hours , to their great astonishment and satisfaction , they found themselves upon the shore , much nearer to the ship than their most sanguine expectations could have flattered them .
When they took a retrospect of their former route from the sea , they found , that instead of ascending the hill in a direct line , they had made a circle almost round the country .
The congratulations every one on board expressed at their return , can better be imagined than expressed .


On the 20th Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander went again on shore , and landed in the bottom of the bay , when they collected many shells and plants hitherto unknown .
They returned on board to dinner , and afterwards went to visit an Indian town about two miles up the country .
 The access was difficult on account of the mud .
When they approached the town , two of the Indians came out to meet them : they began to shout in the same unmeaning manner as they had before done on board the ship .
After this had continued for some time , they conducted Mr. Banks and the Doctor to the town .
It was seated on a small hill , over-shaded with wood , and consisted of about a dozen huts  constructed without art or regularity .
They were composed of a few poles inclining towards each other , in the shape of a sugar-loaf , which were covered on the weather-side with grass and boughs  and on the other side a space was left open , which served at once for a fire-place and a door .
The huts that had been seen in St. Vincent 's Bay were of the same kind .
A little grass served for beds and chairs , and their utensils consisted of a basket for the hand , a satchel to hang upon the back , and a bladder for water  out of which they drank through a hole near the top .
This town was inhabited by a small tribe , consisting of about 50 men , women and children .
Their bows and arrows were constructed with neatness and ingenuity : they were made of wood highly polished  and the point , which was either glass or flint , was fitted with much skill .
Mr. Banks observed glass and flint amongst them unwrought , with cloth , canvass , rings and buttons , c. it was therefore judged , that they travelled at times to the north , as no ship  Figure 5 .
View of a Toillegible in the Island of Terra del Fuego .
 had touched at this part of Terra del Fuego for some years .
Neither did they testify any surprise at the sight of fire-arms , and appeared to be well acquainted with their use .
Probably the spot on which Mr. Banks and the Doctor met them , was not a fixed habitation  their houses not being erected to stand any length of time , and they were destitute of a boat or canoe .
They did not seem to have any form of government among them , nor did there appear any kind of subordination .
These people appeared upon the whole to be the out-casts of human nature , whose lives were passed in wandering in a forlorn manner over dreary wastes - whose only dwelling was a wretched hovel , such as has been described , and their cloaths scarcely sufficient to prevent their perishing with cold in the summer of this country , much less in the extreme severity of winter  their only food was shell-fish , which must soon be exhausted at any one spot  destitute of every convenience arising from the rudest art , or even an implement to dress their food .
Such were these people , who nevertheless appeared content  so little does refinement or luxury promote happiness .


They observed no quadruped animals except seals , sea-lions and dogs .
Mr. Banks saw , from a hill , the impression of the foot-steps of a large beast on the surface of a bog , but he could not determine of what kind it was .
This gentleman  observed no land-birds larger than an English black-bird , except hawks and vultures  there were however ducks , and other water fowl in abundance  likewise shell-fish , muscles , clams and limpets in great plenty .


It is remarkable , that in this country , though uncleared , there was no species of hurtful or troublesome animals .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander found a great variety of plants .
The beach and the birch may be used for timber .
The scurvy-grass and wild celery , it is imagined , contain antiscorbutic qualities  and may therefore be of service to the crews of such ships as hereafter touch at this place .
The former is found in abundance near springs and in damp places , particularly at the watering-place in the Bay of Good Success , and resembles the cuckow-flower or lady 's - smock in England .
The wild-celery resembles the celery in our gardens , but the leaves are of a deeper green .
It grows in great plenty near the beach , and upon the land above the spring-tides  and tastes like parsley mixed with celery .
In the morning of Sunday , January 22 , Captain Cook having got in his wood and water , sailed out of the bay , and steered his course through the streight .


The generality of writers , who have described the island of Terra del Fuego , have represented it as covered with snow , and destitute of wood .
In this however they are evidently mistaken ,  and their error must have arisen from having visited it in the winter season , when it possibly is covered with snow .
The crew of the Endeavour perceived trees when they were at a considerable distance from the island , and on their nearer approach , they found the sea coast and the sides of the hills clothed with an agreeable verdure .
The summit of the hills are barren , but the vallies are rich , and a brook is to be found at the foot of almost every hill  the water has a reddish tinge , but is not ill tasted , and was some of the best Captain Cook took in during his whole voyage .


The streight of Le Maire is bounded on the west by Terra del Fuego , and on the east by the west end of Staten Land , and is near five leagues in length , and as many in breadth .
The bay of Good Success is seated about the middle of it on the side of Terra del Fuego , which presents itself upon entering the streight from the northward  and the south head of it may be distinguished by a land-mark , resembling a road from the sea to the country .
It affords good anchorage , and plenty of wood and water .
Staten Land did not appear to Captain Cook in the manner described in Lord Anson 's Voyage  the horror and wildness with which it is there depicted was not discernable to Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen  on the contrary , the land was neither destitute of wood nor verdure , nor covered with snow , and on  the north side there appeared bays and harbours .
This difference may also probably arise from their not having visited the place in the same season of the year .


Thursday , January 26 , Capt. Cook sailed from Cape Horn .
The farthest southern latitude he made was 60 degrees 10 minutes , by 74 degrees 30 minutes west .
The weather being very calm , Mr. Banks sailed in a small boat to shoot birds , when he killed some sheer-waters and albatrosses  the latter were larger than those caught to the north of the streight  the sheer-waters were less , and their backs darker coloured .
The albatrosses proved very good eating .


Notwithstanding the doubling of Cape Horn is represented as a very dangerous course , and that it is generally thought passing through the streight of Magellan is less perilous , the Endeavour doubled it with as little danger as the North Foreland on the Kentish coast  the heavens were fair , the wind temperate , the weather pleasant , and , being near shore , they had a very distinct view of the coast .


Wednesday , March 1 , Captain Cook was in latitude 38 degrees 44 minutes south , and longitude 110 degrees 33 minutes west , as well by observation as by the log  which concurrence , after a course of 660 leagues , was judged very singular  from whence it was plain , he had no currents that affected the ship , and most probably  had not approached any land of great extent , as there are always currents near lands of considerable compass .
Mr. Banks killed more than sixty birds in one day , and he caught two forest flies of the same species , but never yet described : he also found a cuttle fish , which had just been killed by the birds  it was different from the fishes of this name , met with in the European seas , having a double row of sharp talons , resembling those of a cat , which issued or retracted at will .
This fish made excellent soup .


Saturday , the 25th , on account of a squabble about a bit of seal-skin , which he had taken in a frolic , but which was represented to his officer as a theft , one of the marines , a young fellow about twenty , threw himself overboard , and was drowned .


About 10 o'clock , Tuesday , April 4 , Peter Briscoe , servant to Mr. Banks , discovered land to the south , about three or four leagues distant .
The Captain immediately hauled up for it , and found it to be an island of an oval form , with a lake or lagoon in the center , that extended over the greatest part of it  the border of land which surrounded the lake was in many places low and narrow , especially towards the south , where the beach consisted of a reef of rocks  three places on the north side had the same appearance .
This dismembrance of the firm land , made the whole resemble several woody islands .
To the west was a large clump of trees , and in the center two cocoa-nut trees .
 Captain Cook came within a mile on the north side , but though he cast a line of 130 fathom , he found no bottom , and could not meet with any anchorage .
The island appeared covered with trees of different sorts , but the gentlemen on board could not ascertain any , with glasses , except palm-nuts and cocoa-nuts  there were several natives visible on shore  they seemed tall , with remarkable large heads , which might probably be increased by some bandage  their hair was black , and their complexions copper colour .
There appeared along the beach , abreast of the ship , some of these inhabitants , with pikes or poles in their hands , which seemed twice the height of themselves : they at this time appeared naked  but when they retired , upon the ship 's passing the island , they put on a covering of a light colour .
Some clumps of palm-trees served them for habitations , and at a distance resembled hilly ground , and the groves had a very happy effect .
This island was in latitude 18 degrees south longitude , 139 28 west , and was named LAGOON ISLAND .


Captain Cook saw land again in the afternoon to the north-west .
He reached it by sun-set , when it appeared a low island covered with wood , in form circular , about a mile in circumference .
No inhabitants were visible , nor any cocoa-nut trees  though the Endeavour had reached the shore within half a mile , yet the sland appeared covered with verdure of various tinges .
This island , which is distant from that  of Lagoon , about seven leagues north 62 west .
The gentlemen on board named THRUMB CAP .


Wednesday the 5th they continued their course with a fine trade wind , and about three o'clock discovered land to the west .
This was a low island between 10 and 12 leagues in circumference  it resembled in form a bow , the cord and arch forming the land , and the interstice marking the water  the beach was flat , without any visible herbage upon it , being covered with sea-weeds .
Its length was between three and four leagues , and its width about 200 yards  the bow terminated with two large tufts of cocoa-nut trees  the arch was covered with trees of various heights , and of different verdure  some parts of it , however , was low , and resembled the cord .
They sailed along the beach , within a league , till sun-set , when they judged they were half way between the two tufts of trees  here they sounded .
This island , from the smoke that was discovered , appeared to be inhabited , and it was named BOW ISLAND .
Captain Cook 's second Lieutenant , Mr. Gore , said , after they had sailed by the island , that he had perceived several of the natives under the first clump of trees , that he had discriminated their houses , and observed many canoes hauled up .
But he was the only person who made these observations , though there were several upon deck besides himself .


About noon , on Thursday the 6th , they saw  land again to the west , and at three o'clock they came up with it .
This land seemed divided into two islands , or rather collections of islands , their extent being near nine leagues .
The two largest were divided from each other by a streight of near half a mile in breadth .


Some of these islands were ten miles or more in length , but appeared like long narrow strings of land , not above a quarter of a mile broad  they seemed , however , to produce trees of different kinds , among which was the cocoa-nut tree .
Several of the inhabitants came out in their canoes , and two of them appeared to have a design of coming on board  but they , with the rest , stopped at the reef .
When Captain Cook had got about a league from the shore , he perceived some of the natives following in a canoe , with a sail : he did not think proper to wait for her , and though she had passed the reef , she discontinued her course .
These people appeared to be about our size , and well made : their complexion was brown , and they seemed naked  they had , for the most part , two weapons in their hands  one was a thin long pole , with a kind of spear at the end  the other resembled a paddle  some of their canoes were constructed to carry not more than three men  others had on board six or seven  one hoisted a sail , which , upon the falling of a shower of rain , was taken down and converted into an awning .
It could not be determined  whether the signals made by the people on shore were designed to deter the Endeavour 's company from landing , or as an invitation to come on shore  these waved their hats , the others answered by shouting .
The Captain did not judge it prudent or merciful to be convinced in this respect , as the island appeared of no importance , and the crew were not destitute of any thing it could produce  and as it must have proved a bloody contest on the side of the unarmed Indians .
This curiosity was therefore laid aside , in expectation of soon discovering the island , where they had been directed to make their astronomical observations , the natives of which , it is reasonable to conjecture , would make no opposition to the landing of the gentlemen on board , having already experienced the danger of resistance .


Captain Cook discovered another island on the seventh , about six in the morning , which was judged to be in compass about five miles .
It was very low , with a piece of water in the center , and appeared to abound in wood , and to be covered with verdure , but no inhabitants were visible .
It was called BIRD ISLAND , from the number of birds that were flying about .


Saturday 8 , in the afternoon , they saw land to the north , and in the evening came a-breast of it , at about five miles distance .
This land seemed to be a chain of low islands , it was of an oval figure , and consisted of coral and sand ,  with a few clumps of small trees , and in the middle of it was a lagoon .
It was , from its appearance , called CHAIN ISLAND .
They saw smoke , which arose from different parts , by which they were convinced it was inhabited .


On Monday the 10th , after a tempestuous night , Captain Cook saw Osnaburgh Island  it is called by the natives Maite .
This island is high and circular , about four miles in circumference : it is partly naked and rocky , and partly covered with trees .


The same day , upon their looking out for the island to which they were destined , they saw land a-head .
The next morning it appeared very high and mountainous , and it was known to be King George the IIId 's Island , so named by Captain Wallis , but by the natives called Otaheite .
The calms prevented the Endeavour from approaching it till the morning of the 12th , when a breeze springing up , before 11 several canoes were making towards the ship  only a few approached , and the people on board those that came the nearest would not come on board Captain Cook .
Each canoe had in it young plantains , and branches of trees .
They were brought , as Captain Cook was afterwards informed , as tokens of peace and friendship , and they were handed up the sides of the ship by the people in one of the canoes , who made signals in a very expressive manner , intimating , that they desired these emblems of pacification  should be placed in a conspicuous part of the ship  and they were accordingly stuck amongst the rigging , at which they testified their approbation .
Their cargoes consisting of cocoa-nuts , bananas , bread-fruit , apples and figs , which were very acceptable to the crew , and were then purchased .


In the evening they opened the north-west point , and saw York Island , so named by the crew of the Dolphin .
They lay off and on all night , and in the morning of the 13th they entered Port Royal Harbour , in the island of Otaheite , and anchored within half a mile of the shore .
A great number of the natives immediately came off in their canoes , bringing with them bananas , cocoa-nuts , bread-fruit , apples , and some hogs , which they bartered with the ship 's crew for beads and other trinkets .


The tree that bears the bread-fruit is about the size of the horse-chesnut  its leaves are near a foot and a half long , in shape oblong , resembling , in almost every respect , those of the fig-tree  its fruit is not unlike the cantaloupe melon , either in size or shape  it is inclosed in a thin skin , and its core is as large as a person 's thumb  it is somewhat of the consistency of new bread , and as white as the blanched almon : it divides into parts , and they roast it before it is eaten  it has little or no taste .
An elderly man , named Owhaw , who was known to Mr. Gore and others , who had visited this island with Captain Wallis , came on  board , and as he was considered a useful man , the Captain endeavoured to gratify all his enquiries .
Captain Cook now drew up several necessary rules for the regulation of their traffic with the inhabitants , and ordered that they should be punctually observed .


When the ship was properly secured , the Captain went on shore with Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , a party under arms , and their friend the old Indian .
They were received on shore by some hundreds of the natives , who were struck with such awe , that the first who approached crept almost upon his hands and knees .
He also presented to them branches of trees , the usual symbol of peace .
This symbol was received , on the part of the English gentlemen , with demonstrations of satisfaction and friendship  and noticing , that while each of the Indians held one of these branches in his hand , they gathered some , and followed the example of the natives .


They were conducted by the old Indian , accompanied by his countrymen , towards the place where the Dolphin had watered  here the ground being cleared , the chiefs of the natives threw down their boughs , and the Captain and his companions followed the example , after having drawn up the marines , who , marching in order , dropped their branches upon those of the Indians .
When they came to the watering-place , the Indians intimated , that they had  their permission to occupy that ground , but it was not suited to their purpose .
In the course of this walk , and a circuit through the woods , the Indians had got rid of their timidity , and became familiarized .
On the way they received beads and other small presents , at which they expressed great pleasure .


The whole circuit was near four miles , thro ' groves , consisting of trees of cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit .
Beneath which trees were the habitations of the natives , consisting of only a roof , destitute of walls .
In this peregrination the gentlemen were not a little disappointed at finding very few fowls or hogs .
Captain Cook was informed by such of the party as had been here with the Dolphin , that none of the people hitherto seen were of the first rank , and they imagined the Queen 's residence was moved , no traces remaining of it .
Next morning , before they left the ship , several canoes came about her , filled with people , whose dress denoted them of the superior class : two of these came on board , and each of them fixed upon a friend  one of them chose Mr. Banks , and the other Captain Cook .
The ceremony consisted of taking off their cloaths in great part , and putting them upon their adopted friends .
This compliment was returned , by presenting them some trinkets .
They then made signs for these gentlemen to go with them to the place of their abode  and the Captain being desirous  of meeting with a more convenient harbour , and knowing more of the people , readily assented .
Accordingly the Captain , Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , with the Indians and other friends , got into two boats .
About three miles distance they landed , among several hundreds of the natives , who conducted them to a large house .
Upon their entrance they saw a middle aged man , named Tootahah , who , as soon as they were seated , ordered a cock and hen to be produced , which he presented to Mr. Banks and the Captain , as well as a piece of perfumed cloth  which compliment was returned by a present from Mr. Banks .
They were then conducted with great civility to several large houses , constructed in the same manner as those already described  the ladies , so far from shunning , invited , and even pressed them to be seated .
Whilst they were afterwards walking along the shore , they met , accompanied by a great number of natives , another Chief , named Tubora Tumaida , with whom they settled a treaty of peace , in the manner before described .
Tubora Tumaida intimated , he had provisions for them if they chose to eat , and they accordingly dined heartily upon bread-fruit , plantains and fish .


In the course of this visit , Tomio , the wife of the Chief , placed herself upon the same matt with Mr. Banks , close by him , but she not being young , nor appearing ever to have possessed  many charms  to these causes may be ascribed the little attention this gentleman paid her  and Tomio received the additional mortification of Mr. Banks 's beckoning to a pretty girl , who , with some reluctance , came and seated herself by him .
The Princess was somewhat mortified at the preference given to her rival , nevertheless she continued her assiduities to him .
This whimsical scene was interrupted by an event of a serious nature .
Dr. Solander having discovered that he had lost an opera glass , they complained to the Chief , and interrupted the convivial party .
This complaint was enforced , by Mr. Banks 's starting up and striking the butt end of his musket on the ground , which struck the Indians with a panic , and they all precipitately ran out of the house , except the Chief , and a few others of the superior class .


The Chief appeared much concerned at this accident  not , as we had reason afterwards to believe , that he had any aversion to knavish practices , but because he feared that this early instance of dishonesty might give us unfavourable suspicions of his countrymen , and thereby deprive him of those advantages and emoluments which they expected to gain from us , and which by various artifices they afterwards secured , when our connexion with them became more intimate .
The chief , therefore , to obviate any disadvantageous impressions , gave us to understand , with an appearance of great  probity , that the place which the Doctor had mentioned was not within his district , but that he would send to the Chief of it , and endeavour if possible to have the glass recovered  but that if this could not be done , he would make the Doctor compensation , by giving him as much new cloth , of which he shewed large quantities , as should be thought equal to its value .
The case however was in a little time brought , and the glass itself soon after , which deprived us of the merit we should otherwise have had in refusing the cloth which had been offered us .
But it afforded an opportunity of convincing the natives of our generosity , by lavishing rewards on them for an action , to which self-interest had been the motive , rather than any sentiment of probity  to which , from numerous transactions , they appeared to be absolute strangers .
After this adventure was amicably terminated , they returned to the ship about six o'clock in the evening .


Saturday the 15th in the morning , several of the Chiefs , one of whom was very corpulent , came on board from the other point , bringing with them hogs , bread-fruit , and other refreshments , in exchange for which they gave them hatchets , linen , beads and other trinkets , but some of them took the liberty of stealing the top of the lightening chain .
This day the Captain , attended by Mr. Banks and some of the other gentlemen , went a-shore to fix on a  proper spot to erect a small fort for their defence during their stay on the island  and the ground was accordingly marked out for that purpose .
A great number of the natives looking on all the while , and behaving in the most peaceable and friendly manner .


Mr. Banks having suspected , from seeing few hogs or poultry in their walks , that they had , upon the ship 's arrival , been driven farther up the country , it was resolved to penetrate into the woods  some marines and a petty officer being appointed to guard the tent in the interim  several of the natives accompanied the gentlemen in this excursion .
Upon crossing a little river Mr. Banks perceiving some ducks , fired , and killed three .
The Indians were struck with the utmost terror at this event , which occasioned them to fall suddenly to the ground , as if they had been shot at the same time  they recovered , however , presently from their fright , and continued the march .
Before this party had gone much farther , they were alarmed by the discharge of two pieces , fired by the tent-guard .
Owhaw , after calling together the Captain 's party , dispersed all the Indians except three , who broke branches of trees as pledges of their fidelity .
Upon their return to the tent , it appeared , that an Indian had taken an opportunity to snatch away one of the centinels musquets  whereupon a young midshipman , under whose command the party was , very imprudently  ordered the marines to fire , which they did immediately amongst the thickest of the fugitive Indians , in number above a hundred , several of whom were wounded , but as the criminal did not fall , they pursued and shot him dead .


When Mr. Banks heard of the affair , he was greatly displeased with the guard , and he used his utmost endeavours to accommodate the difference  going across the river , and through the mediation of an old man , prevailed on many of the natives to come over to them , bringing plantain-trees , their usual signal of peace , and clapping their hands in their breasts , they cried , Tyau , which signifies friendship .
In a short time they became social and chearful , and seemed , for the present , to have buried in oblivion the wanton acts of cruelty which had been so lately exercised on their fellow countrymen .


Few of the natives appeared next morning upon the beach , and not one of them came on board .
From hence Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen concluded , that their apprehensions were not intirely removed , more especially as even Owhaw had forsaken them .
The Captain , in consequence of these disagreeable appearances , brought the ship nearer to shore , and moored her so as to make her broad side bear on the spot which had been marked for erecting the fort .
The Captain went on shore in the evening , with some of the gentlemen ,  when the Indians assembled round them , and they trafficked together in a friendly manner .


Mr. Banks had the misfortune of losing Mr. Buchan on the 17th .


The same day they received on board a visit from Tubora Tumaida and Tootahah .
As tokens of peace , they brought with them some plantain branches , and would not risk themselves on board till these had been received , being probably alarmed at the affair of the tent .
They also brought some bread-fruit and a hog ready dressed : in return for which they received some nails .


The fort began to be erected on the 18th .
Some of the company were employed in throwing up intrenchments , whilst others were occupied in cutting fascines and pickets , which the Indians of their own accord chearfully assisted in bringing from the woods .
Three sides of the fort were fortified with intrenchments and pallisades  and on the other which was flanked by a river , the water-casks being filled , were placed so as to form a breast-work .


This day the natives brought down such quantities of bread-fruit and cocoa-nuts , that it was necessary to reject them , and to intimate to them , that the company would not want any for two days .
Beads were trafficked this day for every thing .
Mr. Banks 's tent being got up , he , for the first time , slept on shore .
No Indian attempted to approach it the whole night   however , a precaution had been taken to place proper centinels about it .


Wednesday 19 , Tubora Tumaida visited Mr. Banks at his tent , and brought with him , besides his wife and family , the materials for erecting a house , in the neighbourhood of the fort , where he designed to reside : some time after he had reached the tent , he requested Mr. Banks to accompany him back to the woods  on their arrival at a place where he occasionally resided , he presented him with two garments , one of which was of red cloth , and the other of very fine matting  in which , having clothed Mr. Banks , he conducted him to the ship , and with his wife and son staid to dinner : they had a dish served up , which was prepared by one of Tubora Tumaida 's attendants , not unlike in taste to what in England is called flummery  of this dish the natives seemed exceedingly fond , but the English could not relish it .
Tubora Tumaida had likewise brought with him some food , which appeared like the flower of wheat  this being mixed with cocoa-nut liquor , and some hot stones put into it , was stirred about till it became a thick jelly  on tasting it , they found it of an agreeable flavour , not very inferior to good blanc mange .


Without the lines a sort of market was established , which was tolerably well supplied .
Tubora Tumaida became Mr. Banks 's and the other gentlemens frequent guest  he adopted  their manners , and was the only one of his countrymen who had attempted to use a knife and fork .


Mr. Monkhouse , the Surgeon , said he had seen , in his evening walk the body of the man who had been shot at the tent .
It was deposited in a shed , close to the house where he had resided when alive , and others were within ten yards of it .
It was in length about fifteen feet , and eleven in breadth , and the height was proportionable : the two sides and one end were partly enclosed with a sort of wicker-work , the other end was entirely open .
The corps was deposited on a bier , the frame of which was wood , with a matted bottom , supported by posts about five feet high .
The corps was covered with a matt , and over that a white cloth  by its side lay a wooden mace , and towards the head two cocoa-nut shells : towards the feet was a bunch of green leaves , and small dried boughs , tied together and stuck in the ground , near which was a stone the size of a cocoa-nut : here was also placed a young plantain-tree and a stone axe .
A great number of palm-nuts were hung in strings at the open end of the shed  and the stem of a plantain-tree was stuck up without the shed  upon this stem was placed a cocoanut shell filled with fresh water .
At the side of one of the posts , there hung a little bag with some roasted pieces of bread-fruit .
The natives did not seem pleased at his approaching  the body , their jealousy and uneasiness being very visibly depicted in their countenances .


The flies on shore were so very tormenting , that they were obliged to destroy them with musqueto nets and fly traps .


They had a specimen of the music of the country on the 22d  some of the natives performing on flutes , which had only two stops  they were blown like the German flute , but the performer blew with his nostril instead of his mouth : several others sung , only one tune , to this instrument .


Some of the Indians brought the English axes to grind and repair , most of which they had received from the Dolphin  but a French one occasioned much speculation , and it at length appeared to have been left here by Mr. de Bougainville .


On the 24th Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander made an excursion into the country , which they found to be level and fertile for about two miles along the shore to the eastward , after which the hills reached quite to the water 's edge , and farther on they ran out into the sea .
After passing these hills , which continued about three miles , they discovered a large plain , abounding with good houses , inhabited by people who seemed to be in affluence .
A very wide river issuing from a valley , added greatly to the beauty of this place : they crossed this river , and perceived the country to be again  A Fly Fan


Figure 6 .
A Musical Youth of the illegible Discovered Islands in the Habit of his Profession .
 barren , which determined them to return  but just as they had taken this resolution , they were offered some refreshment by one of the natives , a man , at some authors describe to be , mixed with many nations , but different from them all , his skin being of a dead white , though some parts of his body were not so white as others  his hair , eye-brows , and beard were as white as his skin .
The great joy of Tubora Tumaida and his women , who met them as they returned , is not to be expressed .
On the 25th several of their knives were missing  upon which Mr. Banks , who had lost his among the rest , accused Tubora Tumaida with having stolen it , which caused him to be very unhappy , as he happened to be innocent of the fact , Mr. Banks 's servant having mislaid it  and the rest were produced in a rag by a native .
The Indian was some time before he would forget this accusation , the tears starting from his eyes , and he made signs with the knife , that if he had ever been guilty of such an action , as was imputed to him , he would suffer his throat to be cut .
However , in general , these people , from the highest to the lowest , are the greatest thieves in the world .


On the 26th , six swivel guns were mounted upon the fort , which put the natives into great consternation , and caused several fishermen , who lived upon the point , to remove farther off , imagining they were to be fired at in a few days .


 The next day Tubora Tumaida , with a friend , a remarkable glutton , and three of his women , dined at the fort  after which he set out for his house in the wood .
In a short time he returned in much agitation , to acquaint Mr. Banks , that the ship 's butcher had threatened to cut his wife 's throat , upon her refusing to sell him a stone hatchet , which he had taken a fancy to , for a nail .
It clearly appeared he had been culpable , and he was flogged on board , in sight of several of the Indians .
As soon as the first stroke was given they interfered , and earnestly intreated that he might be untied .
This being refused , they burst into tears , and shewed great concern .


On Friday 28 , one of Tubora Tumaida 's female attendants , came down to the fort in the greatest affliction , the tears gushing from her eyes , and full of lamentation .
Mr. Banks seeing her , insisted upon knowing the cause  but instead of answering , she struck herself several times with a shark 's tooth upon the head , till she caused a great effusion of blood  while her distress was unnoticed by several other Indians , who continued laughing and talking with the utmost unconcern .
After this , she gathered up some pieces of cloth , which she had thrown down to catch the blood , and threw them into the sea , as if she wished to obliterate her absurd behaviour .
She then bathed herself in the river , and with remarkable chearfulness  returned to the tent , as if nothing extraordinary had happened .


During the forenoon of this day , canoes were continually coming in , and the tents at the fort were filled with people of both sexes .
Mr. Molineux , Master of the Endeavour , went on shore , and seeing a woman , whose name was Oberea , he declared she was the person he judged to be the queen of the island , when he came there on board the Dolphin in the last voyage .


The eyes of every one were now fixed on her , who had made so distinguished a figure , in the accounts that had been given by the first discoverers of this island .
The person of the queen Oberea was of a large make , and tall  she was about forty years of age , her skin white  her eyes had great expression and meaning in them  she had been handsome , but her beauty was now upon the decline .
She was soon conducted to the ship , and went on board , accompanied with some of her family .
Many presents were made her , particularly a child 's doll , which seemed the most to engross her attention .
Captain Cook accompanied her on shore  and as soon as they landed , she presented him with a hog , and some plantains , which were carried to the fort in procession , Oberea and the Captain bringing up the rear .
They met Tootahah , who , though not King , seemed to be at this time invested with a sovereign authority .
He immediately became jealous of the Queen 's  having the doll  which made them find it necessary to compliment him with one also .
A doll now was preferable to a hatchet , though it was not considered so long , as they soon were looked upon as trifles of little or no value .


The ship 's provisions seemed to be very acceptable to the men , but the women were shy of tasting any of them .
They were solicited strongly , this day , to dine with the gentlemen  but they refused , and chose to partake of plantains with the servants  a mystery that could not be explained .


On Saturday 29 , in the forenoon , Mr. Banks paid a visit to Oberea , who was still asleep under the awning of her canoe , whither he went with an intention of calling her up .
Upon entering her chamber , to his great surprise , he found her in bed with a handsome young fellow , about five and twenty  upon which he immediately retired with some precipitation , not a little disconcerted at this discovery  but he was soon given to understand , that such amours were by no means considered scandalous , and that Obadie , the person found in bed with the queen , was by every one known to have been selected by her as the object of her lascivious hours .
The queen soon got up and dressed herself to wait upon Mr. Banks .
After dressing him in a suit of fine cloth , they proceeded together to the tents .
Mr. Banks paid a visit in the evening to Tubora Tumaida , and  was greatly surprized to find him and his family all in tears  he in vain attempted to discover the cause , and soon took leave of them .
Upon his return he was told by the officers , that Owhaw had foretold that the guns would be fired in four days , and as this was the eve of the third day , they were alarmed at the situation they judged themselves to be in .
In consequence of this intelligence they doubled the centries at the fort , and the gentlemen slept under arms .
Mr. Banks , about two in the morning , went round the point , but finding every thing as he could wish , he dropt all suspicions of the Indians having hostile intentions , and dwelt quite secure , as the little fortification was now complete .


The next day , Sunday the 30th , Tomio came running to the tents , and taking Mr. Banks by the arm , to whom they applied in all emergent cases , told him that Tubora Tumaida was dying , owing to something which had been given him to eat by his people , and prayed him to go instantly to him .
Accordingly Mr. Banks went , and found the Indian very sick .
He was told , that he had been vomiting , and had thrown up a leaf , which they said contained some of the poison which he had taken .
Upon examining the leaf , Mr. Banks found it to be nothing more than tobacco , which the Indian had begged of some of their people .
He looked up to Mr. Banks , while  he was examining the leaf , as if he had not a moment to live .
Mr. Banks , now knowing his disorder , ordered him to drink of cocoa-nut milk , which soon restored him to health , and he was as chearful as ever .


On the 1st of May Captain Cook produced an iron adze , made in imitation of one of their stone ones , which had been brought home by Captain Wallis , and shewed it to Tootahah , who took such a fancy to it , that notwithstanding he was offered the choice of any of the things that were in his chests , he snatched it up with the greatest eagerness , and would accept of nothing else .
The same day a Chief , who had dined on board a few days before , accompanied by some of his women , who used to feed him , came on board by himself , and when dinner was on table , the Captain helped him to some victuals , thinking upon this occasion he would condescend to feed himself  but he never attempted to eat , and had not one of the servants fed him , he would certainly have gone without his dinner .


In the afternoon they took the astronomical quadrant , with some other instruments , on shore .


On Tuesday the 2d , having occasion to use the quadrant , to their great astonishment and concern it was missing  this was the more extraordinary , as a centinel had been posted the whole night within a few yards of the tent in  which it had been deposited  and it had never been taken out of the case in which it was packed .
Their own people were at first suspected , imagining they might have mistaken the contents for articles used in traffic .
They searched the fort and the adjacent places , and a considerable reward was offered , as the loss of this instrument would have rendered it impossible for them to have made the necessary observations respecting the Transit , one of the principal objects of their voyage .
After every fruitless search had been made , Mr. Banks , accompanied by Mr. Green , and some other gentlemen , set out for the woods , where he thought he might gain some intelligence of the robbery , if it had been committed by the natives .
In the course of their journey they met Tubora Tumaida , with a few of the natives , who was made by signs to understand , that some of his countrymen had stolen the quadrant , and Mr. Banks insisted upon being conducted to the place where it was concealed .
Accordingly they proceeded together a few miles , and , after some enquiry , Tubora Tumaida received information of the thief , and that he was to be found at a place about four miles distant  as they had no other arms but a brace of pistols , and the spot for which they were destined was at so considerable a distance from the fort , they were not without some apprehensions of danger .
They accordingly dispatched one of their company to  Captain Cook , desiring him to forward another party after them  having laid an embargo upon all the canoes in the bay  a party accordingly sat out , with the Captain at their head .


Mr. Banks and Mr. Green in the interim pursued their route , and at the very place which had been mentioned were met by one of Tubora Tumaida 's own people , with part of the quadrant  soon afterwards the box in which it had been packed , containing the other parts of it , was recovered  and , upon examination , though it had been taken to pieces , they had the satisfaction to find it had received no material injury .


In the evening , when Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen , with Tubora Tumaida , returned , they were very much surprized to find Tootahah confined in the fort , the gate of which was surrounded by the natives , who expressed the utmost dread and anxiety on the occasion , as they had no other expectation but it was intended to put him to death .


Upon enquiry into this affair , it appeared that the Indians were so much alarmed at Captain Cook 's going up into the country with a party of armed men , that in the evening most of them forsook their habitations near the fort  a canoe likewise attempted to leave the bay , which the Lieutenant , who commanded on board the ship , and had been ordered not to permit any canoe to go out , perceiving , dispatched  a boat to detain her , but she no sooner came near them than they jumped into the sea  among this unfortunate number was Tootahah , who , being taken up , was sent by the Lieutenant to the fort  and the commanding officer thought it his duty to detain him .


He could not be persuaded that he was not to be put to death , till Captain Cook gave orders for him to be conducted out of the fort .
He was received with great affection by the people , every one pressing forward to embrace him .


On Wednesday the 3d , in the morning , Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander attended as usual to purchase provisions , but the Indians brought nothing to market  nor could they procure any from some fishing-boats which came a-breast of the tents , though they were in great want of cocoa-nuts and bread-fruit .
Mr. Banks walked into the woods , and heard great complaints from the people of the ill treatment of their Chief , who they said had been beaten , and otherwise ill used , of which Mr. Banks declared he was totally ignorant .
The hogs which he had left as a present , were sent for back by the Chief , which , probably , he was of opinion they had ill-deserved .
However , they would not send them till he came himself , by which means they thought to procure a reconciliation , knowing that absence would promote that coolness between them , to which the first  interview might put an end , especially as they were told , the Chief did not intend coming to the fort for near a fortnight .


Their provisions now were extremely scarce , and the markets ill supplied , the people resenting the ill usage their Chief had received .
The next day , with some difficulty , Mr. Banks obtained a few baskets of bread-fruit from Tubora Tumaida in the woods , which were a very seasonable relief .
An axe and shirt were sent for this day by Tootahah , in return for his two hogs which they promised to bring him the next day .
If they had not complied with this request , they could have scarcely procured any provisions .


After his sending again early in the morning , on Friday 5 , Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , with the Captain , set out in the pinnace , taking one of Tootahah 's people with them , they soon reached Eparre , the place where he dwelt , which was but a few miles to the west of the tents .


Upon their arrival , they found great numbers of people upon the shore waiting for them .
They were immediately conducted to the Chief , whilst the people shouted round them , Taio Tootahah , ' `` Tootahah is your friend  '' ' they found him sitting under a tree , and some old men standing round him .
As soon as he had made signs for them to sit down , he asked for his axe , which Captain Cook presented to him ,  with a shirt and a broad cloth garment , with which he seemed greatly pleased  and put the garment on .
After eating a mouthful together in the boat , they were conducted to a large area , or court-yard , on one side of his house , where an entertainment was provided for them , consisting of wrestling .
The Chief sat at the upper end of the area , with several of his principal men on each side of him , by way of judges , from whom the conquerors received applause .


Ten or twelve combatants entered the area , and after many simple ceremonies of challenging each other , they engaged , endeavouring to throw one another by dint of strength  then seizing hold of each other by the thigh , the hand , the hair , or the cloaths , they grappled without the least art , till one was thrown on his back  this conquest was applauded by some words from the old men , and three huzzas .
After one engagement succeeded another , but if they could not throw each other during the space of a minute , they parted either by consent , or the intervention of their friends .
Several women of rank were present  but it was thought , they would not have attended this amusement , only in compliment to the English gentlemen .


A man with a stick , who made way for them when they landed , officiated here as master of the ceremonies , keeping order among the people .


 When this entertainment was at an end , they were informed , that some hogs and a quantity of bread-fruit were preparing for their dinner  which intelligence was the more agreeable , as their appetites were at this time exceedingly keen .
But instead of dining either on shore or on board of the boat , they had the mortification of going as far as the ship by the desire of the Chief .


As soon as the Chief was known to be on board the ship , the people brought plenty of bread-fruit , cocoa-nuts , and other provisions to the fort .


On Monday 8 , early in the morning , Mr. Molineux , the Master , and Mr. Green , set out in the pinnace to the eastward , in order to procure some hogs or poultry  but after proceeding a considerable way , and seeing many hogs and a turtle , they could not purchase either .
They belonged to Tootahah , and the people told them , that they could not sell them without his consent  so absolute was the power of this man .


They were now obliged , for the first time , to bring out their nails to purchase provisions  for one of the smallest size , they obtained near twenty cocoa-nuts and some bread-fruit , so that they soon got great plenty .


On Tuesday 9 , in the forenoon , Oberea paid them a visit , accompanied by her favourite  Obadee  she presented them with a hog and some bread-fruit .


The forge being now set up and frequently at work , became not only a new subject of admiration to the Indians , but afforded the Captain an additional opportunity of conferring obligations on them , by permitting the smith , during his leisure hours , to convert the old iron , which they were supposed to have procured from the Dolphin , into different kinds of tools .


The natives , after repeated attempts , finding themselves incapable of pronouncing the names of the English gentlemen , had recourse to new ones formed from their own language , Mr. Cook was named Toote  Hicks , Hete  Gore , Touara  Solander , Tolano  Banks , Opane  Green , Treene  and so on for the greatest part of the ship 's crew .


As Mr. Banks was sitting in his boat , trading with them as usual , on Friday the 12th , a very extraordinary ceremony was performed by some ladies who were strangers , to whom the rest of the Indians giving way on each side , and forming a passage , they advanced in procession towards Mr. Banks , to whom they presented some parrots feathers , plantains , and other plants .
They then brought a large bundle of cloth , consisting of nine pieces , which being divided into three parcels , one of the women , who appeared to be the principal , stepping on one of the parcels , pulled up all her cloaths as high as  her waist , and then , with an air of unaffected simplicity , turned round three times .
This ceremony she repeated in the same manner on the other two parcels of cloth , and the whole being then presented to Mr. Banks , the ladies went and saluted him  in return for which he made them such presents as he thought would gratify them the most .


The next evening Mr. Banks was under the disagreeable necessity of reprimanding , in very strong terms , Tubora Tumaida , for having the insolence to snatch his gun from him , and firing it in the air  a thing which surprised Mr. Banks greatly , as he imagined him totally ignorant of the use of it .
And as their safety in a great measure depended on keeping them in that state , he told him , with threats , that his touching his piece was the greatest of insults .
The Indian made no reply , but set off with his family to his house at Eparre .
He being an useful man , Mr. Banks , accompanied by Mr. Molineux , thought fit to go after him , and they found him among a number of people , greatly dejected .
However , as Mr. Banks judiciously caused all animosity to cease , they brought him back to supper  after which the Chief and his wife both slept in Mr. Banks 's tent .
One of the natives , not intimidated by their presence , attempted that very evening to scale the walls of the fort , but was prevented by the centinel .
These Indians  could not resist making attempts to steal the iron and iron tools within the works .


Sunday morning the 14th , divine service was performed at the fort , in hopes that some of the principal Indians might be present , but most of them returned home before the time .
However , Tubora Tumaida , and his wife Tomio , were present  they behaved with great decency , but without the least apparent curiosity .
They made no enquiries with respect to the ceremonies , and their brethren were as little inquisitive upon their return .
This evening several of their people were witnesses to an entertainment of a very extraordinary nature , which consisted of the most indecent acts of lewdness .
For example , a young fellow cohabited in public with a girl about eleven or twelve years of age , without the least sense of shame  and what is still more extraordinary , Oberea , with several other females of the first rank , were present during the whole time .


On Monday the 15th , Mr. Banks detected Tubora Tamaida in having stolen some nails .
Mr. Banks having a good opinion of this Chief , was willing to put his fidelity to the test , and several temptations were thrown in his way , among the rest a basket of nails , which proved irresistible .
He confessed the fact , and upon Mr Banks 's insisting upon restitution , he declared the nails were at Eparre  this occasioned high words , and at length the Indian produced  one of them .
He was to have been forgiven upon restoring the rest , but not having resolution to fulfil his engagement , he fled with his furniture and family before night .


On the 17th , one of the natives who came in the morning before day-light to steal some casks , it not being the first offence , the centinel snapped his gun at him , but it missing fire he escaped .


On Wednesday 24 , Tootahah having sent many messages to request a visit from the Captain , declaring that he would acknowledge the compliment by a present of some hogs .
Mr. Hicks the first Lieutenant was sent , in hopes of getting the hogs without the visit .
He was received in a very friendly manner at a place called Tettehah , five miles farther to the westward , where Tootahah had taken up his residence .
He brought away one hog only , which had been produced immediately upon his arrival , with a promise of receiving more the next morning  but , when morning came , he was obliged to depart without them .
Mr. Banks , on the 25th , seeing Tubora and his wife Tomio at the tent , for the first time after he stole the nails , endeavoured to persuade him to restore them , but in vain .
He was treated with great coolness during his short stay , and his departure was very abrupt .


On the 27th of May , Tootahah being removed to a place called Atahourou , Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , Captain Cook , and some others , set  out in the pinnace to pay him a visit  after making presents of a few trifling articles , they were invited to stay the night .
Mr. Banks having accepted of a place in Oberea 's canoe , left his companions , in order to retire to rest .
Notwithstanding the care Oberea took of his cloaths , by having them in her own custody , they were stolen with his pistols , powder-horn , and many other things that were in his waistcoat pockets .
The alarm was given to Tootahah , who slept in the next canoe , and who went with Oberea in search of the thief , leaving Mr. Banks with only his breeches on , and his musquet uncharged .
They soon returned , but without success  Mr. Banks thought proper to put up with the loss for the present , and a second time endeavour to sleep .
But he had scarce composed himself , before he heard some musick , and perceived lights at a small distance from shore  this proved to be a concert , which they call Heiva .
Mr. Banks judged it then necessary to get up and try to find his companions .
As soon as he approached the lights , he found the hut , where Mr. Cook and three of his associates lay , and began to relate his melancholy tale  but instead of receiving much comfort from them , he was told , that they had shared the same fate , having lost their stockings and jackets .
However , this did not prevent their hearing out the concert , which consisted of  drums , flutes , and several voices  after which they retired to rest .


The next morning Mr. Banks got his musquet from Tupia , with whom he had intrusted it , and some cloaths from Oberea  in which he made a whimsical appearance .
They then got together , and were joined by Dr. Solander , who was the only one among them that had not been robbed , having slept at a house about a mile distant .
As to the others they were obliged to put up with their loss  their cloaths , c. having never been heard of afterwards .
They set out for the boat not very well pleased , carrying with them only one hog , which had been intended for their supper the night before .


In their return to the boat , they were greatly amused by seeing some Indians swimming for their diversion , amidst a surf , which no European boat could have lived in , or the best swimmer in Europe have saved himself from drowning , had he by accident been exposed to its fury .
This extraordinary surf breaks upon the shore in a few places , where access to the island is not guarded by a reef , and makes it very dreadful and dangerous .


Some Indians from a neighbouring island , to which Captain Wallis gave the name of DUKE OF YORK 'S ISLAND , informed them of more than twenty islands in the neighbourhood of Otaheite .


They now began to make necessary preparations for observing the Transit of Venus , and ,  from the hints Mr. Cook had received from the Royal Society , he sent out two parties to make observations from different spots , that in case they failed at Otaheite , they might succeed elsewhere  they employed themselves in preparing their instruments , and instructing such gentlemen with the use of them , as were to go out .
And on Thursday the 1st of June , the next Saturday being the day of the Transit , they sent the long boat to Eimayo , having on board Mr. Gore , Mr. Monkhouse , and Mr. Sporing , a friend of Mr. Banks  each furnished with necessary instruments by Mr. Green .
Mr. Banks and several of the Indians went out with this party .
Others were dispatched to find out a convenient spot , at such a distance from their principal station , as might suit their purpose .


Those who went to Eimayo in the long boat , after rowing the best part of the night , by the help of some Indians aboard a canoe , which they hailed , found a proper situation for their Observatory upon a rock , which rose out of the water about one hundred and forty yards from the shore , where they fixed their tents , and prepared the apparatus for the following day 's observation .


On Saturday the 3d , as soon as it was light , Mr. Banks left them to go to the island for fresh provisions .
As he was trading with the natives who belonged to Tarrao , the King of the island , his majesty arrived with his sister , whose name  was Nuna , in order to pay him a visit .
It being customary among these people to be seated during their conferences , Mr. Banks spread on the ground his Indian cloth turban , that he wore instead of a hat , on which they all sat down .
After this the royal present was brought , consisting of a hog and a dog , some cocoa-nuts , bread-fruit , c..
A messenger was dispatched by Mr. Banks for an adze , a shirt , and some beads , and they were presented to his majesty , who received them with great pleasure .
Tubora Turmaida and Tomio , Indians who had gone with Mr. Banks upon the expedition , came from the Observatory : Tomio , said to be related to Tarrao , brought him a long nail , and a shirt for Nuna , by way of presents .
Mr. Banks returned to the Observatory with Tarrao , Nuna , and three beautiful young women , their chief attendants .
He shewed them the Transit of Venus over the Sun , and informed them , that he and his companions had come from their own country solely to view it in that situation .


The produce of this island , according to the inspection of Mr. Banks , proved to be much the same as that of Otaheite , the people also resembling those of that island , many of them he had seen upon it , who were well acquainted with the value of the trading articles .


Both the parties which were sent out , made their observation with great success .
They nevertheless differed in the accounts of the times  Figure 7 .
Mr. Banks receiving a Visit from the King of Duke of Yorks Island .
 of the contacts more than might have been imagined .
Mr. Green 's Account was as follows .


Hours Min .
Sec .
The first external contact , or first appearance of Venus on the Sun , was 9 25 4 Morning .
The first internal contact or total immersion was 9 44 4 The second internal contact , or beginning of the immersion 3 14 8 Afternoon .
The second external contact , or total immersion 3 32 10 Latitude of the Observatory 17 ° 29 ' 15 ? .
Longitude 149 ° 32 ' 30 ?
W. of Greenwich .
While they were viewing the Transit of Venus , some of the ship 's company broke into one of the store-rooms , and stole a quantity of spike-nails .
As the circulation of these nails might have been greatly detrimental to them , strict search was made , and one of the thieves was detected .
He had only a few in his custody  but was however punished with two dozen lashes .


The death of an old woman of some distinction gave them an opportunity of observing the manner of the Indians disposing of their dead , whom they never bury .
The kind of bier , on which the corpse is deposited , has already  been described , and the bread-fruit , c. placed as before , which Tubora Tumaida informed Mr. Banks was deposited as an offering to their Gods .
A sort of stile was placed in the front of the square , where the relations of the deceased stood to testify their sorrow  beneath the awning were several pieces of cloth , on which were the tears and blood of the mourners , for upon these occasions they wound themselves with a shark 's tooth .
At a small distance two temporary houses were erected , in one of which some of the relations of the deceased constantly remained , and in the other the chief mourner resided , who was dressed in a peculiar manner , to perform a particular ceremony .
After the corpse is rotten , the bones are buried near the spot .
It was afterwards discovered , that these repositories of the dead were used also for religious worship .


There having been a scarcity of bread-fruit for some days , an enquiry was made of the cause , and the reasons the Indians gave was , that there being a great crop , the fruit had been gathered to make a sort of sour paste , which the natives call Mabie , which , after fermentation , will keep a long time , and supply them in times of dearth .


The funeral ceremony , in honour of the old woman , was performed on the 10th by the chief mourner , and Mr. Banks was so desirous to be a spectator , that he agreed to take a part  in the performance of this ceremony , being informed , that he could not be present on any other condition .
He accordingly went in the evening to the place where the body was deposited , there he was met by the relations of the deceased , and afterwards joined by several other persons .
The chief mourner was Tubora Tumaida  his dress was whimsical , though not altogether ungrateful .
Mr. Banks was obliged to quit his European dress , and he had no other covering than a small piece of cloth , which was tied round his middle  his body was then blacked with charcoal and water , as were the bodies of several others , particularly some females , who were as little covered as himself  the procession then began .
The chief mourner uttered some words , that were judged to be a prayer , when he approached the body  and he repeated it as he came up to his own house .
After this the procession went on , by permission , towards the fort .
It is usual for the Indians to shun these processions as much as possible  they accordingly ran into the woods in great haste , as soon at it came in view .
From the fort it proceeded along the shore .
Having crossed the river , it entered the woods , passing several houses , which became immediately uninhabited  and , during the rest of the procession , which continued above half an hour , not a single Indian was visible .
Mr. Banks filled an office they called Nineveh , and there  were two others in the same character .
When none of the other natives were to be seen , they approached the chief mourner , saying , imatata  then those who had assisted at the ceremony bathed in the river , and resumed their customary dress .


Such was this uncommon ceremony , in which Mr. Banks performed a capital part , and met with the applause of Tubora Tumaida , the chief mourner .


Complaint was made on Monday the 12th to the Captain , that the Indians had lost some bows and arrows , and strings of plaited hair  the affair was enquired into , and the fact being well attested , two dozen lashes were inflicted upon each of the criminals .


The bows and arrows of the Indians have not hitherto been noticed  but this day Tubora Tumaida brought his hither , occasioned by a challenge he had received from Mr. Gore .
The Indian Chief imagined it was a trial of skill who could shoot the farthest  but Mr. Gore proposed shooting at a mark .
The mistake being soon discovered , the champions declined the trial .
The Indian , however , to display his skill , drew his bow , and sent an arrow , unfeathered , as they all were , nearly the sixth part of a mile .
They shoot kneeling , and drop the bow the instant the arrow is discharged .


In this morning 's excursion , Mr. Banks met several of the natives , who were itinerant musicians ,  and the place of the evening 's rendezvous being known , all the English gentlemen went thither to partake of the diversion .
Their instruments were flutes and drums , and a great number of the Indians were got together upon the occasion .
The drummers sung to the music , and to the astonishment of Mr. Banks and the rest of his companions they found , that they were the chief subject of the minstrels lays .
These songs must , therefore , have been extemporaneous , the rewards whereof were such necessaries as they required .


An iron coal rake for the oven being stole in the night of the 14th , and many other things having at different times been taken by the Indians , the Captain judged it of some consequence , if possible , to put an end to these practices , by making it their common interest to prevent it .
He had already given strict orders , that the centinels should not fire upon them , even if they were detected in the fact .
About twenty-seven of their double canoes with sails were just come in with cargoes of fish , which the Captain seized , and then gave notice , that unless the rake , and all the other things , which had at different times been stolen , were returned , the vessels should be burnt .
The Captain had , indeed , no such design , as will appear by the event .
The menace produced no other effect than the restitution of the rake , all the other things remaining in their possession   at length the Captain thought proper to give up the cargoes , as the innocent natives were in great distress for want of them  and at last , to prevent confusion , from the difficulty of ascertaining to whom the different lots belonged , he promised also to release the canoes .


About this time another event had nearly involved the English in a quarrel with the Indians .
The Captain having sent a boat on shore to get ballast , the officer not meeting immediately with what he wanted , began to pull down one of their sepulchral buildings : this measure was strenuously opposed by the Indians .
Mr. Banks , having received intelligence of the affair , repaired to the spot , and the matter was soon amicably terminated , there being stones sufficient found elsewhere .
This was the only opposition they had , hitherto , made , and the only personal insult received ( besides the affair of the musket at the tent , for which the Indian forfeited his life ) was by Mr. Monkhouse , who having pulled a flower within one of their burial inclosures , was struck by an Indian  the gentleman laid hold of him , but he was rescued by two more , who pulling Mr. Monkhouse 's hair forced him to quit his hold , after which they all ran off .


On the 19th in the evening , soon after dark , while the canoes were detained by the Captain , Oberea the Queen , and several of her attendants , paid the gentlemen a visit  she came from Tootahah 's palace , in a double canoe , and  brought with her a hog , bread-fruit , and other presents , among which was a dog  but none of the things that had been stolen  those she pleaded had been taken away by her gallant Obadee , for which she had beaten him .
She did not , however , seem to think her story deserved credit , but appeared at first much terrified , though she surmounted her fears with great fortitude  and was desirous of sleeping with her attendants in Mr. Bank 's tent  but this being refused , she was obliged to pass the night in her canoe .
The Captain declined accepting of her presents , at which she seemed very sorrowful .
Mr. Banks and the rest of the gentlemen retired to bed , and a whole tribe of the Indians would have slept in the bell-tent , but were not permitted .


The next morning the Queen returned to the fort , and Captain Cook having altered his mind accepted of her presents .
Two of her attendants were very earnest in getting themselves husbands , in which they succeeded , by means of the Surgeon and one of the Lieutenants : they seemed very agreeable till bed-time , and determined to lie in Mr. Banks 's tent , which they accordingly did , till the Surgeon having some words with one of them Mr. Banks thrust her out , and she was followed by the rest , except Otea Tea , who cried for some time , till he turned her out also .
This had like to have become a serious affair , a duel being talked of between Mr. Banks and Mr. Monkhouse , but it was happily  avoided .
Dogs are esteemed here more delicate eating than pork  as those bread to be eaten taste no animal food , but live entirely upon vegetables  and the experiment was tried .
Tupia undertook to kill and dress him , which he did , by making a hole in the ground and baking him .
It was agreed by every one to be a very good dish .


They were visited on the 21st at the fort by many of the natives , who brought various kinds of presents , and among the rest Oamo , a Chief of several districts on the island , whom they had never before seen , who brought with him a hog .
This Chief was treated with great respect by the natives , and was accompanied by a boy , and a young woman .
The boy was carried upon a man 's back , though he was very able to walk .
Oberea and some other of the Indians went out of the fort to meet them , their heads and bodies being first uncovered as low as the waist .
This was considered as a mark of respect , they had not noticed it before , but judged it was usually shewn to persons of distinguished rank among them .
Oamo entered the tent , but the young woman , who was about sixteen , could not be prevailed upon to accompany him , tho ' she seemed to combat with her curiosity and inclination .
Dr. Solander took the youth by the hand , and conducted him in  but the natives without , who had prevented the girl 's entrance , soon found means to get him out again .


 The curiosity of Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen being excited from these circumstances , they made enquiry , who these strangers were , and were informed , that Oamo was Oberea 's husband , but that by mutual consent they had been for a considerable time separated  and that the youth and girl were their offspring .
The boy was named Terridiri , and was heir apparent to the sovereignty of the island  and he was to espouse his sister as soon as he had attained the proper age .
The present sovereign being a minor , called OUTOU , and son of Whappai  Whappai , Oamo , and Tootahah , were all brothers  Whappai was the senior , and Oamo the next  wherefore , Whappai having no child but Outou , Terridiri , son of Oamo , was heir to the sovereignty .
To us it will appear singular , that a boy should reign during the life of his father  but in the island of Otaheite , a boy succeeds to his father 's authority and title as soon as he is born  when a regent is elected , which office usually falls upon the father , till the boy becomes of age : at this time , however , the election had fallen upon his uncle Tootahah , on account of his warlike exploits .
Oamo was very inquisitive with respect to the English , and by his questions he appeared a man of understanding and penetration .


A woman called Teetee , who came from the west of the island , presented to the Captain an elegant garment , of a bright yellow ground ,  bordered with red , and in the middle of it were several crosses , which they had probably learned from the French .


On the 23d in the morning , one of their hands being missing , they enquired for him among the natives , and were told that he was at Eparre , Tootahah 's residence in the wood  and one of the Indians offered to fetch him back , which he did that evening .
On his return he informed them , that he had been taken from the fort , and carried to the top of the bay , by three men , who having stripped him , forced him into a canoe , and conducted him to Eparre , where he received some cloaths from Tootahah , who endeavoured to prevail on him to continue there .
They had great reason to suppose this account true , for the natives were no sooner acquainted with his return , than they left the fort with much precipitation .


Monday June 26 , early in the morning , the Captain set out in the pinnace , accompanied by Mr. Banks , to circumnavigate the island .
They sailed to the eastward , and in the forenoon they went on shore , in a part of the island under the government of Ahio , a young Chief , who had often visited them at the tents .
They also found here some other natives of their acquaintance .
They then proceeded together to the harbour , wherein M. Bougainville lay when he visited this island , and were shewn the ground on which he fixed his tent , and the watering-place .
 They also met with Orette , a Chief , who was their particular friend , whose brother went away with M. Bougainville .


Having taken a survey of this harbour , and a large bay near which it is situated , they proposed going to the opposite side of the bay , but Titubaola , who was their conductor , not only refused to accompany them , but endeavoured to dissuade the Captain and Mr. Banks from going , saying , ' `` That country was inhabited by people who were not subjects to Tootahah , and who would destroy them all . '' '
This information did not , however , prevent the execution of their design  and upon loading their pieces with ball , Titubaola took courage to go with them  they rowed till it was dark , when they reached a narrow neck of land , that divided the island into two peninsulas , which are distinct governments .
As they were not yet got into the hostile part of the country , they agreed to spend the night on shore , where they were provided with supper and lodging by Ooratooa , the lady who paid her compliments to Mr. Banks in so remarkable a manner at the fort .


In the morning they pursued their passage for the other government .


They landed in a district , which was governed by a Chief , named MARAITATA , the burying place of men , and his father was called PAHAIREDE , the stealer of boats .
Notwithstanding  their names were so ominous , they gave the Captain and Mr. Banks a very civil reception  furnished them with provisions , and sold them a large hog for a hatchet .
The curiosity of the natives was soon excited , and a crowd gathered round the English gentlemen , but they saw only two people whom they knew , neither did they observe any trinkets that had come out of the Endeavour , though they met with several European commodities , particularly two twelve pound shot , one of which had the English broad arrow upon it , though the Indians said they had them from M. Bougainville 's people .
They then advanced till they reached the district , which was under the dominion of the principal Chief , or King , named Waheatua , who had a son , but it was not known in whose hands the sovereign power was lodged .
Here they found a spacious verdant plain , watered by a river of so great a width , that they were obliged to pass it in a canoe , but their Indian followers swam over it with the greatest facility .
There was no house that appeared inhabited  but the ruins of several large ones .
Having continued their journey along the shore for a considerable way , they at last saw the Chief , and with him an agreeable young woman about two and twenty , named Toudidde .
They were not unacquainted with her name , as they had often heard it mentioned by the natives  and they had great reason to suppose she was the Queen of this peninsula .


 In passing through this part of the island , they found it better cultivated , and more improved than any they had hitherto met with  though the houses were but few , and those very small , but there were a great number of canoes which excelled any they had seen , both in size and workmanship .
The burial places were likewise numerous , being found not only at every point , but at different places in the interior parts of the island .
These buildings nearly resembled , in form , those which they had seen at Opouroenu , but they were neater , and adorned with carvings of various figures  in one there was a cock , which was painted in imitation of the natural colour of the feathers of that bird .
Notwithstanding the fertility of the country , and its being well cultivated , scarce any bread-fruit was to be met with , and the inhabitants subsisted chiefly upon a nut , called ahee .


Finding themselves fatigued , they now took to their boat , and in the evening landed on an island named Otooareite  being in want of some refreshment , Mr. Banks went into the woods to try what he could obtain , but it being dark , he met with no inhabitants and but one house , in which he found only a bread-fruit , and a few of the nuts before-mentioned  nor were they more successful in procuring provisions the next morning .


Towards the southermost part of the island they found a good harbour , formed by a reef ,  and the circumjacent country is remarkably fruitful .
At about three miles distant they landed , at a place where they found several of the natives , with whom they were intimately acquainted .
After having , with a good deal of difficulty , obtained some cocoa-nuts , they again embarked .


They landed again a little further to the east .
Mathiabo , the Chief , with whom they had no acquaintance , nor had ever seen before , soon came to them , and supplied them with cocoa-nuts and bread fruit .
They also purchased a hog of him for a glass bottle , which he took in preference to every other thing that was offered him .
They saw here a turkey cock and a goose which the Dolphin left on the island , they were remarkably fat , and seemed to be greatly admired by the Indians .


A very uncommon sight presented itself in a house near this place , several human jaw-bones were fastened to a board of a semicircular form  they seemed fresh , and had not lost any of their teeth  but Mr. Banks could obtain no explanation of this mystery .
Upon their quitting the place , the Chief accompanied them , and piloted them over the shoals .
They opened the bay in the evening , on the north-west side of the island , which corresponded with that on the south-east , in such a manner , as to intersect the island at the isthmus .


 Several canoes came off here with some very beautiful women , who appeared to be desirous of their going on shore , to which they readily assented .
They met with a very friendly reception from the Chief , whose name was Wiverou , who gave directions to some of his people to assist them in dressing their provisions , which were now very plentiful , and they supped at Wiverou 's house , in company with Mathiabo .
Part of the house was allotted for them to sleep in , and soon after supper they retired to rest .
Mathiabo having obtained a cloak from Mr. Banks , under pretence of using it as a cover-let when he lay down , immediately made off with it , unperceived by that gentleman or his companions .
News however of the robbery was soon brought them by one of the natives  in consequence of which intelligence they sat out in pursuit of the thief , but had proceeded a very little way before they were met by a person bringing back the cloak , which Mathiabo had given up through fear .


The house , upon their return , was entirely deserted , and about four in the morning the centinel gave the alarm , that the boat was missing .
Mr. Banks and the Captain were greatly astonished at this account , and ran to the waterside , but though the morning was clear and starlight , no boat was visible .
Their situation was now extremely terrifying : the party consisting of but four , with a single musket and two  pocket pistols , without a spare ball or a charge of powder .
After remaining in this distressful state of anxiety for a considerable time , dreading the advantage the Indians would take of it , to their great joy , the boat , which had been driven away by the tide , returned  Mr. Banks and his companions no sooner breakfasted than they departed .
This place is situated on the north side of Tiarrabou , the south-east peninsula of the island , about five miles east from the isthmus , with a harbour equal to any in the island .
It was fertile and populous , and the inhabitants every where behaved with civility .
The last district in Tiarrabou , in which they landed , was governed by a Chief , named OMOE .
He was building a house , and was very desirous of purchasing a hatchet , but Mr. Banks and the Captain had not one left .
He would not trade for nails , and they embarked  the Chief following them in a canoe with his wife , in hopes of obtaining something useful to him .
The Chief and his wife were afterwards taken on board , and after having gone about three miles , they desired to be put on shore , and their request was complied with , when the Captain met with some of Omoe 's people , who had brought with them a very large hog .
The Chief agreed to exchange the hog for a large axe and a nail , and to bring the beast to the fort in Port Royal Bay .
This resolution he came to after consulting with his wife   and Mr. Banks judged the exchange to be very advantageous to the English , as the hog was a remarkable fine one .


At this place they saw one of their Eatuas , or Gods , it was made of wicker-work , and resembled the figure of a man  it was near seven feet in height , and was covered with black and white feathers  on the head were four protuberances , which the natives called Tate ete , or little men .


Having taken their leave of Omoe , they sat out on their return  after rowing a few miles , they went on shore again , but saw nothing remarkable except a sepulchral building , which was ornamented in an extraordinary manner .
The pavement , on which was built a pyramid , was very neat  at a little distance there was an image of stone , very uncouthly carved , which the natives seemed to hold in a great estimation .


They passed through the harbour , which was the only one fit for shipping , on the south of Opoureonu , situated about five miles to the westward of the isthmus , between two small islands not far from shore , and within a mile of each other .
They were now near the district , named Paparra , which was governed by Oamo and Oberea , where they intended to spend the night .
Mr. Banks and his company landed about an hour before it was dark , and found that they were both set out to pay them a visit at the fort .
They nevertheless slept at the house  of Oberea , which , though not large , was very neat  no inhabitant but her father was now in possession of it , who shewed them much civility .
They took this opportunity of walking out to a point , upon which they had observed , at a distance , some trees , called Etoa , which usually grow on the burial-places of these people .
They call these burying-grounds Morai , which are also places of worship .
They here saw an immense edifice , which they found to be the Morai of Oamo and Oberea , which was by far the most considerable piece of architecture to be found in the island .


It consisted of an enormous pile of stone work , raised in the form of a pyramid , with a flight of steps on each side , something after the manner of those little buildings , which are commonly erected in England to place the pillars of sun dials upon  it was near two hundred and seventy feet long , and about one-third as wide , and between forty and fifty feet high .


The foundation consisted of rock-stones , the steps of coral , and the upper part of round pebbles , all of the same shape and size  the rock and coral stones were squared with the utmost neatness and regularity , and the whole building appeared as compact and firm , as if it had been erected by the best workmen in Europe .
As the Indians were totally destitute of iron utensils to shape their stones , as well as mortar to cement them , when they had made  Figure 8 .
A Morai or Burial Place .
 them fit for use , a structure of such heighth and magnitude , must have been a work of infinite labour and fatigue .
In the center of the summit was the representation of a bird , carved in wood  close to this was the figure of a fish  which was in stone .
This pyramid made part of one side of a wide court or square , the sides of which were nearly equal  the whole was walled in , and paved with flat stones .
Within this place grew ( notwithstanding it was in this manner paved ) several plantains , and trees which the natives call Etoa .
At a little distance to the west of this edifice was another paved square , which contained several small stages , called by the natives Ewattas , which appeared to be altars  upon them they place provisions , as sacrifices to their gods : Mr. Banks afterwards observed whole hogs placed upon these ewattas , or altars .


The inhabitants of the island of Otaheite seem in nothing so desirous of excelling each other as in the grandeur and magnificence of their sepulchres  and the rank and authority of Oberea was forcibly evinced upon this occasion .
The gentlemen of the Endeavour , it has been observed , did not find Oberea possessed of the same power , as when the Dolphin was at this place , and they were now informed of the cause .
The way from her house to the Morai , was by the sea-side , and they observed , in all places as they passed along , a great number of  human bones .
Inquiry being made into the cause of this extraordinary sight , they were informed , that about four or five months before Captain Cook 's arrival , the inhabitants of Tiarrabou , the peninsula to the south-east , made a descent here , and slew many of the people , whose bones were those that were seen upon the coast : that hereupon Oberea and Oamo , who then held the government for his son , had fled and taken refuge in the mountains  and that the victors destroyed all the houses , and pillaged the country .
Mr. Banks was also informed , that the turkey and goose which he had seen in the district of Mathiabo , were among the booty  this afforded a reason for their being found where the Dolphin had little or no correspondence  and the jaw-bones , being mentioned , which had been seen hanging in a house , he was informed , that they had likewise been carried off as trophies .
The jaw-bones of their enemies being considered by the natives of this island , as great a mark of triumph , as scalps are by the Indians of North America .


On Friday the 30th they arrived at Otahourou , where their old acquaintance Tootahah resided  he received them with great civility , and provided for them a good supper , and a convenient lodging  and notwithstanding they were so shamefully plundered the last time , they slept with this chief .
They spent the night in  the utmost security , none of their cloaths , or any other article , being missing in the morning .


On Saturday , July 1 , they returned to the fort at Fort Royal Harbour  having discovered the island , both peninsulas included , to be about one hundred miles in circumference .
They were now very much in want of bread-fruit , owing to the scarcity of the season , and could obtain but a very small quantity upon their whole tour .


Their Indian friends crouded about them upon their return , and none of them came without provisions .


Monday the 3d , Mr. Banks made an excursion , with some Indian guides , to trace the river up the valley to its source , and observe to what extent its banks were inhabited .
After meeting with houses for the space of six miles , they came up to one which was said to be the last that could be seen .
The master of it presented them with cocoa-nuts and other fruits  and after a short visit , they continued their walk .
In this tour they often passed under vaults , formed by rocky fragments , in which , they were informed , that those who were benighted often took refuge .
They pursued the course of the river for about five or six miles further , and found it banked on both sides by rocks which were almost perpendicular , and near one hundred feet high , notwithstanding which , a way was to be traced up these dreadful precipices ,  and their Indian guides offered to conduct them by this path to the summit  but as it could not be effected without the utmost difficulty and danger , and there appeared nothing at the top to recompence them for the fatigue and hazard of the undertaking , they declined attemping it .


Mr. Banks during this tour had a fine opportunity of searching for minerals among the rocks , which were almost , on all sides , naked  he found , however , not the smallest appearance of any kind of mineral .
The stones every where resembling those of Madeira , gave manifest signs of having been burnt .
Scarce a single stone was found during their whole stay upon the island , which had not unquestionable marks of fire on it , except the hatchet-stone , and some of these were not entirely free from it .
There are also evident traces of fire in the clay upon the hills , both of this and the neighbouring islands .


Mr. Banks was engaged the 4th in planting on each side of the fort a great quantity of the seeds of water-melons , oranges , lemons , limes , and other plants and trees which he had brought from Rio de Janeiro .
He gave of these seeds to the Indians in great plenty , and planted many of them in the [ ... ] oods : some of the melon-seeds , which had been planted soon after his arrival , had already produced plants which appeared to be in a very flourishing state .


 They now began to make preparations for their departure  but before they set sail they had another visit from Oamo , Oberea , and their son and daughter .
The young woman , whose name they understood to be Toimata , was very curious to see the fort , but Oamo would by no means permit her to come in .
The son of Waheatua , sovereign of Tiarrabou , or the south-east peninsula , was also here at this time  and they received intelligence of the arrival of another guest , whose company they neither wished for nor expected  this was the Indian who had stolen the quadrant .


On Friday the 7th , the carpenters were ordered to take down the gates and pallisadoes of the fort , to be converted into firewood on board the Endeavour  and one of the Indians stole the staple and hook belonging to the gate : he was instantly pursued  but could not be found  and soon after this , their old friend Tubora Tumaida brought back the staple .


They continued on the 8th and 9th to pull down the fort , and their friends still visited them .


Captain Cook hoped now to quit the island , without any farther misunderstanding with the natives  but in this he was mistaken .
Two foreign sailors having been out , one of them was robbed of his knife , and striving to recover it , the Indians attacked and wounded him in a dangerous manner with a stone  his companion also received a slight wound in the head .
 As Captain Cook would have been unwilling to have taken farther notice of the transaction , he was not sorry that the offenders had made their escape .
Another affair equally disagreeable soon after happened .
Between the 8th and 9th in the evening  two young marines retired secretly from the fort , and in the morning were not to be met with .
Notice having been given for all the company to go on board the next day , and that the ship would sail that day or the day ensuing , Captain Cook began to fear that the marines intended to remain on shore .
He was apprised , that no effectual steps could be taken to recover them , without risking the harmony and good fellowship which at present subsisted between the English and the natives  and therefore resolved to wait a day in hopes of their returning .


The 10th in the morning the marines not being returned , an enquiry was made after them , when the Indians declared they did not propose returning , having taken refuge in the mountains , where it was impossible to discover them , and that each had taken a wife .
In consequence of which it was intimated to several of the Chiefs who were in the fort with their women , among whom were Tubora Tumaida , Tomio and Oberea , that they would not be suffered to quit it till the deserters were produced .
Captain Cook thought this precaution necessary , as , by concealing them a short time , he might be compelled  to go without them  they received the intimation with very little signs either of fear or discontent , assuring the Captain that the marines should be sent back .
In the interim he sent Mr. Hicks in the pinnace to bring Tootahah on board the ship , which he executed without giving any alarm .
Night coming on , Captain Cook judged it was not prudent to let the people , whom he had detained as hostages , remain at the fort , and he therefore ordered Tubora Tumaida , Oberea , and some others , to be brought on board .
This gave an unusual alarm , and several of them , especially the females , testified their apprehensions with great agitation of mind , and floods of tears , when they were coming on board .
Captain Cook went on board with them , Mr. Banks remaining on shore with some others , whom he thought it of less importance to detain .


One of the marines was brought back in the evening by some of the Indians , who reported , that the other , and the two people who were sent to fetch them back , would be detained whilst Tootahah was confined .
Mr. Hicks was immediately dispatched in the long-boat , with several men , to rescue the English prisoners  at the same time Captain Cook told Tootahah , that it was incumbent on him to assist them with some of his people , and to give orders , in his name , that the men should be set at liberty , for that he should expect him to answer for the  event .
Tootahah immediately complied , and this party recovered the men without any opposition .
About seven in the morning on the 11th they returned , but without the arms which had been taken from them when they were made prisoners : the arms were however brought on board soon after , and the Chiefs were allowed to return on shore .


At the time the Chiefs were set on shore from the ship , those at the fort were also released , and after remaining with Mr. Banks about an hour and a half , they all returned to their respective places of residence .
When the deserters were examined , it was discovered , that the account which the Indians had given was no way false : they had become fond of two girls , and it was their design to keep themselves concealed till the ship had set sail , and continue upon the island .


Tupia , whose name has been often mentioned in this voyage , had been prime minister of Oberea , when she was at the pinnacle of her authority : he was also the principal priest of the island , and therefore intimately acquainted with the religion of the country .
He was likewise deeply versed in navigation , and was thoroughly acquainted with the number , situation , inhabitants and produce of the adjacent islands .
He had often testified a desire to go with them  and on Wednesday the 12th , in the morning , he came on board , with a boy about twelve  years of age , his servant , named Taiyota , and requested the gentlemen on board , to let him go with them .
As it was thought he would be useful to them in many particulars , they unanimously agreed to comply with his request .
Tupia then went ashore for the last time to see his friends , and took with him several baubles to give them as parting tokens of remembrance .


Mr. Banks being willing to obtain a drawing of the Morai , in possession of Tootahah , at Eparre , Captain Cook accompanied him thither in the pinnace , together with Dr. Solander .
They immediately , upon landing , repaired to Tootahah 's house , where they were met by Oberea , and several others .
A general good understanding prevailed , and they promised to visit the gentlemen early the next day , to take leave of them , as they were told that the ship would then set sail .
There also they met Tupia , who came back with them , and slept for the first time on board the ship .


Thursday the 13th of July , the ship was visited by a multitude of the gentlemen 's friends , and surrounded by numberless canoes , which contained the inferior natives .
They weighed anchor about twelve , and the Indians took their leaves of the gentlemen on board , weeping in a friendly and affecting manner .
Tupia supported himself in this scene with a becoming fortitude , tears flowed from his eyes , its true ,  but the effort that he made to conceal them did him additional honour .
He went with Mr. Banks to the mast head , where he continued waving his hand to the canoes as long as they remained visible .


The longitude of Port Royal Bay , as settled by Captain Wallis , was found to be within half a degree of its real situation .
Point Venus , the northern extremity of the island , and the eastern point of the bay , lies in the longitude 149 degrees 30 minutes .
Port Royal Bay , which is equal to any in Otaheite , may easily be discovered by a remarkable high mountain in the center of the island , bearing due south from Point Venus .
The shore of the bay is a fine sandy beach , behind which runs a river of fresh water  any number of ships may water here without any inconvenience to each other .
The only wood for firing , upon the whole island , is that of fruit-trees , which must be purchased of the natives , or it is impossible to live upon good terms with them .


According to Tupia 's account , the island could furnish above six thousand fighting men , whereby a computation of the number of inhabitants may easily be made .


The produce of Otaheite is bread-fruit , cocoa-nuts , bananas , plantains  a fruit not unlike an apple , potatoes , yams , cocoas , sugarcane , and a variety of other fruits and vegetables .


 They have no European fruits , garden stuff , or pulse , nor grain of any species .
Their tame animals are hogs , dogs , and poultry  there is not a wild animal in the island , except ducks , pigeons , parroquets , and a few other birds  rats being the only quadruped , and there are no serpents .
The sea however supplies them with great variety of excellent fish .


With regard to the people , they are in general rather of a larger make than Europeans .
The males are tall , robust , and finely shaped .
The females of the superior class are likewise generally above our common size  but those of the lower rank are rather below it , and some of them are remarkably little .


Their natural complexion is a fine clear olive , or what we call brunette , their skin is delicately smooth and agreeably soft .
The shape of their faces is in general handsome , and their eyes are full of sensibility and expression , their teeth are likewise remarkably white and regular , and their breath intirely free from any disagreeable smell  their hair is for the most part black .
The men , unlike the original inhabitants of America , have long beards , which they wear in various forms  and what is very remarkable , circumcision is almost universally practised among them , from a motive of cleanliness  having a peculiar term of reproach , with which they upbraid those who do not adopt this custom .
Both sexes always eradicate the  hair from their arm-pits , and they often reproached the English gentlemen with a want of cleanliness , for not making use of the same method .
Their motions are easy and graceful , but not vigorous  their deportment is generous and open , and their behaviour affable and courteous .
They appeared of a brave , noble , and candid disposition  equally strangers to the base and unworthy passions of cruelty , treachery , or revenge , and setting aside their violent prepensity to thieving , it may fairly be said , that their general characters would lose nothing in the comparison with those of the most civilized nation under the globe .


Contrary to the custom of almost all other countries , the women of this island cut their hair quite short , whereas the men wear it long , sometimes hanging loose on their shoulders , and at others tied in a knot on the crown of their heads , in which they stick the feathers of birds of various colours .


Both sexes frequently wear a piece of cloth of the manufacture of the island tied round their heads in the form of a turban  and the women take no little pains in plaiting human hair into long strings , which being folded into branches , are tied on their foreheads by way of ornament .


Th [ ... ] re is a custom likewise prevalent among th [ ... ] m [ ... ] f anointing their heads with an oil extracted from the cocoa-nut .
The smell of  which is not altogether agreeable , as the climate is hot , and they are not provided with any thing similar to a comb , their heads are not clear from vermin : it evidently appeared , however , to be more the effect of necessity than inclination , as those to whom they gave combs immediately got rid of these disagreeable companions .


They stain their bodies , by indenting or pricking the flesh with a small instrument made of bone , cut into short teeth  which indentures they fill with a dark blue or blackish mixture , prepared from the smoke or an oily nut , burnt by them instead of candles and water  this operation , which is called by the natives Tattaowing , is exceedingly painful , and leaves an indelible mark on the skin .
It is usually performed when they are about ten or twelve years of age , and on different parts of the body  but those which suffer most severely are the breech and the loins , which are marked with arches , carried one above another a considerable way up their backs .


At the operation of Tattaowing , performed upon the posteriors of a girl about twelve years of age , Mr. Banks was present , it was executed with an instrument that had twenty teeth , and at each stroke , which was repeated every moment , serum mixed with blood issued .
She bore it with great resolution for several minutes  but at length the pain became so violent ,  that she murmured and complained , and then burst into the most violent lamentations  but her operator was inexorable , whilst some females present chid , and even beat her .
Mr. Banks was a spectator for near an hour , during which time it was performed only on one side , the other having undergone the ceremony sometime before  and the arches upon the loins , which are the most painful , but upon which they the most pique themselves , were yet to be made .


They cloath themselves in cloth and matting of various kinds  the first they wear in fair , the latter in wet weather .
They are in different forms , no shape being preserved in them , nor are the pieces sewed together .
The women of a superior class wear three or four pieces  one , which is of considerable length , they wrap several times round their waists , and it falls down to the middle of the leg .
Two or three other short pieces , with a hole cut in the middle of each , are placed on one another , and their heads coming through the holes , the long ends hang before and behind , both sides being open , by which means they have the free use of their arms .


The mens dress is very similar , differing only in one instance , which is that part of the garment instead of falling below the knees , is brought between the legs .
This dress is worn by all ranks of people , the only distinction being quantity in  Figure 9 .
A Woman  Boy of the new discoverd Islands , in the Dress of the Country .
 the superior class .
At noon both sexes appear almost naked , wearing only the piece of cloth that is tied round the waist .
Their faces are shaded from the sun with small bonnets , made of cocoa-nut leaves or matting which are constructed in a few minutes .
The men sometimes wear a sort of wig , made of human or dogs hair , or of cocoa-nut strings , woven on a single thread , which is fastened under their hair , and hangs down behind .
Both men and women wear ear-rings on one side , consisting of shells , stones , berries , or small pearls  but they soon gave the perference to the beads , brought by the Endeavour 's company .
The boys and girls go quite naked  the first till they are seven or eight years old  the latter till they are about five .
Their houses , which have been described already , they seldom use but to sleep in , or to avoid the rain , as they eat in the open air , under the shade of a tree .
Their clothes serve them at night for covering , and there are no divisions or apartments .
The master and his wife repose in the middle , then the married people  next to these the unmarried females , and at a small distance the men who are unmarried  and the servants sleep in the open air in fair weather .
The houses of the Chiefs , however , differ in some degree  there are some very small , and so built as to be carried in canoes : all sides of them are inclosed with the leaves of the cocoa-nut  the air , nevertheless ,  penetrates , in these the Chief and his wife alone sleep .
There are also houses which are general receptacles for the inhabitants of a district .
These are much larger , many being more than two hundred feet in length , forty in breadth , and seventy or eighty feet high .
They are constructed at the common expence , and have an area on one side surrounded with low pallisades  but like the others have no walls .


When a Chief kills a hog , which is but seldom , he divides it equally among his vassals  dogs and fowls are more common .


When the bread-fruit in not in season , they are supplied by cocoa-nuts , bananas , plantains , c..


Their cookery consists chiefly of baking , the manner of doing which has been already described .
They bake their bread-fruit in the same way , which renders it something like a mealy potatoe  of this fruit three dishes are made , by beating it to a paste , and mixing it with bananas , plantains , or the sour paste , which the natives nominate Mahie .


This paste is made by taking bread-fruit , which is not thoroughly ripe , and laying it in heaps , covered with leaves , by which means it ferments , the core is then taken out , and the fruit put into a hole lined with grass  it is then again covered with leaves , upon which large stones are placed  this produces a second fermentation , after which it grows sour , and undergoes  no change for a long time  they take it from this hole as they have occasion for it , and making it into balls , it is rolled up in plantain-leaves and baked  as it will keep for some weeks after it is dressed , they eat it both hot and cold .


Such is the food of these people , their sauce to which never consists of any thing but salt water .
As to their drink , it is generally confined to water , or the milk of the cocoa nuts , though there were instances in which some of them drank so freely of the English liquors , as to become quite intoxicated  this , however , seemed to proceed more from ignorance than design , as they were never known to repeat a debauch of this kind a second time .
They were told indeed that the Chiefs sometimes became inebriated by drinking the juice of a plant called Ava , but of this they saw no instance during the time they remained on the island .


The Chiefs generally eat alone , unless when visited by a stranger , who is sometimes permitted to become a second in their mess  having nothing to supply the want of a table , they sit on the ground in the shade  leaves of trees being spread before them serve as a table-cloth  their attendants , who are numerous , having placed a basket by the Chiefs , containing their provisions , and a cocoa-nut shell of fresh and salt water , seat themselves round them  they then begin by washing their mouth and hands , after  which they eat a mouthful of bread-fruit and fish , dipt in salt water alternately , till the whole is consumed , taking a sup of salt water likewise between almost every morsel .
The bread-fruit and fish being all eaten , they next have either plantains or apples , which they never eat without being pared .
During this time a soft paste is prepared from the bread-fruit , which they sup out of a cocoa-nut shell  this finishes the meal , and the hands and mouth are again washed as at the beginning .


It is astonishing how much food they eat at a meal  Mr. Banks and some other gentlemen were present when one man devoured three fish the size of a middling carp , four bread fruits as large as a common melon , thirteen or fourteen plantains seven or eight inches long , and above half as big round , and about a quart of the paste made of bread-fruit .


It is not a little surprizing , that the inhabitants of this island , who seemed exceedingly sensible of the pleasures of society , should have an universal aversion to the least intercourse with each other at their meals , and so rigid are they in the observance of this unusual custom , that even brothers and sisters have their separate baskets to contain their provisions , and generally sit some yards distance when they eat , with their backs turned towards each other , not exchanging a single word during the whole time of their repast  the middle aged of superior  rank usually betake themselves to sleep after dinner , but what is remarkable , the older people are not so lazy  music , dancing , wrestling , and shooting with the bow , or throwing a lance , constitute a chief part part of their diversions .


Flutes which have been mentioned before , and drums , are the only musical instruments among them  their drums are formed of a circular piece of wood , hollow at one end only , which is covered with the skin of a shark , and they are beaten with the hand instead of a stick .
Their songs are extempore , and frequently in rhime , but consist of only two lines  these couplets are often sung by way of evening amusements , between sun-set and bed-time , during which time they are not destitute of lights , having candles which they make of an oily nut , fixing them one above another , upon a small stick run through the middle  some of these candles burn a long time , and afford a pretty good light .


Among their other amusements , they have a dance named Timorodee , which is performed by ten or a dozen young females , who put themselves into the most wanton attitudes that can possibly be imagined , keeping time during the performance with the greatest nicety and exactness , from these dances the women are immediately excluded on their becoming pregnant .


Many of the principal people of this island , of each sex , have united into an association , in which no woman confines her favours to any  particular man  in this manner they obtain a perpetual variety , no one object ever gratifying them but a few days .


These societies are named Arreoy , the members of which have meetings where the men amuse themselves by wrestling  and notwithstanding the frequent intercourse which the women have with a variety of men , they dance the Timorodee in such a manner , as they imagine will most excite the desires of the male sex , and which are often gratified upon the spot .
There are yet much worse practices .
In case any of the women prove with child , which in this manner of life seldom happens , they destroy the helpless infant as soon as it is brought into the world , that it may not be a burden to the father , nor interrupt the mother in the pursuit of her lascivious amusements .
Natural affection , however , for the child sometimes happily produces a reformation in the mother , but when this happens , the child 's life is always forfeited , unless the mother can procure a man to adopt it as his child , in which case this inhuman murder is prevented , but both the man and woman are for ever expelled this society .
The woman being particularized by the appellation of Whannownow , ' `` bearer of children '' ' , which among these people , is considered as a term of the greatest reproach .


Their personal cleanliness is an object that merits peculiar attention .
Both sexes never  omit to wash with water three times a day  when they rise , at noon , and before they go to rest .
They also keep their cloaths extremely clean  so that in the largest communities no disagreeable effluvia ever arises , nor is there any other inconvenience than heat .


The chief manufacture of Otaheite is cloth  of this cloth there are three different sorts , which are made of the bark of as many different trees , viz .
the mulberry , the bread-fruit , and a tree not very unlike the wild fig-tree , which is found in some parts of the West Indies .
The mulberry-tree , which the Indians call Aouta , produces the finest cloth , which is seldom worn but by those of the first rank .
The next sort , which is worn by the lower class of people , is made of the bread-fruit tree , and the coarsest of the tree resembling the fig-tree .
This last sort , though more useful than the two former on account of its keeping cut water , which neither of the others will , is exceedingly scarce , being manufactured but in small quantities .


The same method is used in manufacturing these three cloths , notwithstanding they are all different  a description therefore of their manner of making one , will suffice for the whole .


Having stript off the bark of the trees , it is soaked in water for two or three days , they then take it out and separate the inner bark from the external coat , by scraping it with a shell , after which it is spread out on plantain-leaves , placing  two or three layers one over another , and taking care to make it of an equal thickness in every part  it continues in this state till it is nearly dry , when it adheres together so firmly , that it may be taken from the ground without breaking .
After this process it is laid on a smooth board , and beaten with an instrument made for that purpose , of a compact heavy wood , called by the natives Etoa .
This instrument is about fourteen inches long , and seven in circumference  it is of a quadrangular shape , and each of the four sides is marked with longitudinal grooves or furrows , differing in this instance , that there is a regular gradation in the width and depth of the grooves on each of the sides , the coarser side containing not more than ten of these furrows , and the finest above sixty .


They begin to beat their cloth with that side of the mallet where the grooves are deepest and widest , and proceeding regularly with the others , finish with that which has the greatest number  by this beating it is extended in a manner similar to the gold which is formed into leaves by the hammer , and is marked with an appearance of little channels , not unlike those which are visible on paper , but rather deeper  it is in general beat very thin , and when they want it thicker than common , they take two or three pieces and paste them together with a kind of glue , prepared from a root called Pea .


 This cloth becomes exceedingly white by bleaching , and is died of a red , yellow , brown , or black colour : the first of which is exceedingly beautiful , and equal , if not superior , to any in Europe .
They make this red colour from a mixture of the juices of two vegetables , neither of which used separately has this effect .


Matting of various kinds is another considerable manufacture , in which they excel , in many respects , the Europeans .
They make use of the coarser sort to sleep on , and in wet weather they wear the finer .


They greatly excel in the basket and wickerwork  both men and women employ themselves at it , and can make it of a great number of different patterns .


They make ropes and lines of all sizes of the bark of the poerou , and their nets for fishing are made of these lines : the fibres of the cocoa-nut they make thread of , such as they use to fasten together the several parts of their canoes  the forms of which are various , according to the use to which they are applied .


Their fishing-lines are esteemed the best in the world , made of the bark of the Erowa , a kind of nettle which grows on the mountains  they are strong enough to hold the heaviest and most vigorous fish , such as bonetas and albicores  in short , they are extremely ingenious in every expedient for taking all kinds of fish .


 The tools which these people make use of for building houses , constructing canoes , hewing stone , and for felling , cleaving , carving and polishing timber , consist of nothing more than an adze of stone , and a chissel of bone , most commonly that of a man 's arm  and for a file or polisher , they make use of a rasp of coral , and coral sand .


The blades of their adzes are extremely tough , but not very hard  they make them of various sizes , those for felling weigh six or seven pounds  and others which are used for carving , only a few ounces  they are obliged , every minute , to sharpen them on a stone , which is always kept near them for that purpose .


The most difficult task they meet with in the use of these tools , is the felling of a tree , which employs a great number of hands for several days together .


The tree which is in general use is called Avie , the stem of which is strait and tall .
Some of their smaller boats are made of the bread-fruit tree , which is wrought without much difficulty , being of a light spongy nature .
Instead of planes , they use their adzes with great dexterity .
Their canoes are all shaped with the hand , the Indians not being acquainted with the method of warping a plank .


They have two kinds of canoes , one they call Ivahahs , the other Pahies  the former is used for short voyages at sea , and the latter for  longer ones .
These boats do not differ either in shape or size  but they are in no degree proportionate , being from sixty or seventy feet to ten in length , and not more than the thirtieth part in breadth .
Some are employed in going from one island to another , and others used for fishing .
There is also the Ivahah , which serves for fighting  these are by far the longest , and the head and stern are considerably raised above the body .
These Ivahahs are fastened together , side by side when they go to sea , at the distance of a few feet , by strong wooden poles , which are laid across them and joined to each side .
A stage or platform is raised on the fore-part about ten or twelve feet long  upon which stand the fighting men , whose missile weapons are slings and spears .
Beneath these stages the rowers sit , who supply the place of those who are wounded .


The fishing Ivahahs are from thirty or forty to ten feet in length  and those for travelling have a small house fixed on board , which is fastened upon the fore-part , for the better accommodation of persons of rank , who occupy them both day and night .


The Pahies differ also in size , being from sixty to seventy feet long , they are likewise very narrow , and are sometimes used for fighting , but chiefly for long voyages .
In going from one island to another , they sometimes are out a month , and often at sea a fortnight or twenty  days , and if they had convenience to stow more provisions , they could stay out much longer .


These vessels are very useful in landing , and putting off from the shore in a surf  for by their great length and high sterns they landed dry , when the Endeavour 's boats could scarcely land at all .


They are very curious in the construction of these boats , the chief parts or pieces whereof are formed separately without either saw , plane , chissel , or any other iron tool , which renders their fabrication more surprizing and worthy observation .


These parts being prepared , the keel is fixed upon blocks , and the planks are supported with props , till they are sewed or joined together with strong plaited thongs , which are passed several times through holes bored with a chissel of bone , such as they usually make use of  and when finished , they are sufficiently tight without caulking .


They keep these boats with great care in a kind of shed , built on purpose to contain them .


Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were at a loss to find out their method of dividing time  they always made use of the term Malama , which signifies moon , whenever they spoke of time , either past or to come  they reckon thirteen of these moons , beginning again when they are expired .
This proves that they have some idea of the solar year  but these gentlemen could  not discover how they computed their months , so as to make thirteen of them equal to the year  for the natives say , that their month consists of twenty-nine days , one day , in which the moon is invisible , being included .
They knew the fruits that would be in season , and even the prevailing weather of the months to come .


They divide the day into twelve parts , each consisting of two hours , six belonging to the day , and the other six to the night .
They reckon from one to ten when they numerate , making use of their fingers , and changing hands till they come to the number which they intend to express , and in conversation they joined signs to their words , which were remarkably expressive of their meaning .


They are not so expert in measuring distances , as in computing numbers  for when they speak of the distance from one place to another , they are obliged to express it by the time that would be taken to pass it .


Their language is soft and musical , abounds with vowels , and is easy to be pronounced .
But whether it is copious , Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were not sufficiently acquainted with it to know .
As very few either of their nouns or verbs are declinable , it must consequently be very imperfect .
They found means , however , to be mutually understood without much difficulty .


 The following specimen will possibly enable the reader to form some idea of their language .


Teine , a brother .
Tooaheine , a sister .
Tane , a husband .
Aree , a chief .
Midee , a child .
Aheine , a woman .
Erowroo , the head .
Matau , the eyes .
Eahoo , the nose .
Meyoooo , the nails .
Huaheine , a wife .
Oowhau , the thighs .
Kipoo a meemhee , a chamber-pot .
Oorè dehaiya , a large nail .
Oorè eeteea , a small nail .
Pahiè , a ship .
Aihoo , a garment .
Parawei , a shirt .
Tumatau , a bonnet .
Poe , ear-rings .
Epanoo , a drum .
Toonoah , a mole in the skin .
Hooare , spittle .
Epeènei , an eccho .
Mahana , a day .
Poa , a night .
Otaowa , yesterday .
Aouna , to day .
Oboboa , to-morrow .
Tatta te Hàmannee Màitài , a good-natured person .
Amawhattoo , a shrew .
Epehe , a song .
Teà , white .
Marroowhai , dry .
Myty , good .
Porai , to talk .
Mutee , to kiss .
Eàwow , to scold .
Emòto , to box .
Eei , to eat .
Matte roah , to die .
Mayneenee , to tickle .
Itopa , to fall .
Ainao , take care .
Eeyo , look you .
Neeheeo , good night .
Waow , I. Tooanahoe , you and I. Wahaa , fire .
Avy , water .
 In respect to diseases , the natives are seldom afflicted with any , except sometimes an accidental fit of the cholic .
They are subject to the erisypelas , attended with cutaneous eruptions , not unlike the leprosy  and if they have had it for any time to a certain degree , they are secluded from all society , and live alone in a small house , in some unfrequented part of the island .


Here the management of the sick falls to the lot of the priests , and their method of cure consists chiefly of prayers and ceremonies , which are repeated till the patients recover or die .
If they recover , they attribute the cure to these remedies  if they die , like the medical tribe of this and every other country , they say the disease was incurable .


From their connection with the Europeans , they have entailed upon themselves that dreadful curse , the venereal disease  which , upon enquiry , evidently appeared to have been brought among them by the vessels under the command of Mons .
Bougainville .
It was called by a name somewhat similar , in meaning , to rottenness , but of a much stronger import  and they gave a most shocking account of the sufferings of those who were first infected with it  telling them , that their nails and hair fell off , and the flesh even rotted from their bones : and so greatly were they terrified at the dreadful effects of this alarming disease , that the infected person was forsaken even by his own relations , and left to  perish by himself , in such a state of misery and pain as he had never before experienced .


The religion of these people appeared to be exceedingly mysterious  and as the language used on the occasion was different from that spoken in common , they were not able to obtain much information respecting it , but from what little they could learn from their friend Tupia , these Indians seemed to have adopted strange notions of the creation of the world  imagining that every thing was derived from procreation , and the conjunction of two persons .
The supreme Deity , one of these two first Beings , they call TAROATAIHETOOMOO  and the other , TEPAPA .
The year which is called TETTOWMATATAYO , is supposed to be the daughter of the two first .
They also imagine , that there is an inferior race of Deities , whom they call EATUAS .
They say , two of these Eatuas formerly inhabited the earth , and that the first man descended from them .


They emphatically stile the supreme Being , the Causer of Earthquakes  but their prayers are more generally addressed to Tane , supposed to be a son of the first progenitors of nature .


They believe in the existence of the soul in a separate state , and that there are two situations , differing in their degrees of happiness , which they consider as receptacles for different ranks , but not as places of reward and punishment  they suppose , that their Chiefs and principal  Ornaments for the Ears .


[ ... ] ring Instruments


Figure 10 .
A Priest of the illegible Discovered Islands in the Habit of his Order .
 people will have the preference to those of inferior rank , as they imagine their actions no way influence their future state , and that their Deities take no cognizance of them whatsoever .
The office of priest is hereditary  there are several of them , and of all ranks  the Chief is respected next to their Kings , and they are superior to the rest of the natives not only in point of divine knowledge , but also in that of navigation and astronomy .


The priests here are no way concerned with the ceremony of marriage , it being a simple agreement between the man and woman  and when they chuse to separate , it is done with as little ceremony as that of their marriage .


These people do not seem to be any way guilty of idolatry , as they worship no kind of images whatever .
They enter their morais with great reverence and humility , and when they bring their offering to the altar , their body is uncovered to the waist .


There is a subordination among them , that much resembles the early state of every nation in Europe under the feudal system , which secured , to a small number , the most unrestrained liberty , while the rest were abject slaves .


Their ranks or orders are , Earee rahie , which signifies King  Earee , Baron  Manahouni , Vassal  and Toutou , Villain .
The Earee rahie , of which there are two , one belonging to each of the peninsulas of which this island consists , had  great respect shewn them by all ranks .
The Earees are Lords of one or more of the districts , into which each of the peninsulas is divided  and they separate their territories into lots , which are given to the Manahounies , who respectively cultivate that share which they hold under the baron .
But they are only nominal cultivators , this as well as all other laborious work being done by the Toutous , or lower class of people .


The Sovereign or Earee rahie , and the Baron or Earee , are succeeded in titles and honours by their children as soon as they are born , the fathers being immediately divested of them  but they remain possessors and managers of their estates .


In case of a general attack upon the island , every district , under the command of an Earee , furnishes a proportionate number of fighting men for the defence of the common cause , and they are commanded in chief by the Earee rahie .
- According to Tupia 's account , the number furnished by the principal districts amounted to six thousand and upwards .


Slings , with which they are very dextrous , pikes headed with stone , and long clubs made of wood , remarkably hard and heavy , constitute their weapons .
With these they fight with great obstinacy and cruelty , giving no quarter to either man , woman or child , if they fall into their hands in time of battle .


 During the stay of the Endeavour , there was a perfect good understanding between the Earee rahies of the two peninsulas , though the Earee rahie of Tiarreboo , arrogated to himself the title of King of the whole island  which the other considered , as it really was , a mere nominal claim , and only a feather in his cap .
There is nothing among them substituted for money , or a general medium , by which every object may be purchased or procured  neither can any permanent good be unlawfully obtained by force or fraud  and the general commerce with women , sets aside almost every excitement for committing adultery .
In a word , in a government so little polished , though distributive justice can not be regularly administered  as there can at the same time be but few crimes for the exercise of it , the want of this justice is not so severely felt , as it would be in more civilized societies .


Thursday July the 13th , after leaving the island of Otaheite , they sailed with a gentle breeze and clear weather  and were informed by Tupia , that four islands , which he called Huaheine , Ulietea , Otaha , and Bolabola , were at the distance of about one or two days sail , and that hogs , fowls , and other refreshments , which had lately been scarce , were to be got there in abundance .
They accordingly steered their course in search of these islands , and on Saturday the 15th , discovered the island of Huaheine  and on the 16th , in the morning , they  sounded near the north-west part of the island , but found no bottom with seventy fathom .
Several canoes immediately put off , but they appeared fearful of coming near the ship , till they saw Tupia , which totally removed their apprehensions , and they ventured to come along-side , and upon assurances of friendship , the King of Huaheine and his Queen went on board .
Astonishment was testified by their Majesties at every thing that was shewn them  yet they made no researches , and appeared satisfied with what was presented to their observation , making no enquiry after any other objects , though it was reasonable to suppose , that a building of such novelty and extent as the ship must have afforded many curiosities .
The King , whose name was Oree , made a proposal to exchange names with Captain Cook , which was readily assented to .
The custom of exchanging names is very prevalent in this island , and is considered as a mark of friendship .
They found the people here nearly similar to those of Otaheite in almost every circumstance , except , if Tupia might be credited , they were not addicted to thieving .
Having come to an anchor in a small but fine harbour , on the west side of the island , Captain Cook went ashore , accompanied by Mr. Banks and some other gentlemen , with Tupia and the King .
The instant they landed , Tupia uncovered himself as low as his waist , and desired Mr. Monkhouse to follow  his example .
Being seated , he now begun a speech , which lasted about twenty minutes  the King , who stood opposite to him , answering in what seemed to be set replies .
During this discourse he delivered , at different times , a handkerchief , a black silk neckcloth , some beads and plantains , as presents to their Eatua , or Deity .
He received in return for the Eatua , of the English , a hog , some young plantains , and two bunches of feathers , which were carried on board .
These ceremonies were considered as a kind of ratification of a treaty between the English and the King of Huaheine .


On the 17th they went again on shore , and walked up into the country , the productions of which greatly resembled those of Otaheite  the rocks and clay seemed , however , more burnt  the boat-houses were large , and the other houses neat .
The level part of the country affords the most beautiful landscapes that the imagination can possibly form an idea of  the soil is exceedingly fertile , and the shores are lined with fruit trees of different kinds , particularly the cocoa-nut , which was seen in great abundance .


They also went on shore on the 18th without Tupia , but his boy , whose name was Tayota , accompanied them , and Mr. Banks proposed taking a more perfect view of a kind of chest , or ark , which he had before observed  the lid of this ark was sewed on in a peculiar manner , and thatched with palm-nut leaves .
It was  placed upon two poles , and sustained on small carved arches of wood , the poles served to remove it from one place to another , in the manner of a sedan chair  it is very surprising , that this chest was of a form greatly resembling the ark of the Lord among the Jews  but what was still more extraordinary , the boy informed them , that it was called Ewharre no Eatua , the house of the God , but he could give no account of its meaning or utility : with some difficulty they negotiated for eleven pigs , and were not without hopes of obtaining more the next morning .


Wednesday the 19th , they carried some hatchets with them , with which they procured three very large hogs .
As they proposed to sail in the afternoon , the King , accompanied by some others of the natives , came on board to take his leave , when his Majesty received from Captain Cook a small pewter plate , with the following inscription . '
`` His Britannic Majesty 's ship Endeavour , Lieutenant Cook Commander , 16 July , 1769 . '' '
He also was presented with some medals , or counters , resembling the coin of England , and a few other trifles .


This island is situated in the latitude of 16 degrees 43 minutes south , and longitude 150 degrees 52 minutes west  it is distant from Otaheite about thirty leagues , and is about twenty miles in circumference .


 The productions of Huaheine , seem to be a month forwarder than those of Otaheite , as they found by several of the fruits , c..
Mr. Banks met with only a few new plants , but found a species of scorpion which he had not seen before .


The people are of a very lazy disposition , though they are stouter and larger made than those of Otaheite .


The women are much fairer than those of that island , and in general exceedingly handsome : both men and women seemed less susceptible of fear , and not so desirous of information .


From Huaheine they sailed for the island of Ulietea , and in the afternoon came within a league or two of the shore .
The next morning , being the 20th , by the direction of Tupia , they anchored in a bay , which is formed by a reef , on the north side of the island  two canoes of natives soon came off from the shore , and brought with them two small hogs , which they exchanged for some nails and beads .
The Captain , Mr. Banks , and some other gentlemen , now went on shore , accompanied by Tupia , who introduced them with the same kind of ceremonies that had taken place on their landing at Huaheine  after which , Capt. Cook took possession of this and the adjacent islands in the name of the King of Great Britain .


They then walked to a large Morai , which the natives called Tapodeboatea  they found that  it differed considerably from the Morais of Otaheite , being composed of four walls , about eight or nine feet in height , built of very large coral-stones , which surrounded an area about thirty yards square : at a small distance they discovered an Ewhatta , or altar , upon which , as an oblation , was placed a whole hog , about a hundred pounds weight .
At the front of this Morai , facing the sea , there was a kind of amphitheatre .
There were likewise three or four Ewharee no Eatua , or houses of God , of the same kind as that which they saw at Huaheine .


On Friday the 21st , the Master was sent in the long-boat to inspect the coast on the south part of the island , and a Lieutenant was dispatched in the yawl , to sound the harbour where the Endeavour lay , while the Captain went in the pinnace to take a view of the coast on the north part of the island  in their return they saw a tree , of the same kind as that seen by Mr. Green at Otaheite , the circumference of the trunk , or rather congeries of the roots of which measured about forty yards .


On the 22d and 23d it being hazy weather with brisk gales , Captain Cook judged it rather unsafe to put to sea .
On they 24th they got under sail , and steered to the northward within the reef , towards an opening five or six leagues distant  in effecting this , he was in the greatest danger of striking on a rock  the man who sounded , crying out on a sudden , two fathom ,  at which they were much alarmed , but happily got clear without receiving any damage .


The bay in which the Endeavour lay at anchor is called Oopoa  it is large enough to contain a great number of shipping , and is secured from the sea by a reef of rocks .
It lies off the eastermost point of the island , and may be distinguished by a low woody island which lies to the south-east of it .


The provisions of this island consist chiefly of cocoa-nuts , yams , plantains , and a few hogs and fowls : that part of the country where they landed is not so fruitful as either Otaheite or Huaheine .


On the 25th they were within a league or two of the island of Otaha , but the wind continuing contrary , they could not get near enough to land till the 28th in the morning , when Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander went in the long-boat , with the Master , to sound a harbour on the east side of the island , which they found safe and convenient , with good anchorage .
They then went on shore , and purchased some hogs and fowls , and a large quantity of yams and plantains .


This island appeared to be more barren than Ulietea , but the produce was much the same .
The natives paid them the compliment they used towards their own Kings , by uncovering their shoulders , and wrapping their cloaths  round their bodies  taking care no one should omit doing the same .


On the 29th they made sail to the northward , and at eight o'clock next morning they were close under the high craggy peak of the island of Bolabola .
The island was inaccessible in this part , and they found it impossible to weather the south end of it till late at night .
The next morning , Sunday the 30th , they discovered an island , which Tupia called Maurua , who said it was small , surrounded by a reef , and without any commodious harbour , but inhabited , and yielded nearly the same produce as the adjacent islands .
In the middle is a high round hill , which may be seen at eleven or twelve leagues distance .


In the afternoon , finding themselves to windward of some harbours that lay on the west side of Ulietea , they intended to put into one of them , in order to stop a leak which they had sprung in the powder-room , and to take in some additional ballast .
The wind being right against them , they plied on and off till the afternoon , of the 1st of August , when they came to an anchor in the entrance of the channel which led into one of the harbours .


Wednesday 2 , in the morning , when the tide turned , they came into a proper place for mooring , in twenty-eight fathom .
In the interim many of the natives came off , and brought  hogs , fowls , and plantains , which were purchased upon very moderate terms .


Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander went on shore , and spent the day very agreeably  the natives shewing them great respect .
Being conducted to the houses of the chief people , they were received in an uncommon manner .
Upon their entrance into a house , they found those who had ran hastily before them , standing on each side of a long matt , spread upon the ground , and the family sitting at the further end of it .
In one house they observed some very young girls , dressed in the neatest manner , who kept their places , waiting for the strangers to accost them : these girls were the most beautiful the gentlemen had ever seen .


One of them , who was about seven or eight years old , was dressed in a red gown , and her head was decorated with a great quantity of plaited hair  this ornament is called Tomou , and is held in great estimation among them .
She was sitting at the upper end of one of their long mats , on which none of the people present presumed to set a foot  and her head was reclined on the arm of a decent looking woman , who appeared to be her nurse  when Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander approached her , she stretched out her hand to receive some beads , which they presented to her , with an air of such dignity and gracefulness , as would have done honour to the first princess in Europe .


 Before their departure they were entertained with a dance , different from any they had seen before .
The performer put upon his head a large piece of wicker-work , about four feet long , of a cylindrical form , covered with feathers , and edged round with shark 's teeth .
Having this head-dress on , which is called a Whou , he began to dance with a slow motion , frequently moving his head , so as to describe a circle with the top of his wicker cap , and sometimes throwing it so near the faces of the bye-standers , as to make them jump back  this they considered as an excellent piece of humour , and it always produced a hearty laugh , when practiced upon any of the English gentlemen .


On Thursday the 3d , as Mr. Banks and the Doctor were going along the shore to the northward , with a design to purchase stock , they met with a company of dancers , who retarded the progress of their excursion near two hours , and afforded them much diversion .
The company was composed of six men and two women dancers , with three drums .
They were informed , that these dancers were some of the principal people of the island , and though they were an itinerant troop , they did not , like the strolling parties of Otaheite , receive any gratuity from the by-standers .
The women wore a considerable quantity of Tamou , or plaited hair , ornamented with the flowers of the cape jessamine , which were stuck in with taste , and made  Figure 11 .
Representation of a Dance in the Island of Ulietea .
 an elegant head dress .
The womens necks , breasts and arms were naked  the other parts of the body were covered with black cloth , which was fastened close round them  and by the side of each breast , next the arms , was a small plume of black feathers , worn like a nosegay .
Thus apparalleled they advanced sideways , keeping time with great exactness to the drums , which beat quick and loud  soon after , they began to shake themselves in a very whimsical manner , and put their bodies into a variety of strange postures , sometimes standing in a row one behind another , sometimes sitting down , and at others falling with their faces to the ground , and resting on their knees and elbows , moving their fingers at the same time with a quickness scarcely to be credited .
The chief dexterity , however , of the dancers , as well as the amusement of the spectators , consisted in the lasciviousness of their attitudes and gestures , which decency forbids us to describe .


Between the dances of the women , a kind of dramatic interlude was performed by the men , consisting of dialogue as well as dancing  but for want of a sufficient knowledge of their language , they could not learn the subject of this interlude .


Friday the 4th , Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , and some other gentlemen , were present at a more regular dramatic entertainment .
The  performers , who were all men , were divided into two parties , one dressed in brown , and the other in white , by way of distinction .
Tupia being present , informed them , that the party in brown acted the parts of a master and his servants , and the party in white a gang of thieves  the master having produced a basket of meat , which he gave in charge to his servants  the white party exhibited a variety of expedients , in endeavouring to steal this basket , and the brown set as many in preventing the accomplishment of their design .
After some time had been spent in this manner , those to whom the basket was entrusted , laying themselves down on the ground round it , pretended to fall asleep  the other party availing themselves of this opportunity , stole gently upon them , and carried off their booty  the servants awaking soon after discovered their loss , but they made no search after the basket , and began to dance with as much alacrity as before .


On Saturday the 5th , some hogs and fowls , and several large pieces of cloth , many of them being fifty or sixty yards in length , together with a quantity of plantains and cocoa-nuts , were sent to Captain Cook as a present , from the Earee rahie of the island of Bolabola , accompanied with a message , that he was then on the island , and intended waiting on the Captain the next day .


 On Sunday the 6th , the King of Bolabola did not visit them agreeable to his promise , his absence , however , was not in the least regretted , as he sent three very agreeable young women to demand something in return for his present .
After dinner , they set out to pay the King a visit on shore , as he did not think proper to come on board .
As this man was the Earee rahie of the Bolabola men , who had conquered this , and were the dread of all the neighbouring islands , they were greatly disappointed , instead of finding a vigorous , enterprising young Chief , to see a poor feeble decrepid old dotard , half blind , and sinking under the weight of age and infirmities .
He received them without either that state or ceremony which they had hitherto met with among the other Chiefs .


On Wednesday the 9th , having stopped their leak , and taken on board their fresh stock of provisions , they sailed out of the harbour .
Tho ' they were several leagues distant from the island of Bolabola , Tupia earnestly entreated Captain Cook , that a shot might be fired towards it  which , to gratify him , the Captain complied with .
This was supposed to have been intended by Tupia as a mark of his resentment against the inhabitants of that place , as they had formerly taken from him large possessions which he held in the island of Ulietea , of which island  Tupia was a native , and a subordinate Chief , but was driven out by these people .


They had great plenty of provisions , as well of hogs and fowls , as of vegetables , during the time they continued in the neighbourhood of those islands , so that they were not obliged to use any considerable quantity of the ship 's provisions , and they had flattered themselves , that the fowls and hogs would have supplied them with fresh provisions during the course of their voyage to the southward  but in this they were unhappily disappointed , for as the hogs could not be brought to eat any sort of European grain , or any provender whatever that the ship afforded , they were reduced to the disagreeable necessity of killing them immediately on their leaving those islands  and the fowls all died of a disease in their head , with which they were seized soon after they had been carried on board .


As they were detained longer at Ulietea in repairing the ship than they expected , they did not go on shore at Bolabola  but , after giving the general name of the Society Islands to the islands of Huhaheine , Ulietea , Bolabola , Otaha and Maurua , which lie between the lalitude of 16 deg .
10 min .
and 16 deg .
55 min .
south , they pursued their course , standing southwardly for an island , to which they were directed by Tupia , at above an hundred leagues distant , which they discovered on Sunday the 13th , and were informed by him , that it was  called Ohiteroa .
The next morning they stood in for land , and saw several of the inhabitants along the shore  one of the Lieutenants was now dispatched in the pinnace , to sound for anchorage , and obtain what intelligence he could of the natives , respecting any land that might lay further to the south .
Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , and Tupia went also in the boat , with the Lieutenant , when they came near the shore , they could perceive that the inhabitants were armed with lances of a considerable length .
The appearance of the boat soon drew together a great number of them upon the beech , two of whom leaped into the water , and endeavoured to gain the boat , but she soon left them behind  several others made the same attempt , but with as little success .


The boat having doubled the point where they intended to land , opened a large bay , and discovered another party of the natives standing at the end of it , armed in the same manner as those they had already seen .
The boat 's crew now rowed towards the shore , and began to make preparations for landing , upon which a canoe , with some of the natives on board , came off towards them  they ordered Tupia to acquaint these people , that they did not intend doing them any injury , but wanted to traffick with them with nails , which they shewed them  this information encouraged them to come along-side the boat , and they accepted  of some nails , which were given them with much apparent pleasure and satisfaction  it soon appeared , however , to be nothing more than dissimulation  for , in a few minutes , several of them unexpectedly boarded the boat , with an intention of dragging her on shore  some musquets were immediately discharged over their heads , which had the desired effect , all of them leaping directly into the sea  and as soon as they reached the canoe , they put back to the shore as fast as they could paddle , where a vast concourse of their countrymen were assembled to receive them .
They were followed to the shore by the people in the boat , who found the surf so violent , that they did not think it safe to attempt landing .
They therefore coasted along the shore , in hopes of finding a place where they might land with less danger  presently after the canoe got on shore , a man with a lance in his hand ran along opposite to the boat , flourishing his weapon , and calling out with a shrill voice , which , upon enquiry of Tupia , they were informed was a mark of defiance .


Not being able to find a more convenient landing place , they returned , with a design of attempting it at the place where the canoe went on shore : as they were going back , the same mode of defiance was repeated by another warrior of a more formidable appearance than the first  having a high cap on , made of the tail  feathers of a bird , and his body painted with streaks of a variety of colours .
When this man retired , another advanced in years , with a grave and sedate countenance , made his appearance upon the beach , and asked them several questions , such as from whence they came , whither they were bound , and who they were .
Tupia having answered these questions , and repeated his assurances , that our intentions were amicable , they appeared to be somewhat pacified .
The people in the boat now proposed going on shore , to trade with them for such articles as they chose to dispose of , if they would quit their weapons  but they would not agree to this proposal on any other terms , than the English leaving their musquets behind them in the boat  with this , however , prudence would not permit them to comply , especially as they had so lately experienced the dissembling nature of these people .
They therefore gave over all hopes of establishing a friendly intercourse with them , and returned to the ship .
And as neither the bay which the boat entered , nor any other part of the island afforded either harbour or anchorage , the Captain did not think it worth while to attempt a second landing .


The people of this island are very tall , well proportioned , and have long hair , which , like the inhabitants of the other islands , they tie in a bunch on the top of their head  they are  likewise tataowed on different parts of their bodies , but not on their posteriors .


This island does not shoot up into high peaks , like the others which they visited , but is more level and uniform , and divided into small hillocks , some of which are covered with groves of trees  they saw no bread-fruit , and not many cocoa-nut trees , but great numbers of the tree called Etoa , were planted all along the shore .


Their cloth , as well as the manner of wearing it , differed in many respects from any they had met with  all that they saw was died yellow , and painted on the outside with a variety of colours .
Their habit consisted only of one piece with a hole made in the middle of it , thro ' which they put their head  it reaches as low as their knees , and is tied close round their bodies with a kind of yellow sash  some of them wear caps of the same kind as that already mentioned , and others bind their heads with a piece of cloth resembling a turban .


On Tuesday , the 15th of August , they sailed from this island to the southward , with a fine breeze from the north , and clear pleasant weather  and on the 16th it being rather hazy , they were deceived by an appearance like several high peaks of land , for which they bore away , but the weather clearing up , convinced them of their mistake , and they resumed their course to the south .


 On Friday the 25th , they celebrated the anniversary of their leaving England , from whence they had now been absent one year : a large Cheshire cheese , which had been carefully preserved for that purpose , was brought out , and a barrel of porter tapped , which proved to be as good as any they had ever drank in England .
On the 29th John Raden , the Boatswain 's mate , died  this man 's death was occasioned by drinking too freely of some rum which was given him by the Boatswain .
On the 30th , about four o'clock in the morning , they saw a large comet about 60 degrees above the horizon .


On Thursday the 7th of October , they discovered land at west by north , and in the afternoon , of the next day , they came to an anchor opposite the mouth of a little river about a mile and a half from the shore .
The Captain , with Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , and some other gentlemen , accompanied by a party of marines , went on shore in the evening , in the pinnace and yawl .


Having left the pinnace at the entrance of the river , Captain Cook , Mr. Banks , c. proceeded a little farther up , when they landed , and leaving the yawl to the care of some of their boys , went up to a few small houses which they saw at a little distance .
Taking the advantage of their absence from the boat , some of the natives , who had concealed themselves behind the bushes , suddenly rushed out , and ran towards  it , brandishing the long wooden lances which they had in their hands in a threatening manner .
The boys perceiving them , instantly dropt down the stream , but were very closely pursued by the Indians  the Cockswain of the pinnace therefore fired a musquetoon over their heads , which did not seem to intimidate them , as they still continued their pursuit  he then fired a second time over their heads , but with no better effect  alarmed at the situation of the boat , as they were now got near enough to discharge their lances at it , the Cockswain levelled his piece at them , and shot one man dead on the spot .
Struck with astonishment at the fall of their companion , the others stood motionless for some time , but as soon as they recovered from their fright , retreated to the woods with the utmost precipitation .
The report of the gun soon brought the advanced party back to the boats , and both the pinnace and yawl immediately returned to the ship .


On Monday the 9th in the morning , a great number of the natives were seen near the place where the gentlemen in the yawl had landed the preceding evening , and the greatest part of them appeared to be unarmed .
The long-boat , pinnace and yawl , being ordered out , and manned with marines and sailors , Captain Cook , together with Mr. Banks , the rest of the gentlemen and Tupia went on shore , and landed on the opposite side of the river , over-against several  Indians who were sitting on the ground  as soon as the gentlemen began to land , they immediately started up , each producing either a long pike , or a kind of truncheon made of stone , with a string through the handle of it , which they twisted round their wrist .
Tupia was ordered to speak to them in his language  and the gentlemen were agreeably surprized to find that he was well understood , the natives speaking the Otaheitean language , only in a different dialect .
Their intentions at first appeared to be very hostile , brandishing their weapons in the usual threatening manner  upon which a musquet was fired at some distance from them , at the effect of which the ball happening to strike the water , they appeared rather terrified , and desisted from their menaces .
The marines being drawn up , the Captain , with four or five of the gentlemen and Tupia , advanced nearer to the side of the river  Tupia again spoke to them , and informed th [ ... ] m , that they wanted to traffick with them for provisions .
They readily consented to trade , and requested the English gentlemen to cross the river and come over to them  which was agreed to , upon condition that the natives would quit their weapons  but this the most solemn assurances of friendship could not prevail on them to comply with .
Not thinking it prudent therefore to cross the river , as they would not be persuaded to lay by their arms , the gentlemen in their turn intreated  the Indians to come over to them , which after some time they prevailed on one of them to do  he was presently followed by several others , bringing their weapons with them .
They did not appear to set any great value on the beads , iron , c. which was presented to them , nor would they give any thing in return , but proposed to exchange their weapons for those belonging to the English , which being consequently objected to , they endeavoured several times to snatch them out of their hands .
But as the gentlemen were on their guard , from the information given them by Tupia that they were still their enemies , their attempts to seize the arms were repeatedly frustrated , and Tupia , by the direction of the gentlemen , gave them notice , that any further offer of violence would be punished with instant death .
One of them had , nevertheless , the audacity to snatch Mr. Green 's hanger , and retiring a few paces , flourished it over his head  he , however , paid for this temerity with his life , Mr. Monkhouse firing at him with a musquet loaded with ball  and that gentleman afterwards , with some difficulty , recovered the hanger , one of the Indians endeavouring to seize it .


This behaviour of the natives , added to the want of fresh water , induced Captain Cook to continue his course round the head of the bay .
He was still in hopes of getting some of  the Indians on board , and by presents , added to civil usage , convey through them a favourable idea of the English to their fellow countrymen  and thereby settle a good correspondence with them .
Soon after an event occured , though attended with disagreeable circumstances , that promised to facilitate this design .
Two canoes appeared making towards land , and Captain Cook proposed intercepting them with his boats .
One of them got clear off , but the Indians in the other finding it impossible to escape the boats , began to attack them with their paddles : this compelled the Endeavour 's people to fire upon them , when four of the Indians were killed , and the other three , who were youths , jumped into the water , and endeavoured to swim to shore : they were however taken up and brought on board .
They were at first greatly terrified , thinking they should be killed  but Tupia , by repeated assurances of friendship , removed their fears , and they afterwards eat very heartily of the ship 's provisions .
When they retired to rest , in the evening , they appeared perfectly easy in their minds , and slept very quietly for some hours , but in the middle of the night their fears again returned , and they appeared in great agitation , frequently making loud and dismal groans .
After some time , however , the friendly promises and kind caresses of Tupia again prevailed over their fears , and they became so calm and resigned  as to sing a song , the tune of which was solemn and slow , and , at the dead of night , when an universal silence prevailed throughout the ship , had an awful and pleasing effect .
The next morning , after they were dressed and ornamented , according to the mode of their country , with necklaces and bracelets , Captain Cook proposed setting them on shore , that they might give a favourable report to their countrymen of the reception they had met with .
They testified much satisfaction when told they were going to be released : but seemed under great apprehensions of danger , at finding the boat approach Captain Cook 's first landing-place , intimating , that the inhabitants here were their foes , and that they always killed and ate their enemies .
The Captain , nevertheless , judged it expedient to land near the same spot , which he accordingly did with Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander and Tupia , resolving at the same time to protect the youths from any injury that might be offered them .
The gentlemen had not been long on shore before the boys left them , but on seeing two large parties of the Indians advancing hastily towards them , they returned , and again put themselves under their protection .
As the Indians drew nearer , one of the boys discovered his uncle amongst them , and a conversation took place between them across the river , in which the lad gave a very just account of the hospitality he had met with , and took great pains  to display their cloaths and finery .
Soon after the uncle swam across the river , bringing with him a green bow , as a token of friendship , which was received as such , and several presents were made him .
The body of the Indian , who was shot the day before , lay in the same place where he fell : one of the boys had covered it with part of his cloaths  and after the gentlemen had retired , the Indian performed a kind of ceremony over it , by throwing a green branch towards it , and the body was afterwards carried in a raft across the river .
Notwithstanding the presence of the uncle of one of the boys , all three of them , by their own desire , returned to the ship , but as the Captain intended sailing the next morning , he sent them on shore again in the evening , though much against their inclination  the names of these boys were Taahourange , Koikerange and Maragovete .
They informed Captain Cook , that there was a particular kind of deer upon the island , likewise taro , eapes , romara , yams , a kind of long pepper , bald coote , and black birds .


On the 11th Captain Cook set sail , in hopes of finding a better anchoring-place , after giving this bay ( called by the natives Toaneora ) the name of Poverty Bay  and the south-west point he called Young Nick 's Head , on account of its being first perceived by a lad on board named Nicholas Young .
They were becalmed in the afternoon , and several cances came off  from the shore with Indians , who received many presents , and afterwards bartered even their cloaths , and some of their paddles , so eager were they of being possessed of as many European commodities as possible .
A single tree formed the bottom of their canoes , and the upper part consisted of two planks sewed together : they sat on thwarts  their paddles were painted red , representing many uncommon figures , and were curiously wrought .


They were armed with bludgeons made of wood , and of the bone of a large animal  they called them Patoo , Patoo , and they were well contrived for close fighting .


After they had finished their traffic , they set off in such a hurry , that they forgot three of their companions , who remained on board all night .


They testified their fears and apprehensions , notwithstanding Tupia took great pains to convince them they were in no danger  and about seven the next morning a canoe came off , with four Indians on board .
It was at first with difficulty the Indians in the ship could prevail on those in the canoe to come near them  and it was not till after the former had assured them that the English did not eat men , that they came along-side the Endeavour .
The Chief came on board , whose face was tataowed , with a remarkable patoo patoo in his hand  and in this canoe the three Indians left the ship .
 Captain Cook gave the name of Cape Table to a point of land about seven leagues to the south of Poverty Bay , its figure greatly resembling a table  and the island , called by the natives Teabowry , he named Portland Island , it being very similar to that of the same name in the British Channel .
It is joined to the main by a chain of rocks , near a mile in length , partly above water .
There are several shoals , called shambles , about three miles to the north-east of Portland , one of which the Endeavour narrowly escaped  there is , however , a passage between them with 20 fathom water .
Some parts of Portland Island , as well as the Main , were cultivated  and pumice-stone in great quantities lying along the shore , within the bay , indicated that there is a volcano in the island .
High pailings upon the ridges of hills were also visible in two places , which were judged to be designed for religious purposes .


On the 12th several Indians came off in a canoe  they were disfigured in a strange manner , danced and sung , and appeared at times to be peaceably inclined , and at others to menace hostilities  but , notwithstanding Tupia strongly invited them to come on board , none of them would quit the canoe .
Whilst the Endeavour was getting clear of the shambles , five canoes full of Indians came off , and seemed to threaten the people on board , by brandishing their lances , and other hostile gestures  a  four pounder , loaded with grape shot , was therefore ordered to be fired , but not pointed at them .
This had the desired effect , and made them drop a-stern .
Two more canoes came off , whilst the Endeavour lay at anchor  but the Indians on board behaved very peaceably and quiet , and received several presents , but would not come on board .


On Friday the 13th , in the morning , they made for an inlet , but finding it not sheltered they stood out again , and were chaced by a canoe , filled with Indians , but the Endeavour out-sailed them .
She pursued her course round the bay , but did not find an opening .


The next morning they had a view of the inland country  it was mountainous , and covered with snow in the interior parts , but the land towards the sea was flat and uncultivated , and in may places there were groves of high trees .
Nine canoes full of Indians came from the shore , and five of them , after having consulted together , pursued the Endeavour , apparently with an hostile design .
Tupia was desired to acquaint them that immediate destruction would ensue , if they persevered in their attempts  but words had no influence , and a four pounder , with grape shot , was fired , to give them some notion of the arms of their opponents .
They were terrified at this kind of reasoning , and paddled away faster than they came .
Tupia then hailed the fugitives , and  acquainted them , that if they came in a peaceable manner , and left their arms behind , no annoyance would be offered them : one of the canoes submitting to these terms , came along side the ship , and received many presents  but the other canoes returning , and persisting in the same menacing behaviour , interrupted this friendly intercourse .


The following day , Sunday the 15th , they were visited by some fishing boats , the people in which conducted themselves in an amicable manner  though the fish which they had on board had been caught so long that they were not eatable , Captain Cook purchased them , merely for the sake of promoting a traffick with the natives .
In the afternoon a large canoe , with a number of armed Indians , came up , and one of them who was remarkably cloathed , with a black skin , found means to defraud the Captain of a piece of red baize , under pretence of bartering the skin he had on for it .
As soon as he had got the baize into his possession , instead of giving the skin in return agreeable to his bargain , he rolied them up together , and ordered the canoe to put off from the ship , turning a deaf ear to the repeated remonstrances of the Captain against his unjust behaviour .
After a short time this canoe , together with the fishing boats which had put off at the same time , came back to the ship , and trade was again begun .
During this second  traffick with the Indians , one of them unexpectedly seized Tupia 's little boy Tayota , and pulling him into his canoe instantly put her off , and paddled away with the utmost speed  several musquets were immediately discharged at the people in the canoe , and one of them receiving a wound they all let go the boy , who before was held down in the bottom of the canoe .
Tayota taking the advantage of their consternation , immediately jumped into the sea , and swam back towards the Endeavour , he was taken on board , without having received any harm  but his strength was so much exhausted with the weight of his cloaths , that it was with great difficulty he reached the ship .
In consequence of this attempt to carry off Tayota , Captain Cook called the Cape off which it happened Cape Kidnappers , lying in latitude 39 deg .
43 min .
and longitude 182 deg .
24 min .
west , and is very distinguishable by high cliffs and white rocks , that surround it .
Its distance from Portland Island is about 13 leagues , forming the south point of a bay , which the Captain named Hawke 's Bay , in honour of Sir Edward , who then presided at the admiralty board .


As every circumstance that tends to elucidate the manners and customs of these people must attract the attention of the curious reader , we can not omit Tayota 's behaviour upon recovering from his fright , occasioned by his being kidnapped .
He produced a fish , and acquainted  Tupia , that he designed to make an offering of it to his God , or Eatua , as a testimonial of his gratitude for his deliverance .
Tupia approved of his intention , and by his direction the fish was cast into the sea .
This is an evident proof , that even these unenlightened savages , by the mere impulse of nature , believe in the existence of a particular providence .


The Endeavour now passed a small island , white and high , supposed to be inhabited only by fishermen , as it appeared quite barren , and was named Bare Island .
On the 17th Captain Cook gave the name of Cape Turn Again to a head-land , in latitude 40 deg .
34 min .
S. longitude , 182 deg .
55 min .
west , because the Endeavour here turned again .
Before the Endeavour touched at New Zealand , it was not certainly known whether it was an island , or part of the continent , wherefore the lords of the admiralty had , by their instructions , directed Captain Cook to sail along the coasts as far as 40 degrees south latitude , and from thence , if the land appeared to extend farther , to return again to the northward .
Agreeable to these instructions , the Captain being opposite to Cape Turn Again , changed his course from south to north  and the wind having likewise veered to the south , he returned nearly in his former track , sailing along the coast .
This Cape is remarkable for a stratum of clay of a bright brown colour  its prominence gradually diminishes towards  the north-side , but to the south its descent is not so regular .


The land betwen this Cape and Kidnapper 's Bay is unequal , and resembles the high downs of England .
There appeared numerous inhabitants , and several villages .
Wednesday the 18th the Endeavour came a-breast of a peninsula in Portland Island , named Terakako , when a canoe , with five Indians , came up to the ship .
Two Chiefs who were in this canoe came on board , where they remained all night , and were treated with great civility .
One of the Chiefs was a remarkable comely man , and his countenance was open and prepossessing .
Their curiosity was uncommon , and their acknowledgments , for the trifling presents they received , were extremely grateful .
The Chiefs would neither eat nor drink , but the servants made up for their masters abstinence , by their voracious appetites .
The three boys had given these natives an account of the hospitality and liberality of the English , which had prevailed upon them to pay this visit .


Thursday the 19th the Endeavour passed a remarkable head land , which Captain Cook named Gable End Foreland .
It is distinguished by a rock , in the shape of a church spire , which is very near it .
Here three canoes came up , and one Indian came on board  he received some small presents , and retired to his companions .
 He wore a new garment of white silky flax , with a border of black , red and white .


Many of the Indians had pieces of greenstone round their necks , by way of necklaces  they were transparent , like an emerald , and appeared , on examination , to be a species of Nephritic-stone , of which all their ornaments of this kind consisted .
Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen obtained several pieces of it .


The dialect of these Indians was not so guttural as that of the others , and they spoke the most like the inhabitants of Otaheite .
The physiognomy of some was agreeable , their noses being rather prominent than flat .


On the 20th they anchored in a bay , about two leagues to the north of the Foreland .
The natives in canoes invited them hither , and behaved very amicably .
There appeared to be two Chiefs , who came on board : they received presents of linen , which gave them much satisfaction  but they did not hold spike-nails in such estimation as the inhabitants of some of the islands .
They were dressed in jackets , the one ornamented with tufts of red feathers , the other with dog 's skin .
The other Indians in the canoes traded with the Endeavour 's people , without attempting any imposition  and towards the evening the Chiefs returned .
The Captain , Mr. Banks , and Dr. Solander , now went on shore , and were courteously received by the inhabitants , who did not appear in numerous bodies ,  to avoid giving offence .
They received several trifling presents , and the Captain had the pleasure to find fresh water , in the course of a tour round the bay .
They remained on shore all night , and next day Mr. Banks and the Doctor discovered several plants , and many beautiful birds , particularly quails and large pigeons .
There were some houses with fences , to shelter them from the wind , and many stages for drying fish near the place where the gentlemen landed .
Dogs with small pointed ears , and very ugly , were the only tame animals among them .
At the watering-place the Captain ordered a line to be drawn , and enjoined the natives not to pass it , which injunction they civilly complied with .
Many houses were contiguous , and the lands in the adjacent vallies were regular flats , neatly laid out in small plantations , the ground appearing to be broken , as if designed for gardens .
They have sweet potatoes , like those of North America , in great quantities  and the cloth plant grows here spontaneously .
There is plenty of fish in the bay , such as crabs , cray-fish , and ship-jacks or horse mackrel , which are larger than those upon our coasts .
The number of supple jacks that grow in the adjacent woods , render them almost impassable  but they thereby afford shelter to their feathered inhabitants : the flat land was planted with cocos , and the hollow parts with gourds .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander visited several of  the natives houses , and they met with a very civil reception .
Fish constituted their principal food at this time , and the root of a sort of fern served them for bread , which when roasted upon a fire , and divested of its bark , was sweet and clammy  in taste not disagreeable , but unpleasant from its number of fibres .
Vegetables were , doubtless , at other seasons very plentiful .
The women paint their faces red , which so far from increasing , diminishes the very little beauty they have .
The mens faces were not in general painted , but some were rubbed over with red ocre from head to foot , their apparel not excepted .
Though they could not be compared to the inhabitants of Otaheite for cleanliness in general , they surpassed them in this respect in some particulars .
Every dwelling was supplied with a privy , and they had dunghills for depositing dirt and filth .
The women wore a girdle made of the blade of grass under a petticoat , and to this girdle was tied in front a bunch of fragrant leaves .
They seemed to hold chastity in but little estimation , many of the young females resorting to the watering-place , where they bountifully bestowed every favour that was requested .
One of the officers on shore , meeting with an elderly woman , he accompanied her to her house , and having presented her with some cloth and beads , a young girl was singled out , and he was given to understand he might retire with her .
Soon after an elderly man ,  with two women , came in as visitors , and with much formality saluted all the company , according to the custom of the place , which is by gently joining the tips of their noses together .
The officer upon his return was furnished with a guide , who led him a much better road than that he had come , and whenever they came to a brook or rivulet , the Indian took him upon his back to preserve him from being wet  several of the inhabitants were curiously tataowed , and one old man , in particular , was marked on the breast with various figures .
There was an axe made of the green stone , already mentioned , which could not be purchased , though many things were offered in exchange .
At night they danced in a very uncouth manner , making antick gestures , lolling out their tongues , with other strange grimaces  and in these dances old men with grey beards were , as well as the young ones , capital performers .
They carried their civility so far , as to assist Mr. Banks and his company with one of their canoes to carry them on board  but the Endeavour 's people being unacquainted with the method of steering such a vessel , she was overset , but no one was drowned  and they reached the ship without any farther accident , some of the Indians having voluntarily engaged to conduct her .
During the stay of the gentlemen on shore , many of the natives went off in their canoes , and trafficked with the ship 's company ,  preferring at first the cloth of Otaheite to that of Europe  but it soon diminished in its value .
Several of the Indians went on board , and testified their curiosity and surprise , with regard to the different parts of the ship .


Sunday 22 , in the evening , they sailed from this bay , which by the natives is called Tegadoo , and lies in latitude 38 deg .
10 min .
south .
The wind being contrary , they put into another bay a little to the south , called by the natives Tolaga , in order to complete their wood and water , and extend their correspondence with the natives  in this bay they came to an anchor in about eleven fathom water , with a good sandy bottom .
Several canoes appeared , with Indians on board , and they trafficked very fairly for glass bottles and cloth .
The Captain , Mr. Banks , and the Doctor , went in the afternoon to examine the water , and found it extremely good  here was also plenty of wood , and the natives behaved with as much civility as those they had just departed from .


On the 24th , Mr. Gore and the marines were sent on shore , to guard the people employed in cutting wood and filling water .
Captain Cook , Mr. Banks and the Doctor also went on shore  the two latter employed themselves in collecting plants .
In their route they found in the vales many houses uninhabited , the natives residing chiefly in slight sheds , on the ridges of the hills , which are very steep .
In a valley between two  very high hills they saw a curious rock , that formed a large arch , opposite to the sea  this cavity was in length above seventy feet , in breadth thirty , and near fifty in height  it commanded a view of the hills and the bay , which had a very happy effect .
Indeed , the whole country about the bay is agreeable beyond description , and if properly cultivated would be a most fertile spot .
The hills are covered with beautiful flowering shrubs , intermixed with a great number of tall and stately palms , which perfume the air , and make it most agreeably odoriferous .
Mr. Banks and the Doctor found the tree that produces the cabbage , which , when boiled , was very good  and some other trees that yielded a fine transparent gum .
Between the hills were fruitful villages , that might have been successfully cultivated , or turned into pasturage .
Various kinds of edible herbage , were met with in great abundance , and there was reason to believe there were many trees that produced fruit fit to eat , some of which the gentlemen examined .
The plant , from which the cloth is made , is a kind of Hemerocallis , the leaves of which afford a strong glossy flax , equally adapted to cloathing , as making of ropes .
There are sweet potatoes and yam plantations near their houses , which are carefully cultivated .
These gentlemen , upon their return , met an old man , who entertained them with the military exercises of the natives ,  Figure 12 .
View of a perforated Rock in Tolago Bay .
 Figure 13 .
The Head of a new Zealand Chief curiously Tataowed .
 which are performed with the Patoo Patoo , and the lance .
The former has already been mentioned , and is used as a battle-axe  the latter is ten or twelve feet in length , made of extreme hard wood , and sharpened at each end .
A stake was substituted for their old warriors supposed enemy  he first attacked him with his lance , when , having pierced him , the Patoo Patoo was used to demolish his head , and the force with which he struck would at one blow have split any man 's skull .
This mode of fighting induced the gentlemen to believe no quarter was ever given here in war .
The natives in this part are not very numerous  they are tolerably well shaped , but lean and tall  their faces resemble those of Europeans  their noses are aqueline  their eyes dark coloured  their hair is black , which is tied up on the top of their heads , and their beards are of a moderate length .
Their tataowing is done very curiously in various figures , which makes their skin resemble carving  it is confined to the principal men , the females and servants using only red paint , with which they daub their faces , that otherwise would not be disagreeable .
Their cloth is white , glossy and very even  it is worn principally by the men , though it is wrought by the women , who , indeed , are condemned to all the drudgery and labour .
On the 25th an armourer 's forge was set up on shore for necessary uses .
Mr. Banks and  Dr. Solander went again in search of plants .
Tupia , who was with them engaged in a conversation with one of the priests , and they seemed to agree in their opinions upon the subject of religion .
Tupia , in the course of this conference , enquired , whether the report of their eating men was founded in truth  to which the priest replied it was , but that they ate none but declared foes , after they were killed in war .
This idea is , however , horrid and barbarous , and proves that they carry their resentment even beyond death .


Captain Cook and Dr. Solander went on the 27th to inspect the bay , when the Doctor was not a little surprised to find the natives in the possession of a boy 's top , which they knew how to spin by whipping it , and he purchased it out of curiosity .
Mr. Banks was during this time employed in attaining the summit of a steep hill , that had previously engaged their attention  and near it he found many uninhabited houses .
Here were two rows of poles about fourteen or fifteen feet high , covered over with sticks , which made an avenue of about five feet in width , extending near a hundred yards down the hill in an irregular line : the intent of this erection was not discovered .
When the gentlemen met at the watering-place , the Indians , by desire , sung their war song , which was a strange medley of shouting , sighing and grimace , at which the women assisted .
The next  day Captain Cook and the other gentlemen went upon an island at the entrance of the bay , and met with a canoe that was sixty seven feet in length , six in breadth , and four in height  her bottom , which was sharp , consisted of three trunks of trees , and the sides and head were curiously carved .
There was a large unfinished house upon this island  the posts which supported it were ornamented with carvings , that did not appear to be done upon the spot  and as the inhabitants seem to set a great value upon works of this kind , future navigators might find their advantage in carrying such articles to trade with .
Though the posts of this house were judged to be brought here , the people have certainly a taste for carving , as their boats , paddles , and tops of walking-sticks evince .
Their favourite figure is a volute or spiral , which is sometimes single , double and triple , and is done with great exactness , though the only instruments the gentlemen saw were an axe made of stone , and a chissel .
Their taste , however , must be acknowledged whimsical and extravagant , scarce ever imitating nature .


Their huts are built under trees  their form is an oblong square : the door is low on the side , and the windows are at the ends  reeds , covered with thatch , compose the walls  the beams of the eaves , which come to the ground , are covered with thatch  most of the houses the gentlemen saw had been deserted , through fear  of the English upon their landing .
There are many beautiful parrots , and great numbers of birds of different kinds , particularly one whose note resembled the European black bird  but here is no ground fowl or poultry  nor were there any quadrupeds , except rats and dogs , and these were not numerous .
The dogs are considered as delicate food , and their skins serve for ornaments to their apparel .
There is a great variety of fish in the bay : shell and cray-fish is very plentiful  some of the latter weigh near a dozen pounds .


Sunday , Oct. 29 , they set sail from this bay , which is called by the natives Tolaga .
It is seated in latitude 38 deg .
22 min .
south , four leagues to the north of Gable end Foreland : there are two high rocks at the entrance of the bay , which form a cove very convenient for procuring wood and water .
There is a high rocky island off the north point of the bay , which affords good anchorage , having a fine sandy bottom , and from seven to thirteen fathom water , and is likewise sheltered from all but the north-east wind .


Captain Cook obtained nothing here in trade but some sweet potatoes , and a little fish .
This is a very hilly country , though it presents the eye with an agreeable verdure , various woods , and many small plantations .
Mr. Banks met with a great number of trees in the woods , quite unknown to Europeans : the firewood resembled  the maple tree , and produced a gum of whitish colour  other trees yielded a gum of deep yellow green .
The only roots they met with were yams and sweet potatoes , though the soil appears very proper for producing every species of vegetables .


Sailing to the northward , they fell in with a small island , about a mile distant from the north-east point of the main  and this being the most eastern part of it , the Captain named it EAST CAPE , and the island EAST ISLAND : it was but small , and appeared barren .
The cape is in latitude 37 degrees 42 minutes 30 seconds south .
There are many small bays from Tolaga Bay to East Cape .
When the Endeavour had doubled the cape , many villages presented themselves to view , and the adjacent land appeared cultivated .
In the evening of the 30th , Lieutenant Hicks discovered a bay , to which his name was given .
Next morning , about nine , several canoes came off from shore with a number of armed men , who appeared to have hostile intentions .
Before these had reached the ship , another canoe , larger than any that had yet been seen , full of armed Indians came off , and made towards the Endeavour with great expedition .
The Captain now judging it expedient to prevent , if possible , their attacking him , ordered a gun to be fired over their heads  this not producing the desired effect , another gun was fired with ball , which threw them into such consternation ,  that they immediately returned much faster than they came .
This precipitate retreat , induced the Captain to give the cape , off which it happened , the name of CAPE RUNAWAY , which lies in latitude 37 degrees 32 minutes , longitude 181 degrees 48 minutes .
Next morning , at day break , they saw between forty and fifty canoes along shore , many of which came off in the manner they had done the day before , shouting , and menacing an attack .
One of their Chiefs in the largest of the canoes made several harangues , and by the menacing flourish of his pike , seemed to bid the ship defiance  but the gentlemen continuing to invite them to trade , they at last came close along-side , and the Chief who had been declaiming , after uttering a sentence , took up a stone and threw it against the side of the ship , which appeared to be a declaration of hostilities , as they instantly seized their arms  Tupia told them , that immediate destruction would ensue , if they persevered in their design , and at the same time assured them of the gentlemens pacific intentions , and that they only wanted to traffick with them .
Neither his threats nor persuasions would probably have had any effect , had he not at the same time shewn them some pieces of cloth , which attracted their eye , and brought them to reason .
The gentlemen now purchased a great quantity of cray-fish , muscles and conger-eels .
These Indians did not attempt  any fraud in their trading  but some others , who succeeded them , took the goods from the ship without making proper returns : one of them , who had been particularly culpable , and seemed to pride himself upon his cunning , putting off with his canoe , was brought back by a musquet being fired over his head , and this presently produced good order .
But when the sailors began to traffick with the Indians , they renewed their former fraudulent practices , with great insolence .
One of them seized some linen that was hanging to dry , and made off with it  a musquet was fired over his head to make him return , but this did not prevail , and even after another was fired at him with small shot , which hit him in the back , he still persevered in his design .
Upon this the rest of the Indians dropt a-stern at some distance , and set up their song of defiance .
They did not , however , make any preparations for attacking the ship  but the Captain judged , that if he suffered them to go off without convincing them of his power of avenging the insult , it might give an unfavourable opinion of the English , to the natives on shore .
He accordingly fired a four pounder , which passed over them , and the effect it had in the water terrified them so greatly , that they made to shore with the utmost precipitancy .
In the afternoon they descried a high island to the west , and some time after perceived some other islands and rocks in the same  quarter  not being able to weather them before night came on , they bore up between them and the main-land .
About seven in the evening a double canoe , built like those at Otaheite , but carved after their peculiar manner , came up to the ship , and Tupia entered into a friendly conversation with the Indians on board  when , on a sudden , it being now dark , they pelted the ship with stones , and then retreated .
Tupia was told by the Indians in the canoe , that the island close to which the Endeavour lay , was called Mowtohera  it was but a few miles from the main-land , of no great extent , but pretty high .
They saw a high round mountain , south-west by west of Mowtohera , which the Captain named MOUNT EDGECOMBE .


The next morning , November 2 , many canoes made their appearance , and one , which proved to be the same that gave the salute the night before , came up , and Tupia again engaged in conversation with the people in her .
After behaving very peaceably about an hour , the fit of pelting again seized them , and they gave the ship another volley of stones  but a musquet being fired , they instantly took to their paddles .


In the forenoon , of the same day , the Endeavour sailed between a low flat island and the main : the villages upon the latter were more extensive than any they had yet seen .
They were upon the high land next the sea , and were  surrounded by a bank with rails on the top of it , and a ditch .
There were some inclosures that resembled forts , and the whole had the appearance of fortified places .
The Endeavour passed the night under an island about twenty miles from the main , which they named the MAYOR .
In the morning of the 3d , they gave the name of THE COURT OF ALDERMEN to a number of small islands that lay contiguous , about twelve miles from the main , between which there are several other small islands mostly barren , but very high .
The aspect of the main-land was now much changed , the soil appearing barren , and the country very thinly inhabited .
The Chief , who governed the district from Cape Turnagain to this coast , was named Teratu .


On Friday the 3d , three canoes came a-longside with several Indians .
These canoes were built very different from the others , being formed of the trunks of single trees , made hollow by burning : they were not carved , or in any shape ornamented .
These Indians were of a darker complexion than the others , but made use of the same modes of defiance , and threw several stones and some of their lances into the ship .


The same afternoon the Endeavour sailed towards an inlet they had discovered , and anchored in seven fathom water .
She was soon after surrounded by several canoes , and the Indians  at first did not shew any signs that they intended committing hostilities .
One of the Endeavour 's people shot a bird , which the Indians conveyed on board , without testifying any surprise at the event .
For their civility , the Captain gave them a piece of cloth .
But this favour had a very opposite influence to what was expected , for when it grew dark , they sung one of their menacing songs , and attempted to carry off the anchor 's buoy .
Some musquets were now fired over them , which seemed rather to irritate than terrify them , and upon their going off , they threatened to return the next morning in greater numbers  they came back however the same night about eleven o'clock , in hopes of surprising the ship 's crew  but finding them on their guard , they again retired .


In the morning of the 4th , a great number of canoes , with near two hundred men , armed with spears , lances and stones , made their appearance , seemingly resolved to attack the ship , and desirous of boarding her , but could not determine at what part , changing their stations , and paddling round her .
These motions kept the crew upon the watch , in the rain , whilst Tupia , at the request of the Captain , used every dissuasive argument he could suggest to prevent their carrying their apparent designs into execution  but his expostulations did not pacify them till some musquets were fired  they then laid aside their hostile intentions , and began  to trade : they sold two of their weapons without fraud , but a third , for which they had received cloth , they would not deliver up , and instead of paying any attention to the demand that was made of it , they only laughed at them , and turned their expostulations into ridicule .
As the Captain proposed to stay some days at this place , that he might observe the Transit of Mercury , he judged it expedient to chastise these people for their insolence and knavery  accordingly some small shot were fired upon the principal offender , and a musquet-ball went through his canoe .
His companions left him to his fate , without taking the least notice of him , though he was wounded , and continued to trade without any discomposure .
They for some time traded very fairly , but returning to their male practices , another canoe was fired upon , and struck : they soon after paddled away , whilst a round shot was fired over them .


Thus we find , that theft and chicane are as prevalent amongst the inhabitants of New Zealand , as those of Otaheite  from whence we might conclude , that in all uncivilized nations , probity is not considered as a virtue , or theft as a vice .
Having no punishment for crimes of this kind , it may be urged , that they are not taught to consider them as such  but if nature has implanted in us just ideas of right and wrong , they must operate as forcibly upon the inhabitants under the line , as on those of other climes   and a native of Otaheite must be equally conscious of a breach of natural justice as the most polished European .
However , as this is establishing the doctrine of innate ideas , which would lead us into a large field of controversy , we shall leave the reader to his own opinion upon this subject .


In searching for a convenient anchoring-place , the Captain saw a village upon a high point , near the head of the bay , fortified like those villages already mentioned .
Having met with a place to his mind near where the Endeavour lay , he returned to the ship , and sailed to that spot , where he cast anchor .


Several of the Indians came off to the ship on the 5th , but behaved much better than they had done the preceding day .
They had with them an old man , who had before testified his probity and discretion  and he appeared to be of superior rank to the rest .
He came on board with another Indian , when the Captain presented them with some nails , and two pieces of cloth of English manufacture .
Tojava ( which was the name of the old man ) informed Mr. Banks , that the natives had been in great terror of the English  when he was informed , that the Captain and his people had no ill design against the Indians  but , on the contrary , wanted to establish a friendly intercourse , and to traffick with them .
Tojava then acquainted the Captain , that they were often visited by freebooters  from the north , who stripped them of all they could lay their hands on , and often made captives of their children and wives  and that being ignorant who the English were upon their first arrival , the natives had taken the alarm upon the ship 's appearing off the coast , but were now satisfied of their good intent .
He added , that to secure themselves from these plunderers , their houses were built contiguous near the tops of rocks , where they are more able to defend themselves .
Probably their poverty and misery may be ascribed to the ravages of this banditti , who often strip them of every necessary of life .
Whilst they were fishing for mullets in the bay , the Indians who were upon the banks testified their friendship by every possible means , and gave them an invitation to come on shore .


The assurances of friendship , which they had received from the gentlemen on board , seemed to have a proper influence upon the natives , who were now very tractable and submissive , and behaved with much civility to the people in the long-boat , which was again dispatched into the bay to fish , but with little success  the Indians however brought great quantities of fish , dressed and dried  and though they were very indifferent , they were purchased , that trade might not be discouraged .
In a word , the natives now treated the English with great hospitality  a large supply of wood and  good water was obtained , and the ship , being very foul , was heeled , and her bottom scrubbed in the bay .


November the 8th the ship was visited by several canoes , in one of which was Tojava , who perceiving two strange canoes paddling from the opposite shore , suddenly turned about , and acquainted the Captain that he was under apprehensions , the people in them were some of the freebooters , but he soon found his mistake , and returned to the ship .
The Indians supplied the ship 's crew with as much excellent fish , resembling mackrel , as was sufficient for all their dinners , for which they gave them some pieces of cloth .


A great variety of plants were this day collected by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander  they had never observed any of the kind before .
These gentlemen remained on shore till near dark , when they observed the manner of the natives disposing of themselves during the night .
They lay under some bushes  the men nearest the sea in a semicircular form , and the women and children the most distant from it  their arms were placed against trees very near them , to defend themselves in case of a surprize from the freebooters .
They had no king , whose sovereignty they acknowledged , which was a circumstance unparalleled on any other parts of the coast .


 Early in the morning of the 9th , several canoes brought a prodigious quantity of mackrel , one sort of which was no way different from the mackrel caught on our coast .
These canoes were succeeded by many others , equally well loaded with the same sort of fish  and the cargoes purchased were so great , that when salted , they might be considered as a month 's provision for the whole ship 's company .


This being a very clear day , the astronomer ( Mr. Green ) and the other gentlemen landed to observe the Transit of Mercury , and whilst the observation was making , a large canoe , with various commodities on board , came along-side the ship  and Mr. Gore , the officer who had then the command , being desirous of encouraging them to traffick , produced a piece of Otaheitean cloth , of more value than any they had yet seen , which was immediately seized by one of the Indians , who obstinately refused either to return it , or give any thing in exchange  he paid dearly however for his temerity , being shot dead on the spot .


The death of this young Indian alarmed all the rest  they fled with great precipitancy , and for the present could not be induced to renew their traffick with the English .
But when the Indians on shore had heard the particulars related by Tojava , who greatly condemned the conduct of the deceased , they seemed to think  that he merited his fate .
His name proved to be Otirreeoonooe .


This transaction happened , as has been mentioned , whilst the observation was making of the Transit of Mercury , when the weather was so favourable , that the whole Transit was viewed without a cloud intervening .
Mr. Green made the observation of the ingress , whilst Captain Cook was engaged in ascertaining the time , by taking the sun 's attitude .
The Transit commenced at 7 hours , 20 min .
58 sec .
by Mr. Green 's observation the internal contact was at 12 hours , 8 min .
57 sec .
the external at 12 hours , 9 min .
54 sec .
the latitude 30 deg .
48 min .
5 sec .
In consequence of this observation having been made here , this bay was called Mercury Bay .


On the 10th Mr. Banks , Dr. Solander , and the Captain went in boats to inspect a large river that runs into the bay .
They found it broader some miles within than at the mouth , and intersected into a number of streams , by several small islands , which were covered with trees .
On the east side of the river the gentlemen shot some shags , which proved very good eating .
The shore abounded with fish of various kinds , such as cockles , clams and oysters  and here were also ducks , shags , seapies and curlieus , with other wild fowl in great plenty .
At the mouth of the river there was good anchorage in five fathom water .
The gentlemen were  received with great hospitality by the inhabitants of a little village , on the east side of the river .
There are the remains of a fort called Eppah , in a peninsula that projects into the river , and it was well calculated for defending a small number against a greater force .
From the remains , it nevertheless seemed to have been taken and partly destroyed .


The Indians sup before sun-set , when they eat fish and birds baked or roasted  they roast them upon a stick , stuck in the ground near the fire , and bake them in the manner the dog was baked , which the gentlemen ate at King George 's Island .


A female mourner was present at one of their suppers  she was seated upon the ground , and wept incessantly , at the same time repeating some sentences in a doleful manner , but which Tupia could not explain  at the termination of each period she cut herself with a shell upon her breast , her hands or her face  notwithstanding this shocking , bloody spectacle greatly affect-the gentlemen present , yet all the Indians who sat by her , except one , were quite unmoved .
The gentlemen saw some , who from the depth of their scars must , upon these occasions , have wounded themselves still more violently .


November 11 , great plenty of oysters were procured from a bed which had been discovered , and they proved exceedingly good .
Next day the ship was visited by two canoes , with  unknown Indians  after some invitation they came on board , and they all trafficked without any fraud .


Two fortified villages being descried , the Captain , with Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , went to examine them : the smallest was romantically situated upon a rock , which was arched  this village did not consist of above five or six houses , fenced round .
There was but one path , which was very narrow , that conducted to it .
The gentlemen were invited by the inhabitants to pay them a visit , but not having time to spare , they took another route , after making presents to the females .
A body of men , women and children now approached the gentlemen , who proved to be the inhabitants of another town , which they proposed visiting .
They gave many testimonials of their friendly dispositions , among others they uttered the word Heromai , which , according to Tupia 's interpretation , implied Peace , and appeared much satisfied , when informed the gentlemen intended visiting their habitations .
Their town was named Wharretouwa  it is seated on a point of land over the sea , on the north side of the bay  it was paled round , and defended by a double ditch .
Within the ditch a stage is erected for defending the place in case of an attack  near this stage , which they call Porava , quantities of darts and stones are deposited to be in readiness to repel the assailants .
There is another stage  to command the path that leads to the town , and there are also some outworks .
Upon the whole , the place seemed calculated to hold out a considerable time against an enemy armed with no other weapons than those of the inhabitants .
It appeared however deficient in water for a siege .
They eat instead of bread fern root , which was here in great plenty , with dried fish .


Very little land is here cultivated , sweet potatoes and yams being the only vegetables they found .
There are two rocks near the foot of this fortification , both separated from the main land  they are very small , nevertheless they are not without dwelling-houses and little fortifications .
They throw stones in their engagements with their hands , being destitute of a sling , and those and lances are their only missile weapons  they have , besides the Pattoo Pattoo , already described , a staff about five feet in length , and another shorter .


They sailed from this bay , after taking possession of it in the name of the King of Great Britain , on the 15th of November  Tojava , who visited them in his canoe just before their departure , said he should , as soon as the English were gone , prepare to retire to his fort , as the relations of Otirrecoonooe had menaced to take his life , as a forfeit for that of the deceased , Tojava being judged partial in this affair to the English .
A number of islands of different sizes appeared towards the north-west ,  which were named Mercury Islands .
Mercury bay lies in latitude 36 deg .
47 min .
south  longitude 184 deg .
4 min .
west , and has a small entrance at its mouth .
On account of the number of oysters found in the river , the Captain gave it the name of Oyster river .
Mangrove river ( which the Captain so called from the great number of those trees that grew near it ) is the most secure place for shipping , being at the head of the bay .
The north-west side of this bay and river is much more fertile than the east side .
The inhabitants , though numerous , have no plantations  their canoes are very indifferently constructed , and are no way ornamented  they lie under continual apprehensions of Teratu , being considered by him as rebels .


Upon this shore iron sand is in plenty to be found , which proves that there are mines of that metal up the country , it being brought down by a rivulet from thence .


On the 18th , in the morning , the Endeavour steered between the main , and an island which seemed very fertile , and as extensive as Uli Etea .
Many canoes filled with Indians came along-side , and the Indians sung their war song , but the Endeavour 's people paying them no attention , they threw a volley of stones , and then paddled away  but they presently returned and renewed their insults .
Tupia spoke to them , making use of his old argument , that inevitable  destruction would ensue if they persisted  they answered with brandishing their weapons , intimating , at the same time , that if the English dared to come on shore they would destroy them all .
Tupia still persisted in expostulating with them , but to no purpose  and they soon gave another volley of stones  but upon a musket being fired at one of their boats , they made a precipitate retreat .


In the evening they cast anchor in 23 fathom , and early the next morning they sailed up an inlet .
Soon after two canoes came off , and some of the Indians came on board  they claimed an acquaintance with Tojava , and knew Tupia 's name  and after they had received some presents they retired peaceably .


The Endeavour was now in the bay , called by the natives Ooahaouragee , and Captain Cook , with Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , c. went in the boats to the bottom of the bay to examine it , and they did not return till next morning .
They had been up a fresh water river , at the bottom of the bay , in three fathoms water , which would make a good harbour .
They met with an Indian town , and a hippah , or place of refuge , the inhabitants of which invited them to land , and gave them a friendly reception .
At the entrance of a wood they met with a tree ninety-eight feet high from the ground to the first branch , quite strait , and nineteen feet in circumference  and they found still larger  trees of the same kind as they advanced into the wood .
The Captain called this river THAMES , being not unlike our river of that name .
They also found several young cabbage trees , and a new species of the palm-nut , or Pardanus .


Captain Cook weighed anchor the same afternoon , sailing down the river with the tide , the wind blowing fresh from north north-west  the next morning the flood obliged him to cast anchor again  and the Captain , with Dr Solander , went on shore to the west , but made no observations worth relating .
The ship , at their departure from it , was surrounded with canoes , which induced Mr. Banks to remain on board , that he might trade with the Indians .
The chief object of these people was paper , for which they exchanged their arms and cloaths , and took no unfair advantages .
Though the traders were honest in their dealings , there was one amongst them , who took a fancy to a half-minute glass , but was detected in secreting it , and he was punished with the cato ` nine tails .
The other Indians endeavoured to save him from this punishment  but being opposed , they got their arms from the canoes , and some of the people in them attempted to get on board .
Mr. Banks and Tupia now coming upon deck , the Indians applied to Tupia  but he having no influence upon Mr. Hicks , the commanding officer , informed them of the nature of the offender 's  intended punishment , which pacified them , as they imagined he was going to be put to death .
The criminal not only received twelve lashes , but afterwards a drubbing from an old man , who was thought to be his father .
The canoes immediately went off , the Indians saying , they should be afraid to return again on board .
Tupia , however , had so much influence over them as to bring them back  but they seemed to have lost that confidence , which they had before reposed in the English .


On the 23d the wind being still against them , they were obliged to tide it down the river , anchoring between tides  they passed a point of land , which the Captain called Point Rodney , and which is the north-west extremity of the river .
As they could not approach the land , on account of the wind , they had but a distant view of the main for a course of near thirty miles .
Captain Cook comprehended , under the name of the River Thames , the whole bay  and the promontory at the north-east extremity , he called Cape Colville , in honour of the peer of that name .
This cape is in latitude 36 deg .
26 min .
longitude 194 deg .
27 min .
it is distinguishable at a considerable distance by a very high rock .
The river rans south by east from the south point of this cape  it is , in the narrowest parts , at least three leagues over for near fourteen leagues , when it becomes narrower .
It was thought to contain fish in abundance , as  there appeared many implements necessary for fishing  the water was in some places twenty-six fathoms deep , and gradually diminished .
There are several small islands within cape Colville , which appear to form tolerable harbours .
There are also islands towards the western shore .
The anchorage is good in all parts of the bay , which is defended from the sea by a number of small islands , which Captain Cook named Barrier Islands .


The circumjacent country , which is pretty extensive , appeared to be but thinly inhabited  the natives are a stout and active people , and are painted red all over : their canoes were ornamented with carving , and were constructed upon a good model .


On the 24th , they still continued steering along the shore , between the islands and the main , and in the evening anchored in an open bay , in about fourteen fathoms water .
Here they caught a large number of fish of the scienne , or bream kind  from which the Captain named this Bream Bay , and the extreme points of it Bream Head .
There are numbers of rocks off this bay , which were called the Hen and Chickens  it is situated in latitude 35 deg .
46 min .
seventeen leagues north-west of cape Colville .
There is an extent of land of about thirty miles between Point Rodney and Bream Head  it is woody and low .
No inhabitants were visible , but from the fires perceived at  night , the gentlemen concluded it was inhabited .


On the 25th , early in the morning , the Endeavour sailed out of the bay , keeping to the northward near the shore .
Some islands were soon after discovered , about ten miles to the north-north-east , which they called the Poor Knights  upon these islands there were some houses , and a few towns that appeared fortified , and the land round them seemed cultivated .
Towards night several canoes , with a number of Indians , came up to the ship , and some came on board .
Two of the Chiefs received presents , and told the gentlemen , that they had had an account of the arrival of the English in those parts .
After their departure other Indians came up to trade , and soon began their usual fraudulent practices  the gentlemen had recourse to the old remedy of firing some small shot , and a round shot , which soon put them to flight .


Sunday the 26th , Captain Cook continued his course slowly along the shore to the north .
This day two canoes came up , and some of the Indians came on board , when they trafficked very fairly .
Two larger canoes soon after followed them , and coming up to the ship , the people in them hailed the others , when they conferred together , and afterwards came along-side of the ship .
The last two canoes were finely ornamented with carving , and the people , who appeared to be of higher rank ,  were armed with various weapons  they held in high estimation their Patoo Patoos , which were made of stone and whalebone , and they had ribs of whale , with ornaments of dog 's hair , which were very curious .
These people were of a darker complexion than those to the southward , and their faces were stained blacker , with what they call Amoco  and their thighs were striped with it , very small interstices of the flesh being left visible .
Though they all used the black Amoco , they applied it to different parts , and in various forms .
Most of them had the figure of volutes on their lips , and one woman in particular was curiously marked upon various parts of her body .
These Indians seemed the superiors of the others , they were nevertheless not free from the vice of pilfering , for one of them having agreed to barter a weapon for a piece of cloth , he was no sooner in possession of the cloth , than he paddled away without paying the price of it  but a musquet being fired , he came back and returned the cloth .
All the canoes then returned ashore .


The Endeavour passed a remarkable point of land which the Captain called Cape Bret , in honour of the baronet of that name : this cape is much higher than any of the adjacent land .
Within a mile to the north-east by north is a curious rocky island  it is arched , and has a pleasing effect at a distance .
The natives call this Cape Motugogogo : it lies in latitude 35 deg .
 10 min .
30 sec .
south  and longitude 185 deg .
23 min .
west .
It forms a bay to the west , which contains many small islands , and Captain Cook named the point at the north-west entrance Point Pococke .
There are many villages on the main as well as on the islands , which appeared well inhabited , and several canoes , filled with Indians , made to the ship , and after coming along-side to trade , shewed the same itch for cheating as the others .
One of the midshipmen was so nettled at being imposed upon , that he had recourse to a whimsical expedient by way of revenge  taking a fishing line , he threw the lead with so much dexterity , that the hook caught the Indian who had imposed upon him by the buttocks , when the line breaking , the hook remained in his posteriors .
These Indians were strong and well proportioned  their hair was black , and tied up in a bunch stuck with feathers : the Chiefs among them had garments made of fine cloth , ornamented with dog 's skin  and they were tataowed like those who had last appeared .


On the 27th the Endeavour was among a number of small islands , from which several canoes came off  but the Indians , from their frantic gestures , seemed disordered in their minds  they threw their fish into the ship by handfuls , without demanding any thing by way of barter .
Some other canoes also came up , who saluted the ship with stones .
One of the Indians , who  was particularly active , threw a stick at one of the Endeavour 's men .
It was then judged time to bring them to reason , and a musquet , with small shot was fired at him , when he fell down in the cance .
A general terror was now spread amongst them , and they all made a very precipitate retreat .
Among the fish obtained from these canoes , were Cavalles in great plenty , and for this reason the Captain called these islands by the same name .


For several days the wind was so very unfavourable , that the vessel rather lost than gained ground  on the 29th , having weathered Cape Bret , they bore away to leeward , and got into a large bay , where they anchored on the south-west side of several islands , and suddenly came into four fathom and a half water .
Upon sounding , they found they had got upon a bank , and accordingly weighed and dropped over it , and anchored again in ten fathoms and a half  after which the ship was surrounded by thirty-three large canoes , containing near three hundred Indians all armed .
Some of them were admitted on board , and Captain Cook gave a piece of broad cloath to one of the Chiefs , and some small presents to the others .
They traded peaceably for some time , being terrified at the fire arms , the effect of which they were not unacquainted with  but whilst the Captain was at dinner , on a signal given by one of their Chiefs , all the Indians quitted the ship , and they  attempted to tow away the buoy  a musquet was now fired over them , but it produced no effect  small shot was then fired at them , but it did not reach them .
A musquet , loaded with ball , was therefore ordered to be fired , and Otegoowgoow ( son of one of the Chiefs ) was wounded in the thigh by it , which induced them immediately to throw the buoy overboard .
To complete their confusion a round shot was fired , which reached the shore , and as soon as they landed they ran in search of it .
If these Indians had been under any kind of military discipline , they might have proved a much more formidable enemy  but acting thus , without any plan or regulation , they only exposed themselves to the annoyance of fire arms , whilst they could not possibly succeed in any of their designs .


The Captain , Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander landed upon the island , and the Indians in the canoes soon after came on shore .
The gentlemen were now in a small cove , and they were presently surrounded by near four hundred armed Indians  but the Captain not suspecting any hostile design on the part of the natives , remained peaceably disposed .
The gentlemen marching towards them , drew a line , intimating that they were not to pass it  they did not infringe upon this boundary for some time , but at length they sung the song of defiance , and began to dance , whilst a party attempted to  draw the Endeavour 's boats on shore  these signals for an attack being immediately followed by the Indians breaking in upon the line , the gentlemen judged it time to defend themselves , and accordingly the Captain fired his musquet , loaded with small shot , which was seconded by Mr. Banks discharging his piece , and two of the men followed his example .
This threw the Indians into confusion , and they retreated  but were rallied again by one of their Chiefs , who shouted and waved his patoo patoo .
The Doctor now pointed his musquet at this hero , and hit him  this stopt his career , and he took to flight with the other Indians .
They retired to an eminence in a collective body , and seemed dubious whether they should return to the charge .
They were now at too great a distance for ball to reach them  but these operations being observed from the ship , she brought her broad-side to bear , and by firing over them soon dispersed them .
The Indians had in this skirmish two of their people wounded , but none killed .
Peace being thus restored , the gentlemen began to gather celery and other herbs  but suspecting some of the natives were lurking about with evil designs , they repaired to a cave , which was at a small distance  here they found the Chief , who had that day received a present from the Captain  he came forth with his wife and brother , and solicited their clemency .
It appeared , that  one of the wounded Indians was a brother of this Chief , who was under great anxiety lest the wound should prove mortal  but his grief was in a great degree alleviated , when he was made acquainted with the different effects of small shot and ball  he was at the same time assured , that upon any future hostilities being committed ball would be used .
This interview terminated very cordially , after some trifling presents were made to the Chief and his companions .


The prudence of the gentlemen upon this occasion , can not be much commended .
Had these four hundred Indians boldly rushed in upon them at once with their weapons , the musquetry could have done very little execution  but supposing twenty or thirty of the Indians had been wounded , for it does not appear their pieces were loaded with ball , but only small shot , there would have remained a sufficient number to have massacred them , as it appears they do not give any quarter , and none could have been expected upon this occasion .
It is true , when the ship brought her broad-side to bear , she might have made great havock amongst the Indians  but this would have been too late to save the party on shore .


Being again in their boats , they rowed to another part of the same island , when landing and gaining an eminence , they had a very agreeable and romantic view of a great number of  islands , well inhabited and cultivated .
The inhabitants of an adjacent town approached unarmed , and testified great humility and submission .
Some of the party on shore , who had been very violent for having the Indians punished for their fraudulent conduct , were now guilty of trespasses equally reprehensible , having forced into some of the plantations , and dug up potatoes .
The Captain upon this occasion shewed strict justice in punishing each of the offenders with twelve lashes : one of them being very refractory upon the occasion , and complaining of the hardship , thinking an Englishman had a right to plunder an Indian with impunity , was flogged out of this opinion with six additional lashes .
Probably his adding ' `` that in this , he had only followed the example of his superiors , '' ' might have had no little weight in procuring him this last sentence .


It being a dead calm on the 30th , two boats were sent to sound the harbour , and many canoes came up , and traded with great probity : the gentlemen went again on shore , and met with a very civil reception from the natives  and this friendly intercourse continued all the time they remained in the bay , which was several days .
Being upon a visit to the old Chief , he shewed them the instruments used in tataowing , which were very like those at Otaheite employed upon the like occasion .
They saw the man who had been wounded by the ball , when  the attempt was made to carry off the ship 's buoy  and though it had gone through the fleshy part of his arm , it did not seem to give him the least pain or uneasiness .


On Tuesday the 5th , in the morning , they weighed anchor , but were soon becalmed , and a strong current setting towards the shore , they were driven in with such rapidity , that they expected every moment to run upon the breakers , which appeared above water not more than a cable 's length distance  they were so near the land , that Tupia , who was totally ignorant of the danger , held a conversation with the Indians , who were standing on the beach .
They were happily relieved , however , from this alarming situation by a fresh breeze , suddenly springing up from the shore .


The bay which they had left was called the Bay of Islands , on account of the numerous islands it contains  they catched but few fish while they lay there , but procured great plenty from the natives , who are extremely expert at fishing , and display great ingenuity in the form of their nets , which are made of a kind of grass  they are two or three hundred fathoms in length , and remarkably strong  and they have them in such plenty , that it is scarce possible to go a hundred yards upon the beach , without meeting with numbers lying in heaps .
These people did not appear to be under the government of any particular Chief or Sovereign , and they  seemed to live in a perfect state of friendship , notwithstanding their villages were fortified .
According to their observations upon the tides , the flood comes from the south , and there is a current from the west .


Dec. 7 , Several canoes put off and followed the Endeavour , but a breeze arising , Captain Cook did not wait for them : on the 8th they tacked , and stood in for the shore : and on the 9th , they were about seven leagues to the westward of the Cavalles , and soon after came to a deep bay , which the Captain named Doubtless Bay .
The wind prevented their putting in here , and being soon after becalmed , they were visited by several canoes from shore , with whom they trafficked .
From these Indians they learnt , they were about two days sail from Moore Whennua , where the land changed its shape , and instead of extending to the westward , turned to the south  and that to the north-north-west there was an extensive country , named Ulimaroah , where the inhabitants lived upon hogs , which they called Booah , and was the same name given them by the inhabitants of the islands in the South Seas .
They saw upon the coast several plantations , of the Eaowte , or cloth trees , and some of the Koomarra .
They beat to windward four days , and made but little way .
On the 10th , the land appeared low and barren , but was not destitute of inhabitants  the next morning , they stood in with the land ,  which forms a peninsula , and which the Captain named Knuckle Point .
Another bay , that lies contiguous , Captain Cook called Sandy Bay , in the middle of it is a high mountain , which was named Mount Camel , on account of its resembling that animal .
Several canoes put off , but could not reach the ship , which now tacked and stood to the northward , till the afternoon of the 12th , when she stood to the north-east .
Towards night it began to rain and blow , and in the morning it was so tempestuous , as to split the main-top-sail , and the fore mizen-top-sails .
Early in the morning of the 14th , they saw land to the southward  and on the 15th , they tacked and stood to the westward  next day they discovered land from the mast-head to the south-south-west  and on the 16th came off the northern extremity of New Zealand , which the Captain called NORTH CAPE .
It lies in latitude 34 deg .
22 min .
south , longitude 186 deg .
55 min .
west , and forms the north point of Sandy Bay .
Their situation varied but little till the 24th , when they discovered land , which they judged to be the islands of the Three Kings , though they did not resemble the description of them in Dalrymple 's account .
The chief island is in latitude 34 deg .
12 min .
south , longitude 187 deg .
48 min .
west , between fourteen or fifteen leagues from North Cape .
Mr. Banks went out in the small boat , and caught some birds that greatly resembled  geese , and they were very good eating .
On the 27th , it blew very hard from the east all day , accompanied with heavy showers of rain , and they brought the ship under a reef main-sail .
On the 30th they saw land , bearing north-east , which was thought to be Cape Maria Van Diemen , but the sea being very bo [ ... ] sterous , they did not venture to approach it , but tacked about and stood to the north-west .


January 1 , 1770 , they tacked and stood to the eastward , and on the 3d they saw land again  it was high and flat , and tended away to the south-east , beyond the reach of the naked eye .
It is remarkable , that the Endeavour was three weeks in making ten leagues to the westward , and that she met with a violent gale of wind in latitude 35 deg .
south , at Midsummer .
On the morning of the 4th they stood along the shore , the coast appearing sandy and barren , dreary and inhospitable  steering northward on the 6th they saw land again , which they imagined to be Cape Maria : on the 7th , they had light breezes , and were sometimes becalmed , when they saw a sun-fish , short and thick in figure , with two large fins , but scarce any tail , resembling a shark in colour and size .
They continued steering east till the 9th , when they perceived land , and were soon after a-breast of a point , which Captain Cook named Woody-head .
From the south-west there is a small island , which the Captain called Gannet Island .
 Another point remarkably high to the east-north-east , the Captain named Albetross Point , on the north side of which a bay is formed that promises good anchorage .
At about two leagues distance from Albetross Point to the north-east , they discovered a remarkable high mountain , equal in height to that of Teneriffe , the summit of which was covered with snow , and it was named Mount Egmont .
It is in latitude 39 deg .
16 min .
longitude 185 deg .
15 min .
west , and the country round it is pleasant , presenting an agreeable verdure , intersected with woods : the coast forms an extensive cape , which the Captain likewise called cape Egmont , in honour of the nobleman of that name .
It is about twenty-seven leagues to the south south-west of Albetross Point , having two small islands to the north , near a very high point of a conic figure .
This day some very heavy showers of rain fell , accompanied with thunder and lightening .
The Captain proposed careening the ship here , and taking in wood and water  and accordingly , on the 15th , steered for an inlet  when it being almost a calm , the ship was carried by the current very near the shore , but got clear with the assistance of the boats .
Whilst this was doing a sea lion made its appearance  it is a very curious creature , and answers the description given of it in Lord Anson 's Voyage .
The Captain sent the pinnace to examine a small cove that appeared , but soon after recalled her , on  seeing the natives launch and arm their canoes .
The Endeavour anchored in a commodious part of the bay , in sailing towards which spot an Indian town was descried , when the inhabitants waved their hands , seemingly to invite the Endeavour 's people to land .
In passing the point of the bay , they observed an armed centinel on duty , who was twice relieved .
Four canoes came from shore to visit the ship , but none of the Indians would venture on board , except an old man , who seemed of elevated rank : his countrymen took great pains to prevent his coming on board , but they could not divert him from his purpose , and he was received with the utmost civility and hospitality .
Tupia and the old man joined noses , according to the custom of the country , and after receiving several presents , he returned to his associates , when they began to dance and laugh , and soon after retired .
The Captain and the other gentlemen now went on shore , where they met with plenty of wood and water , and were very successful in fishing , catching some hundred weight in a short time .


On the 16th the Endeavour 's people were engaged in careening her , when three canoes came off with a great number of Indians , and brought several of their women with them .
This circumstance was judged a favourable presage of their peaceable disposition , but they soon gave proofs of the contrary , by attempting  to stop the long-boat that was sent on shore for water , when Captain Cook had recourse to the old expedient of firing some shot , which intimidated them for the present  but they soon gave fresh proofs of their insidious designs .
One of them snatched some paper from the Endeavour 's people who were trading with them , and brandishing his patoo patoo , put himself in a threatening posture  upon which it was judged expedient to fire some small shot at him , which wounded him in the knee  this step put an end to the correspondence with regard to trade  but Tupia still continued conversing with them , and making many inquiries concerning the curiosities of New Zealand  he also asked them , if they had ever before seen a ship of the magnitude of the Endeavour  to which they replied , they had never seen such a vessel , nor ever heard that one had been upon the coast , though Tasman certainly touched here , which was only fifteen miles south of Murderer 's bay .
There is great plenty of fish in all the coves of this bay  among others here are cuttle fish , large breams , small grey breams , small and large baracootas , flying gurnards , horse mackrel , dog fish , soles , dabs , mullets , drums , scorpenas , or rock fish , cole fish , shags , chimeras , c..
The inhabitants catch their fish as follows  their net is cylindrical , extended by several hoops at the bottom , and contracted at the top  the fish going in to feed upon what  is put in the net , are caught in great abundance  there are also birds of various kinds , and in great numbers , particularly parrots , wood pigeons , water hens , hawks , and many different singing birds .
An herb , a species of Philadelphus , was used here instead of tea  and a plant , called Teegoomme , resembling rug cloaks , served the natives for garments .
The environs of the cove where the Endeavour lay is covered entirely with wood , and the supple jacks are so numerous , that it is with difficulty passengers can pursue their way  here is a numerous sand-fly that is very disagreeable .
The tops of many of the hills are covered with fern .
The air of the country is very moist , and has some qualities that promote putrefaction , as birds that had been shot but a few hours were found with maggots in them .
The women who accompanied the men in the canoes wore a head-dress , which the gentlemen had no where met with before .
It was composed of black feathers , tied in a bunch on the top of the head , which greatly increased its height .
The manner of their disposing of their dead is very different to what is practised in the South-sea islands , they tie a large stone to the body , and throw it into the sea : the gentlemen saw the body of a woman which had been disposed of this way , but which by some accident had disengaged itself from the stone , floating upon the water .
The Captain , Mr. Banks , and the  Doctor visited another cove , about two miles from the ship .
There was a family of Indians who were greatly alarmed at the approach of the gentlemen , all running away except one  but upon Tupia 's conversing with him the others returned .
They found , by the provisions of this family , that they were cannibals , here being several human bones that had been lately dressed and picked  and it appeared , that a short time before , six of their enemies having fallen into their hands , they had killed four and eaten them , and that the other two were drowned in endeavouring to make their escape .
They made no secret of this abominable custom , but answered Tupia , who was desired to ascertain the fact , with great composure , that his conjectures were just , that they were the bones of a man , and testified by signs , that they thought human flesh delicious food .
Upon being asked , why they had not eaten the body of the woman that had been seen floating upon the water ?
They replied , she had died of a disorder , and that moreover she was related to them , and they never ate any but their enemies .
Upon Mr. Banks 's still testifying some doubts concerning the fact , one of the Indians drew the bone of a man 's arm through his mouth , and this gentleman had the curiosity to bring it away with him .
There was a woman in this family whose arms and legs were cut in a shocking  manner , and it appeared she had thus wounded herself , because her husband had lately been killed and eaten by the enemy .


Some of the Indians brought four skulls one day to sell , which they rated at a very high price .
The brains had been taken out , and probably eaten , but the scalp and hair remained .
They seemed to have been dried by fire , in order to preserve them from putrefaction .
The gentlemen likewise saw the bail of a canoe , which was made of a human skull .
In a word , their ideas were so horrid and brutal , that they seemed to pride themselves upon their cruelty and barbarity , and took a peculiar pleasure in shewing the manner in which they killed their enemies , it being considered as very meritorious to be expert at this destruction .
The method used was to knock them down with their patoo patoos , and then rip up their bellies .


An amazing number of birds usually began their melody about two o'clock in the morning , and serenaded the gentlemen till the time of their rising .
This harmony was very agreeable , as the ship lay at a convenient distance from the shore , to hear it .
These feathered choiristers , like the English nightingales , never sing in the day time .


On the 17th , the ship was visited by a canoe from the hippah , or village  it contained , among others , the aged Indian , of superior   distinction , who had first visited the English upon their arrival .
In a conference which Tupia had with him , he testified his apprehensions , that their enemies would very soon visit them , and repay the compliment , for killing and eating the four men .
On the 18th they received no visit from the Indians , but going out in the pinnace to inspect the bay , they saw a single man in a canoe , fishing in the manner already described .
It was remarkable , that this man did not pay the least attention to the people in the pinnace , but continued to pursue his employment even when they came along-side of him , without once looking at them .
Some of the Endeavour 's people being on shore found three human hip bones , close to an oven : these were brought on board , as well as the hair of a man 's head , which was found in a tree .
The next day a forge was set up to repair the iron work , and some Indians visited the ship with plenty of fish , which they bartered very fairly for nails .


On the 20th , Mr. Banks purchased of the old Indian a man 's head , which he seemed very unwilling to part with  the skull had been fractured by a blow , and the brains were extracted , and like the others it was preserved from putrefaction .
From the care with which they kept these skulls , and the reluctance with which they bartered any , it was imagined they were considered  as trophies of war , and testimonials of their valour .
In this day 's excursion they did not meet with a single native  the ground on every side was quite uncultivated  but they discovered a very good harbour .
The succeeding day the ship 's company were allowed to go on shore for their amusement , and the gentlemen employed themselves in fishing , in which they were very successful .
Some of the company in their excursion met with fortifications that had not the advantage of an elevated situation , but were surrounded by two or three wide ditches , with a draw-bridge , which , tho ' simple in its structure , is capable of answering every purpose against the arms of the natives .
Within these ditches is a fence , made with stakes , fixed in the earth .
A decisive conquest or victory over the besieged occasions an entire depopulation of that district , as the vanquished , not only those who are killed , but the prisoners likewise are devoured by the victors .
From what has been related by such unquestionable authority , there can remain no doubt with the unprejudiced reader , that the inhabitants of this part of the globe are cannibals .
There are , indeed , some closet travellers , who treat every thing as visionary , that they have not been eye-witnesses of , and therefore disbelieve all they read , related by real travellers , that does not square with their own notions and ideas  but as it may  be impossible to convince these sceptical readers , we shall leave them to amuse themselves with their doubts and objections .


The 22d was employed by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander in collecting of plants , whilst Captain Cook made some observations on the main land on the south-east side of the inlet , which consisted of a chain of high hills , and formed part of the south-west side of the streight  the opposite side extended far to the east .
He also discovered a village , and many houses that had been deserted , and another village that appeared to be inhabited .
There were many small islands round the coast that seemed entirely barren , and what few inhabitants were upon them then lived principally upon fish .
On the 24th they visited a hippah , which was situated on a very high rock , hollow underneath , forming a fine natural arch , one side of which joined to the land , and the other rose out of the sea .
The inhabitants received the gentlemen with great civility , and very readily shewed them every thing that was curious .
This hippah was partly surrounded with a pallisade , and it had a fighting stage like that already described .
Here they met with a cross resembling a crucifix , which was ornamented with feathers , and which was erected as a monument for a deceased person  but they could not learn how his body was disposed of .
From a conversation that Tupia had with these  people , a discovery was made , that an officer being in a boat near this village , and some canoes coming off made him imagine they had hostile designs , and he fired upon them with ball , which made them retire with much precipitation , but they could not effect their retreat before one of them was wounded .
What made this rash action the more to be lamented was , that the Indians afterwards gave every possible assurance that their intentions , upon this occasion , were entirely friendly .


On the 25th the Captain , Mr. Banks , and Dr. Solander went on shore to shoot , when they met with a numerous family , who were among the creeks catching fish : they behaved very civilly , and received some trifling presents from the gentlemen .
The next day they went to take a view of the streight , that passes between the eastern and western seas : they accordingly attained the summit of a hill , but it being cloudy weather , they could not see at any considerable distance .
Here , however , they erected a pile , leaving in it musket balls , small shot , beads , c. as a testimonial of this place having been visited by Europeans .
Upon their return they met with another Indian family , who behaved to them very respectfully , and assisted in procuring them water .
They also visited another hippah upon a rock that was almost inaccessible  it consisted of about ninety  houses , and had a fighting stage .
The gentlemen made the inhabitants some small presents , and they in return furnished them with dried fish .


The ship 's company were , on the 27th and 28th , engaged in making necessary repairs , and getting her ready for sea .
The next day they were visited by Topoa , their old friend , and some other Indians .
They said , that the man who had received a wound from the officer , near the hippah , was dead  but this assertion proved afterwards groundless .
The Doctor and Mr. Banks often went on shore whilst the ship was preparing for sea , and made several observations upon the coast to the north-west : they perceived an island , at about ten leagues distance , between which and the main there were several smaller islands .
The Captain also went on shore , and erected another pyramid of stones , in which he put some bullets , beads , c. as before , with the addition of a piece of silver coin , and placed part of an old pendant on the top , to distinguish it .
Some of the people who had been sent out to gather celery , met with several of the natives , among whom were some women , whose husbands had lately fallen into the hands of the enemy , and they were cutting many parts of their body in the most shocking manner with sharp stones , in testimony of their excessive grief .
What made this ceremony appear ridiculous as well as shocking , was , that  the male Indians , who were with them , paid not the least attention to it , but with the greatest unconcern imaginable , employed themselves in repairing some empty huts upon the spot .


On Tuesday the 30th , two posts were erected , inscribed with the ship 's name , c. as usual  one was placed at the watering-place , with the Union flag upon it , and the other in the same manner , on the island of Motuara  and the inhabitants being informed , that these posts were meant as memorials of the Endeavour having touched at this place promised never to destroy them .
The Capt [ ... ] n then named this inlet Queen Charlotte 's Sound  and took possession of it in the name , and for the use of his Majesty , and a bottle of wine was drank to the Queen 's health .


The Captain made the old man some presents  among others there were a silver three-pence and some spike nails , with the broad arrow upon them .
Topaa being questioned concerning a passage into the eastern sea , answered , that there certainly was such a passage  and he also informed the Captain , that the land to the south-west of the streight , where he then was , consisted of two islands , named Tovy Poennammoo , and that it would take about two days to sail round them  he added , that there was a third island to the east , called Eaheinomauwe , which was of considerable extent  and that the land contiguous to this inlet was called Tiera Witte .


 Towards night , on the 31st , a brisk gale arose , attended with heavy showers , and the next morning the weather became so very tempestuous , that the Endeavour had her hawser broke , and several casks of water that had been left on shore were washed away with the rain .


The 2d , 3d and 4th of February , were chiefly spent in preparing for their departure , and purchasing fish of the natives , who confirmed the accounts that Topoa had given , respecting an eastern passage and the adjacent islands .
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were in the mean while chiefly engaged in collecting seeds and shells of different kinds .
They got under sail the 5th , but the wind not continuing , they came again to an anchor .
Topaa visited the gentlemen again to bid them farewel  and being questioned , whether he had ever heard that such a vessel as the Endeavour had touched there , he answered in the negative  but added , there was a tradition of a small vessel coming from a place called Ulimaroa ( a distant country to the north ) that there were only four men in her , and that they were all put to death .


Mr. Banks and the Doctor went again on shore , in search of natural curiosities , when they met with a very amiable Indian family , among whom was a widow , and a pretty youth about ten years of age .
She had just lost her husband , and was performing the ceremony of the country upon the occasion .
They behaved  with the utmost hospitality and courtesy , and endeavoured to prevail with the gentlemen to stay all night , but they expecting the ship to sail , could not accept of the invitation .
This family seemed the most enlightened and intelligent set of Indians the gentlemen had as yet met with , which made them regret they had not fallen into their company before , as they would probably have derived much information from them .


On the 6th of February , in the morning , the Endeavour sailed out of the bay , which the ship 's company , from an abhorrence of the brutal custom that prevails here of eating men , called Cannibal Bay .
They bent their course to an opening on the east  in the evening , being in the mouth of the streights , they were becalmed in latitude 41 deg .
south , longitude 184 deg .
45 min .
west .
The two points which form this entrance , were named cape Koomaroo , and point Jackson .
The natives call the land about it Totarranue  and the harbour , which the Captain named Ship Cove , is very safe and commodious .
A ship may enter it either between Motuara and the island of Hamote , or between the western shore and Motuara .
Care , however , must be taken to attend to the tides  when there is little wind they flow about nine or ten o'clock at the full and change of the moon , and rise and fall about seven feet and a half , passing through the streight from the south east .


 The natives about this sound are not above four hundred in number  they are scattered along the coast , and live upon fern root and fish  the latter of which was the only commodity they traded in .
They were not entirely ignorant of the use of iron , bartering their fish for nails , and often giving them the preference to any other trifles that were offered them  they soon rejected paper when they found it was not water proof  nor was the cloth of Otaheite held in much estimation by them  but the cloths of English manufacture they highly valued .
The timber here is very good , and fit for almost all purposes , except masts  besides fish , which is in great plenty , here are shags , and some other kinds of wild fowl , in abundance .


The Endeavour having left the sound , steered eastward , and about six o'clock in the evening they were greatly alarmed at their being carried , by the rapidity of the current , very close to one of the two islands which lie off Cape Koamaroo , at the entrance of the sounds .
The ship was in such imminent danger , that they expected every minute she would be dashed to pieces  but letting go an anchor , and veering one hundred and sixty fathoms of cable , she was brought up , when they were not above two cables length from the rocks : in this situation they were obliged to wait for the ebb of the tide , which was not till after midnight  at three o'clock in the morning  they weighed anchor , and a fine breeze springing up soon after , they were carried through the streight with great velocity .
At the entrance of the streight , on the north-side , there is a small island , which was named Entry Island .
The narrowest part of this streight , which was called Cooke 's Streight , is between Cape Tierawitte and Cape Koamaroo  it is about thirteen miles long and fourteen broad  the safest passage is on the north-east shore , the other being rocky and dangerous .
The two eastern points of the streight Captain Cook named Cape Palliser and Cape Campbell  the first is in latitude 41 deg .
44 min .
south  longitude 183 deg .
45 min .
west  and the latter in latitude 41 deg .
34 min .
south-east , and longitude 183 deg .
58 min .
west .
The Endeavour was now about three leagues from land , facing a deep bay , which was called Cloudy Bay .
Some of the gentlemen on board expressing a doubt that Eahienomauwe was not an island , the Endeavour steered south-east , in order to ascertain whether it was or not  upon the wind 's shifting , she stood eastward , and steered all night north-east by east .
They were off Cape Palliser next morning ( the 8th ) when they discovered that the land reached away to the north-east towards Cape Turnagain .
Three canoes came off in the afternoon , with several people in them  they made a good appearance , and their canoes were ornamented like those of the  Indians of the northern coast .
They came on board without the least hesitation , and behaved very civilly  a mutual exchange of presents took place , which was the first instance they met with of such courtesy among any of the Indians .
By their asking for Whow , which signified nails , it was imagined they had heard of the Endeavour 's people from the inhabitants of some other place where she had touched .
They resembled the natives of Tolaga Bay in their dress .
One old man was tataowed in a very remarkable manner  he was likewise marked with a streak of red paint across the nose , and over both cheeks  his hair was quite white as well as his beard .
His garment was made of flax , with a wrought border , under which was a kind of petticoat , made of a cloth called Aooree Waow  his ears were decorated with teeth and pieces of green stone .
His voice was soft and low , and he appeared , upon the whole , to be a person of distinguished rank .
These Indians retired greatly satisfied with the presents they had received  and the Endeavour , after parting from them , steered coastwise , till the 9th in the morning , which being a clear day , it was easily determined that Eahienomauwe was certainly an island .


On the 14th of February about sixty Indians , in four double canoes , came within a stone 's cast of the ship , which they beheld with surprise .
Tupia endeavoured to persuade them  to approach nearer , which they refused , and made towards the shore , but did not reach it till after it was dark .
From the behaviour of these people , the place from whence they came was called the Island of Lookers-on .
On the 17th of this month they saw an island , five leagues from the coast of Tovy Poenammoo , which was called after the name of Mr. Banks .
This island appeared to be inhabited , as they saw a few Indians on it , and in one place beheld the smoke of a fire .
As no farther signs of land appeared to the southward , they steered to the west on Sunday the 18th , and made various way till the 23d , when it fell calm .
Mr. Banks took this opportunity to go a shooting in his boat  when he shot some Port Egmont hens , like those found on the island of Faro , and were the first they had seen on this coast .
On Sunday the 25th they saw a point of land , in 45 deg .
35 min .
south latitude , which Captain Cook named CAPE SAUNDERS , in honour of the Admiral of that name .
They kept at a small distance from the shore , which is interspersed with hills that are green , and abound in trees  but they did not see a single inhabitant .
They had various winds and seas till the 4th of March , when they saw several whales and seals .
- On the 9th they saw a ledge of rocks , and soon afterwards another ledge , three leagues from the shore , which they passed to the north during the night , and discovered the others under  their bow at day-break .
Thus they had a narrow escape from destruction  and these ledges of rocks were denominated the TRAPS , from their being adapted to entrap the unwary .
The southermost point of this land they called SOUTH CAPE , and indeed it proved to be the southern extremity of the whole country .


In the morning they sailed northward , and , on the day following , discovered a barren rock , about a mile in circumference , very high , and five leagues from the main land .
This was called SOLANDER 'S ISLAND .
On the 13th they discovered a bay , which contains several islands , behind which , if there be depth of water , there must be shelter from all winds .
Captain Cook called this DUSKY-BAY , and it is remarkable for having five high , peaked rocks , lying off it , which look like the thumb and four fingers of a man 's hand  whence it was denominated POINT FIVE FINGERS .
Three leagues to the south of Dusky Bay lies the westermost point of land on the whole coast , which was therefore called WEST-CAPE .


On the 14th they passed a small narrow opening in the land , where there appeared to be a good harbour , formed by an island .
On the land behind it were mountains covered with snow .
On the 16th they passed a point , consisting of high red cliffs , which received the name of CASCADE POINT , from a cascade of water which fell down it in several small streams .
 On the 18th in the morning they observed the vallies as well as the mountains covered with snow , which they thought had fallen in the night , when they had rain at sea .
On the 23d they gave the name of Rock 's Point to a head of land , off which lay some rocks above the water .


They had now almost passed the whole of the north west coast of Tovy Poenammoo  the face of the country afforded nothing worth notice , but a ridge of rocks of a stupendous height , ' `` which Dr. Hawkesworth describes as totally barren and naked , except where they are covered with snow , which is to be seen in large patches in many parts of them , and has probably lain there ever since the creation of the world  a prospect more rude , craggy , and desolate than this country affords from the sea , can not possibly be conceived  for as far inland as the eye can reach , nothing appears but the summits of rocks , which stand so near together , that , instead of vallies , there is only fissures between them . '' '


By the 27th they had sailed round the whole country , and determined to depart from the coast , as soon as they had taken in a stock of water .
For this purpose the Captain went ashore in the long-boat , and found an excellent watering-place , and a proper birth for the ship  which being moored , they began filling their  casks  while the carpenter and his crew were employed in cutting wood .
On the 30th the Captain , accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander , went in the pinnace to examine the bay , and the land on its borders , on which the two last mentioned gentlemen found several plants , of a species they had not seen before .
They saw no inhabitants  but found several Indian huts , which appeared to have been long deserted .
When they returned on board in the evening , the ship was ready to sail , all the wood and water being on board .
A council of the officers was now held , as to the passage they should take to England  when it was resolved to return by the East Indies , and with that view to steer for the east coast of New Holland , and then follow the direction of that coast to the northward .


This resolution being taken , they sailed at day-break , on Saturday March 31 , 1770 , and taking their departure from an eastern point , which they had seen on the 23d , they called it CAPE FAREWELL .
The bay from which they sailed was named ADMIRALTY BAY , and the two Capes thereof CAPE STEPHENS , and CAPE JACKSON , the names of the then Secretaries to the Board of Admiralty .
Between the island and Cape Farewell is a bay , which they called BLIND BAY , and which Captain Cook supposes , to be the same that is distinguished in Tasman 's Voyage , by the name of Murderers Bay .


 We shall now proceed to give such an account of the country and its inhabitants , as could be acquired during the circumnavigation of the coast .
Abel Jansen Tasman , a Dutchman , was the first European that made a discovery of NEW ZEALAND , to which he gave the name of STAATEN LAND , that is , the land of the States General .
Tasman never went on shore , as the Indians attacked him soon after he came to an anchor , in the bay to which he gave the name of Murderers Bay .
From the time of Tasman 's discovery , which was in December 1642 , till the present voyage , the whole country , except that part which Tasman saw , remained totally unknown , and has been supposed to be part of a southern continent  but it now proves to be two large islands , separated by a streight , of the breadth of about twelve miles .


The situation of these islands is between 34 and 48 degrees of south latitude , and 181 and 194 degrees of west longitude .
The natives call the northern island Eaheinomauwe , and the southermost Tovy Paenammoo .


Eaheinomauwe , though hilly , and in some places mountainous , is well stored with wood , and there is a rivulet in every valley .
The soil of the vallies is light , but is so fertile , as to be well adapted for the plentiful production of all sorts of the fruits , plants , and corn of Europe  the inhabitants of which , if a setttlement  should be effected , might supply themselves with the necessaries and even luxuries of life , without any extraordinary exertion of their industry .
The summer is more equally warm , though not hotter than in England  and it is imagined , from the vegetables that were found , that the winter is not so severe .


Dogs and rats are the only quadrupedes that were seen , and of the latter only a very few .
The inhabitants breed the dogs for the sole purpose of eating them .
There are seals and whales on the coast  and they once saw a sealion .
The birds are hawks , owls , quails  and there are song-birds , whose note is wonderfully melodious .
There are ducks and shags of several sorts , not unlike those of Europe  and the gannet , which is exactly the same .
The sea coast is visited by albatrosses , sheerwaters , pintados and penguins , descriptions of which have been given in other voyages .
The insects are flesh flies , beetles , butterflies , sand-flies and musquitos .


Tovy Poenammoo appears to be a barren country , is very mountainous , and almost destitute of inhabitants .


The sea which washes these islands abounds with fish , which are equally delicate and wholesome food .
They seldom came to anchor but they catched enough , with hook and line only , to supply the whole ship 's crew : and , when they fished with nets , every mess in the ship ,  except those who were too indolent , salted as much as supplied them when at sea for several weeks after .
The fish was not less various in kind than plentiful in quantity : there were many sorts they had never before seen  but the sailors readily gave names to all of them .
They had several sorts of mackrel , one of which was the same as we eat in England .
These fish were catched by the natives in immense quantities , and sold to the crew on the most moderate terms : but the richest dainty these seas afforded was the sea cray-fish , which differ from those seen in England , by having more prickles on the back , and being red when first catched .
These they purchased of the natives on the north coast , who dive for them , and find where they lie with their feet .
They had several kinds of skate , and a kind of dog fish , of a more delicate flavour , though otherwise similar to the skate eaten in London .
Eels , congers , clams , oysters , cockles , and flat fish , resembling both soles and flounders , were likewise found in great plenty on this coast .


This country abounds with forests , filled with very large , strait , and clean timber .
There is one tree about the size of an oak , which was distinguished by a scarlet flower , that appeared to be composed of several fibres  and another which grows in swampy ground , very strait and tall , bearing small bunches of berries , and a leaf resembling that of the yew tree .
About  four hundred species of plants were found , all of which are unknown in England , except garden night-shade , sow-thistle , two or three kinds of fern , and one or two sorts of grass .
They found wild celery , and a kind of crosses , in great abundance , on the sea shore  and of eatable plants raised by cultivation , only coccos , yams , and sweet potatoes .
There are plantations of many acres of these yams and potatoes .
The inhabitants likewise cultivate the gourd  and the Chinese paper mulberry-tree is to be found , but in no abundance .
There is only one shrub or tree in this country which produces fruit , and that is a kind of berry almost tasteless : but they have a plant which answers all the uses of hemp and flax .
There are two kinds of this plant , the leaves of one of which are yellow , and the other a deep red , and both of them resemble the leaves of flags .
Of these leaves they make lines and cordage , and much stronger than any thing of the kind in Europe .
These leaves they likewise split into breadths , and tying the slips together , form their fishing-nets .
Their common apparel , by a simple process , is made from the leaves , and their finer , by another preparation , is made from the fibres .
This plant is found both on high and low ground , in dry mould , and in deep bogs  but as it grows largest in the latter , that seems to be its proper soil .


 Our adventurers were of opinion , that no part of this country is peopled but the sea coast  so that the number of inhabitants is greatly disproportioned to the extent of country  and the settling a colony there , is recommended as an object worthy the notice of Great Britain .


The men of this country are as large as the largest Europeans .
Their complexion is brown , but little more so than that of a Spaniard .
They are full of flesh , but not lazy and luxurious  and are stout and well shaped The women possess not that delicacy which distinguishes the European ladies  but their voice is singularly soft , which , as the dress of both sexes is similar , chiefly distinguishes them from the men .
The men are active in a high degree  their hair is black , and their teeth are white and even .
The features of both sexes are regular  they enjoy perfect health , and live to a very advanced age .
They are of the gentlest dispositions , and treat each other with the utmost kindness : but they are perpetually at war , every little district being at enmity with all the rest .
This is owing , most probably , to the want of food in sufficient quantities , at certain times .
They have neither black cattle , sheep , hogs , nor goats  so that their chief food being fish , and that not at all times to be obtained , they are in danger of dying through hunger .
They have a few , and but a very few dogs  and when no fish is to be got , they have only vegetables , such as yams  and potatoes , to feed on  and if , by any accident , these fail them , their situation must be deplorable .
This will account for their shocking custom of eating the bodies which are slain in battle  for he who fights through mere hunger , will not scruple to eat the adversary he has killed .


Notwithstanding this custom respecting their enemies , the circumstances and temper of these people are in favour of those who shall settle among them as a colony .
They are in need of protection  and their dispositions are so sweet , that it would be an easy task to attach them by kindness .
Civilization would be a blessing to people , whom nature has barely furnished with the necessaries of life .


The inhabitants of New Zealand are as modest and reserved in their behaviour and conversation as the most polite nations of Europe .
The women , indeed , were not dead to the softer impressions  but their mode of consent was , in their idea , as harmless as the consent to marriage with us , and equally binding for the stipulated time .
If any of the English addressed one of their women , he was informed , that the consent of her friends must be obtained , which usually followed , on his making a present .
This done , he was obliged to treat his temporary wife at least as delicately as we do in England .
A gentleman who sailed in the Endeavour having addressed a family of some  rank , received an answer , of which the following is an exact translation .
- ' `` Any of these young ladies will think themselves honoured by your addresses , but you must first make me a suitable present , and you must then come and sleep with us on shore , for daylight must by no means be a witness of what passes between you . '' '


These Indians anoint their hair with oil , melted from the fat of fish or birds .
The poorer people use that which is rancid , so that they smell very disagreeable  but those of superior rank make use of that which is fresh .
They wear combs , both of bone and wood , which is considered as an ornament when stuck upright in the hair .
The men tie their hair in a bunch on the crown of the head , and adorn it with the feathers of birds , which they likewise sometimes place on each side of the temples .
They commonly wear short beards .
The hair of the women sometimes flows over the shoulders , and sometimes is cut short .
Both sexes , but the men more than the women , mark their bodies with black stains , called Amoco .
In general the women stain only the lips  but sometimes mark other parts with black patches : the men , on the contrary , put on additional marks from year to year , so that those who are very ancient are almost covered .
Exclusive of the amoco , they mark themselves with furrows .
These furrows make a hideous appearance , the  edges being indented , and the whole quite black .
The ornaments of the face are drawn in the spiral form , with equal elegance and correctness , both cheeks being marked exactly alike  while the paintings on their bodies resemble fillagree work , and the foliage in old chased ornaments : but no two faces or bodies are painted exactly after the same model .
The people of New Zealand frequently left the breech free from these marks  which the inhabitants of Otaheite adorned beyond any other .
These Indians likewise paint their bodies , by rubbing them with red oker , either dry , or mixed with oil .


Their dress is formed of the leaves of the flag split into slips , which are interwoven , and made into a kind of matting , the ends , which are seven or eight inches in length , hanging out on the upper side .
One piece of this matting being tied over the shoulders , reaches to the knees : the other piece being wrapped round the waist , falls almost to the ground .
These two pieces are fastened to a string , which , by means of a bodkin of bone , is passed through , and tacks them together .
The men wear the lower garment only at particular times .


They have two kinds of cloth besides the coarse matting or shag abovementioned  one of which is as coarse , but beyond all proportion stronger than English canvass  the other , which is formed of the fibres of a plant , drawn into  threads which cross and bind each other , resembles the matting on which we place our dishes at table .
They make borders of different colours to both these sorts of cloth , resembling girls samplars , and finished with great neatness and elegance .
What they consider as the most ornamental part of their dress is the fur of dogs , which they cut into stripes , and sew on different parts of their apparel .
As dogs are not plenty , they dispose these stripes with great oeconomy .
They have a few dresses , ornamented with feathers  and one man was seen covered wholly with those of the red parrot .


The women never tie their hair on the top of their head , nor adorn it with feathers  and are less anxious about dress than the men .
Their lower garment is bound tight round them , except when they go a fishing , and then they are careful that the men shall not see them .
It once happened that some of the ship 's crew surprized them in this situation , when some of them hid themselves among the rocks , and the rest kept their bodies under water till they had formed a girdle and apron of weeds  in a word , their whole behaviour manifested the most refined ideas of female modesty .


The ears of both sexes are bored , and the holes stretched so as to admit a man 's finger .
The ornaments of their ears are feathers , cloth , bones , and sometimes bits of wood  a great many of them made use of the nails which  were given them by the English , for this purpose , and the women sometimes adorned their ears with the white down of the albatross , which they spread before and behind the hole , in a large bunch .
They likewise hung to their ears by strings , chissels , bodkins , the teeth of dogs , and the teeth and nails of their deceased friends .
The arms and ancles of the women are adorned with shells and bones , or any thing else through which they can pass a string .
The men wear a piece of green talc , or whalebone , with the resemblance of a man carved on it , hanging to a string round the neck .
They saw one man who had the gristle of his nose perforated , and a feather being passed through it , projected over each cheek .


These people shew less ingenuity in the structure of their houses , than in any thing else belonging to them  they are from sixteen to twenty-four feet long , ten or twelve wide , and six or eight in height .
The frame is of slight sticks of wood , and the walls and roof are made of dry grass pretty firmly compacted .
Some of them are lined with the bark of trees , and the ridge of the house is formed by a pole , which runs from one end to the other .
The door is only high enough to admit a person crawling on hands and knees  and the roof is stoping .
There is a square hole near the door , serving both for window and chimney , near which is the fire-place .
A plank is placed near  the door , adorned with a sort of carving , and this they consider as an ornamental piece of furniture .
The side walls and roof projecting two or three feet beyond the walls at each end , form a sort of portico , where benches are placed to sit on .
The fire is made in the middle of a hollow square in the floor , which is enclosed with wood or stone .
They sleep near the walls , where the ground is covered with straw for their beds .


Some who can afford it , and whose families are large , have three or four houses , enclosed within a court yard .
Their cloaths , arms , feathers , some ill-made tools , and a chest , in which all these are deposited , form all the furniture of the inside of the house .
Their hammers to beat fern-root , gourds to hold water , and baskets to contain provisions , are placed without the house .


One house was found near forty feet long , twenty wide , and fourteen high .
Its sides were adorned with carved planks of workmanship superior to the rest  but the building appeared to have been left unfinished .


Though the people sleep warm enough at home , they seem to despise the inclemency of the weather , when they go in search of fish or fern-roots .
Sometimes , indeed , they place a small defence to windward  but frequently sleep under bushes , with their arms placed round them , without the least shelter whatever .


 Besides the fern-root , which serves them for bread , they feed on albatrosses , penguins , and some other birds .
Whatever they eat is either roasted or baked , as they have no vessel in which water can be boiled .


They saw no plantations of coccos , potatoes and yams , to the southward , though there were many in the northern parts .
- The natives drink no other liquor than water , and enjoy perfect and uninterrupted health .
- When wounded in battle , the wound heals in a very short time without the application of medicine  and the very old people carry no other marks of decay about them than the loss of their hair and teeth , and a failure of their muscular strength : - but enjoy an equal share of health and chearfulness with the youngest .
- Such are the happy effects of exercise and temperance !


The canoes of this country are not unlike the whale-boats of New England , being long and narrow .
The larger sort seem to be built for war , and will hold from thirty to one hundred men .
One of these at Tolaga measured near seventy feet in length , six in width , and four in depth .
It was sharp at the bottom , and consisted of three lengths , about two or three inches thick , and tied firmly together with strong plaiting : each side was formed of one entire plank , about twelve inches broad , and about an inch and a half thick , which were fitted to the bottom part with equal strength and ingenuity .
 Several thwarts were laid from one side to the other , to which they were securely fastened , in order to strengthen the canoes .


Some few of their canoes , at Mercury Bay and Opoorage , are all made entirely of one trunk of wood , which is made hollow by fire : but by far the greater part are built after the plan above described .
The smaller boats , which are used chiefly in fishing , are adorned at head and stern with the figure of a man , the eyes of which are composed of the white shells of sea-ears , a tongue of enormous size is thrust out of the mouth , and the whole face is a picture of the most absolute deformity .
The grander canoes , which are intended for war , are ornamented with open work , and covered with fringes of black feathers , which gives the whole an air of perfect elegance : the side boards , which are carved in a rude manner , are embellished with tufts of white feathers .


These vessels are rowed with a kind of paddles , between five and six feet in length , the blade of which is a long oval , gradually decreasing till it reaches the handle  and the velocity with which they row with these paddles is really surprising .
Their sails are composed of a kind of mat or netting , which is extended between two upright poles , one of which is fixed on each side .
Two ropes , fastened to the top of each pole , serve instead of sheets .
 A Branch of the Breadfruit-Tree


Figure 14 .
A War Canoeillegible  The vessels are steered by two men , having each a paddle , and sitting in the stern  but they can only sail before the wind , in which direction they move with considerable swiftness .
These Indians use axes , adzes and chissels , with which last they likewise bore holes .
The chissels are made of jasper , or of the bone of a man 's arm  and their axes and adzes of a hard black stone .
They use their small jasper tools till they are blunted , and then throw them away , having no instrument to sharpen them with .
The Indians at Tolaga having been presented with a piece of glass , drilled a hole through it , and hung it round the neck .
A small bit of jasper is thought to have been the tool they used in drilling it .


Their tillage of the ground is excellent , owing to the necessity they are under of cultivating or running the risk of starving .
At Tegadoo their crops were just put into the ground , and the surface of the field was as smooth as a garden , the roots were ranged in regular lines , and to every root there remained a hillock .
A long narrow stake , sharpened to an edge at bottom , with a piece fixed across a little above it , for the convenience of driving it into the ground with the foot , supplies the place both of plough and spade .
The soil being light , their work is not very laborious , and with this instrument alone they will turn up ground of six or seven acres in extent .


 The seine , the large net which has been already noticed , is produced by the united labour , and is probably the joint property of a whole town .
Their fish-hooks are of shell or bone  and they have baskets of wicker-work to hold the fish .


Their warlike weapons are spears , darts , battle-axes , and the patoo-patoo .
The spear , which is pointed at each end , is about sixteen feet in length , and they hold it in the middle , so that it is difficult to parry a push from it .
Whether they fight in boats or on shore , the battle is hand to hand , so that they must make bloody work of it .
They trust chiefly in the patoo patoo , which is fastened to their wrists by means of a strong strap , that it may not be wrenched out of their hand .
These are worn in the girdles of people of a superior rank , as a military ornament .
They have a kind of staff of distinction , which is carried by the principal warriors .
It is formed of a whale 's rib , is quite white , and adorned with carvings , feathers , and the hair of their dogs  and they sometimes carried a stick six feet long , inlaid with shells , and otherwise adorned like the military staff .
This honourable mark of distinction was commonly borne by the old men .


When they came to attack the English , there was usually one or more thus distinguished in each canoe .
It was their custom to stop at about fifty or sixty yards distance from the ship ,  Figure 15 .
A illegible Zealand Warrior in the Dress of his Country .
 Figure 16 .
The manner in which a illegible of OtaheitiThe manner in which the New Zealand Warriors  when the commanding officer , arising from his seat , and putting on a garment of dog 's skin , used to direct them how to proceed .
When they were too far from the ship to reach it either with stone or lance , they cried out , Haromai , haromai , harre uta a patoo-patoo oge .
- ' `` Come to us , come on shore , and we will kill you all with our patoo-patoos . '' '
During these menaces they approached the ship , till they came along-side , talking peaceably at intervals , and answering whatever questions they were asked .
Then again their threats were renewed , till , imagining the sailors were afraid of them , they began the war-song and dance - an engagement always followed , and sometimes continued till the firing of small shot repulsed them  at others , only till they had satiated their vengeance by throwing a few stones on board the ship .
In the war-dance , their motions are numerous , their limbs are distorted , and their faces are agitated .
Their tongue hangs out of their mouths to a vast length , and their eye-lids are drawn so as to form a circle round the eye  they shake their darts , brandish their spears , and wave their patoo-patoos to and fro in the air .
They accompany this dance with a song , which is sung in concert  every strain ending with a loud and deep sigh .
There is an activity and vigour in their dancing , which is truly admirable  and their idea of keeping time in music is such , that sixty or eighty paddles will strike  at once against the sides of their boats , and make only one report .


They sometimes sing , in times of peace , in a manner resembling the war-song  but then they do not dance with it .
The women , whose voices are exceeding soft and harmonious , likewise sing in a melodious , but mournful manner  and their songs appear as if sung in parts .
Their instruments of musick are , a shell , from which they produce a sound , resembling that made by a common horn  and a wooden pipe , not superior in musical sound to a child 's whistle .


These people fortify all their hippahs , or towns , of which there are several between the bay of Plenty and queen Charlotte 's sound .
In these the inhabitants of those parts constantly reside  but near Tolaga , Tegadoo , Hawk 's bay , and Poverty bay , there are no towns , only single houses at a considerable distance apart .
On the sides of the hills were erected long stages , supplied with darts and stones , which were thought to be retreats in time of battle , and on which , from their elevated situation , they can combat the enemy with these weapons to great advantage .
In these repositories they store their dried fish and fern-roots .
The inhabitants of this part of the country were all subject to Teratu , who resided near the bay of Plenty  and to their being thus united under one Chief , they owed a security unknown to the inhabitants of the other parts  of the country .
There were several inferior governors in Teratus 's dominions , to whom the most implicit obedience was paid .
One of the inhabitants having robbed the English , complaint was made to a Chief , who chastised him by kicking and striking him  while the thief bore his punishment with unresisting humility .


The inhabitants of the southern parts appeared to be co-partners in their fishing-nets and fine apparel .
The latter , which probably were obtained in war , were kept in a little hut , destined for that use , in the centre of the town , and the several parts of the nets , being made by different families , were afterwards joined together for the common use .
The gentlemen imagined , that the employment of the men consisted in cultivating the ground , making nets , catching birds , and fishing  while the women were engaged in weaving cloth , procuring fern-roots , and shell fish , and dressing food .


With regard to religion , they acknowledge one superior being , and several subordinate .
Their mode of worship could not be learned , nor was any place proper for that purpose seen .
There was indeed a small square area , encompassed with stones , in the middle of which hung a basket of fern-roots on one of their spades .
This they said was offered to the gods , in the hope of a plentiful crop of provisions .


 The inhabitants of the southern district said , they disposed of their dead by throwing them into the sea  but those of the north said , they buried them in the ground : our adventurers , however , saw not the least sign of any grave or monument  but the body of almost every inhabitant bore the marks of wounds which they had given themselves , in token of grief for the loss of their friends and relations .
Some of these scars were newly made , which is a proof that their friends had died while the ship 's crew were there  yet no one saw any thing like a funeral , as these islanders conceal every thing respecting the dead , with the utmost caution .


A great similitude was observed between the dress , furniture , boats and nets of the New Zealanders , and those of the inhabitants of the South-sea islands , which furnished a strong proof , that the common ancestors of both were natives of the same country .
Indeed the inhabitants of these different places have a tradition , that their ancestors migrated from another country many ages since  and they both agree , that this country was called HEAWIGE .
But perhaps a yet stronger proof that their origin was the same , will arise from the similitude of their language , of which the following is a specimen .


 NEW ZEALAND .
OTAHEITE .
Whahine , Aheine , A woman .
Taata , Tata , People .
Heoo-oo , Eraowroo , The hair .
Erai , Irai , The brow .
Mata , Matau , The eyes .
Ahewh , Eahoo , The nose .
Paparinga , Paparea , The cheeks .
Ateraboo , Eoboo , The belly .
Apeto , Pito , The navel .
Heromai , Harre mai , Come hither .
Taro , Taro , Coccos .
Tahai , Tohe , One .
Rua , Rooa , Two .
Torou , Torhoo , Three .
Ha , Ha , Four .
Etu , Hitoo , Seven .
Iva , Iva , Nine .
Heneaho , Eneeho , The teeth .
They sailed from Cape Farewell on the 31st of March 1770 , and had fine weather and a fair wind till the 9th of April , when they saw a tropic bird , in the latitude of 38 degrees 29 minutes south , a sight very unusual in so high a latitude .
On the 15th they saw an egg-bird and a gannet  and on the day following a small land-bird perched on the rigging , from which they concluded they were near land  but they found no ground with 120 fathom .
On the 18th , in the morning , they saw a pintado-bird , and some  Port Egmont hens , an infallible sign that land was not very distant At six o'clock in the morning of the 19th they discovered land four or five leagues distant  the southermost part of which was called POINT HICKS , in compliment to Mr. Hicks , the first Lieutenant , who made the discovery of it .
At noon they discovered another point of the same land , rising in a round hillock , extremely like the Ram-Head at the entrance of Plymouth Sound , for which reason Captain Cook gave it the same name .
What they had yet seen of the land was low and even , and the inland parts were green , and covered with wood .
They now saw three waterspouts at the same time , one of which continued a quarter of an hour .
At six in the evening the northermost point on the main land , which was distant about two leagues , was named CAPE HOWE .
On the following day they had a distant view of the country , which was in general covered with wood , and interspersed with several small lawns .
It appeared to be inhabited , as smoke was seen in several places .
At four o'clock the next morning they saw a high mountain , which , from its shape , they called MOUNT DROMEDARY , under which there is a point , which received the name of POINT DROMEDARY .
In the evening they were opposite a point of land which rose perpendicularly , and was called POINT UPRIGHT .
On Sunday the 22d they were so near the shore , as to see several of  the inhabitants on the coast , who were of a very dark complexion , if not perfect negroes .
At noon they saw a remarkably peaked hill , to which the Captain gave the name of the PIGEON-HOUSE , from its resemblance to such a building .
The trees on this island were both tall and large  but they saw no place fit to give shelter even to a boat .


The Captain gave the name of CAPE GEORGE to a point of land which he discovered on St. George 's day : about two leagues to the north of which the sea formed a bay , which , from its shape , was called LONG NOSE  eight leagues from which lies RED-POINT , so called from the colour of the soil in its neighbourhood .
On the 27th they saw several of the inhabitants walking along the shore , four of them carrying a canoe on their shoulders : but as they did not attempt coming off to the ship , the Captain took Messrs. Banks and Solander and Tupia in the yawl , and employed four men to row them to that part of the shore where the natives appeared  near which four small canoes laid close in land .
The Indians sat on the rocks till the yawl was within a quarter of a mile of the shore , and then ran away into the woods .
The surf beating violently on the beach , prevented the boat from landing  the gentlemen were therefore obliged to make what observations they could at a distance .
The canoes resembled the smaller sort of those of New Zealand .
They  saw , with longing eyes , a great number of cabbage-trees on shore : the other trees were of the palm-kind , and there was no underwood among them .


At five in the evening they returned to the ship , and a light breeze springing up , they sailed to the northward , where they discovered several people on shore round a fire , who , on their approach , retired to an eminence  soon after which two canoes arrived on the shore , and four men , who came in them , joined the others .
The pinnace having been sent a head to sound , arrived near the spot where the Indians had stationed themselves , on which one of them hid himself among the rocks near the landing-place , and the others retreated farther up the hill .
The pinnace keeping along shore , the Indians walked nearly in a line with her .
They were armed with long pikes , and a weapon resembling a cymeter , and , by various signs and words , invited the boat 's crew to land .
Those who did not follow the boat , having observed the approach of the ship , brandished their weapons , and threw themselves into threatening attitudes .
The bodies , thighs and legs of two of these , were painted with white streaks , and their faces were almost covered with a white powder .
They talked to each other with great emotion , and each of them held a kind of cymeter in his hand .


 The ship having come to an anchor , they observed a few huts , in which were some of the natives  and saw some canoes , in each of which was a man busily employed in striking fish with a kind of spear .
They had anchored opposite a village of about eight houses , and observed an old woman and three children come out of a wood , laden with fuel for a fire : they were met by three smaller children , all of whom , as well as the woman , were quite naked .
The old woman frequently looked at the ship with the utmost indifference , and , as soon as she had made a fire , the fishermen brought their canoes on shore , and they set about dressing their dinner with as much composure , as if a ship had been no extraordinary sight .


Having formed a design of landing , they manned the boats , and took Tupia with them  and they had no sooner come near the shore , than two men advanced , as if to dispute their setting foot on land .
They were each of them armed with different weapons .
They called out aloud in a harsh tone , warra warra wai , the meaning of which Tupia did not understand .
The Captain threw them beads , nails and other trifles , which they took up , and seemed to be delighted with .
He then made signs that he wanted water , and used every possible means to convince them that no injury was intended .
They now made signs to the boat 's crew to land , on which they put the boat in  but they  had no sooner done so , than the two Indians came again to oppose them .
A musquet was now fired between them , on the report of which one of them dropped a bundle of lances , which he instantly snatched up again in great haste .
One of them then threw a stone at the boat , on which the Captain ordered a musket loaded with small shot to be fired , which wounding the eldest of them on the legs , he retired hastily to one of their houses , which stood at some little distance .
The people in the boats now landed , imagining that the wound which this man had received would put an end to the contest  in this , however , they were mistaken , for he immediately returned with a kind of shield , of an oval figure , painted white in the middle , with two holes in it to see through .
They now advanced with great intrepidity , and both discharged their lances at the boat 's crew , but did not wound any of them .
Another musket was now fired at them , on which they threw another lance , and then took to their heels .
The crew now went up to the huts , in one of which they found the children , who had secreted themselves behind some bark .
They looked at them , but left them without their knowing they had been seen  and having thrown some pieces of cloth , ribbons , beads , and other things into the hut , they took several of their lances , and reimbarked in the boat .
The canoes on this coast were about thirteen feet in length ,  each made of the bark of a single tree , tied up at the ends , and kept open in the middle by means of sticks placed across them  their paddles are very small , and they use two at a time .


They now sailed to the north point of the bay , where they found a plenty of fresh water .
On taking a view of the hut where they had seen the children , they had the mortification to find that every Indian was fled , and that they had left all the presents behind them .
The Captain now went in the pinnace to inspect the bay , and saw several of the natives , who all fled as he approached them .
Some men having been sent to get wood and water , they no sooner , came on board to dinner , than the natives came down to the place , and examined the casks with great attention , but did not offer to remove them .
When the people were on shore in the afternoon , about twenty of the natives , all armed , advanced within a trifling distance of them , and then stopped , while two of their number approached still nearer .
Mr. Hicks , the commanding officer , on shore , went towards them , with presents in his hands , and endeavoured , by every possible means , to assure them of his friendly intentions , but to no purpose , for they retired before he came up to them .
In the evening Messrs. Banks and Solander went with the Captain to a cove north of the bay , where they catched between three and four hundred weight of fish , in four hauls .


 On Monday the 30th the natives came down to the huts before it was light , and were repeatedly heard to shout very loud  and soon after day-break they were seen on the beach  but quickly retired about a mile , and kindled several fires in the woods .
This day some of the ship 's crew being employed in cutting grass , at a distance from the main body of those on shore , a party of Indians made towards them  on which the grass-cutters retreated to the main body , while the natives pursued them  but stopping within fifty or sixty yards of them , they shouted several times , and retired to the woods .
In the evening they behaved exactly in the same manner , when the Captain followed them alone and unarmed for some time , but they still retired as he approached .


On Tuesday May the first , the south point of the bay was named SUTHERLAND POINT , one of the seamen , of the name of Sutherland , having died that day , and been buried on shore .
This day Messrs. Banks , Solander , the Captain and a few other gentlemen , went on shore , and left more presents in the huts , such as looking-glasses , combs , c. but the former ones had not been taken away .
- Making an excursion about the country , they found it agreeably variegated with wood and lawn .
The trees being strait and tall , and without underwood , the country might be cultivated without cutting down one of them .
The grass grows in large  tufts , almost close to each other , and there is a great plenty of it .
In this excursion they met with many places where the inhabitants had slept without shelter  but they saw only one man , who ran away the moment he beheld them .
They left more presents , in their huts , and at their sleeping-places , in hopes of producing a friendly intercourse .
They saw the dung of an animal which fed on grass , and traced the footsteps of another , which had claws like a dog , and was probably about the size of a wolf : they discovered the track of a small animal , whose foot was like that of a pole-cat  and saw one animal alive , about the size of a rabbit .
They found some wood which had been felled , and the bark stripped off by the natives  and saw several growing trees , in which steps had been cut , for the convenience of ascending them .
The trees abounded with a vast variety of beautiful birds , among which were cockatoos , parroquets and loriquets , which flew in large flocks .


The second Lieutenant , Mr. Gore , having been with a boat to dredge for oysters , saw some Indians , who made signs for him to come on shore , which he declined .
Having finished his business , he sent the boat away , and went by land with a Midshipman , to join the party that was getting water .
In their way they met with more than twenty of the natives , who followed them so close , as to come within a few yards  of them .
Mr. Gore stopped and faced them  on which the Indians stopped also , and when he proceeded again they followed him  but they did not attack him , though they had each man his lance .
The Indians coming in sight of the Waterers , stood still at the distance of a quarter of a mile , while Mr. Gore and his companion reached their shipmates in safety .
Two or three of the Waterers now advanced towards the Indians  but observing they did not retire , they very imprudently turned about , and retreated hastily  this apparent cowardice inspirited the savages , who discharged four lances at the fugitives , which flying beyond them , they escaped unhurt .
They now stopped to pick up the lances , on which the Indians retired in their turn .
At this instant the Captain came up , with Messrs. Banks , Solander , and Tupia  and advancing , made signs of friendship  but the poor natives would not wait their coming up to them .


On the following day they again went on shore , where many plants were collected by Dr. Solander and Mr. Banks .
They saw several parties of the Indians , who all ran away on their approach .
Tupia having learnt to shoot , frequently strayed alone to shoot parrots  and the Indians constantly fled from him with as much precipitation as from the English .
On the 3d of May , fourteen or fifteen Indians , in the same number of canoes , were engaged in  striking fish within half a mile of the watering-place .
At this time a party of the ship 's crew were shooting near the fishermen , one of whom Mr. Banks observed to haul up his canoe on the beach , and approach the people who were shooting .
He watched their motions , unobserved by them , for more than a quarter of an hour , then put off his boat , and returned to his fishing .


At this time the Captain , with Dr. Solander and another gentleman , went to the head of the bay to try to form some connection with the Indians .
On their first landing they found several Indians on shore , who immediately retreated to their canoes , and rowed off .
They went up the country , where they found the soil to be a deep black mould , which appeared to be calculated for the production of any kind of grain .
They saw some of the finest meadows that were ever beheld , and met with a few rocky places , the stone of which is sandy , and seemed to be admirably adapted for building .
In the woods they found a tree bearing cherries , if shape and colour may entitle them to that name , the juice of which was agreeably tart .
They now returned to their boat , and seeing a fire at a distance , rowed towards it , but the Indians fled on their approach .
Near the beach they found seven canoes , and as many fires , from whence they judged that each fisherman had dressed his own dinner .
There were oysters lying on the spot , and some muscles roasting  on the fire .
They ate of these fish , and left them some beads and other trifles in return .
They now returned to the ship  and in the evening Mr. Banks went out with his gun , and saw a great number of quails , some of which he shot , and they proved to be the same kind as those of England .


On the following day a Midshipman having strayed from his companions , came suddenly on an old man and woman , and some children , who were sitting naked under a tree together .
They seemed afraid of him , but did not run away .
The man wore a long beard , and both him and the woman were grey-headed  but the woman 's hair was cut short .
This day , likewise , two of another party met with six Indians on the border of a wood , one of whom calling out very loud , a lance was thrown from the wood , which narrowly missed them .
The Indians now ran off  and , on looking round , they saw a youth descend from a tree , who had doubtless been placed there for the purpose of throwing the lance at them .
This day the Captain went up the country on the north-side of the bay , which he found to resemble the moory grounds of England  but the land was thinly covered with plants about sixteen inches high The hills rise gradually behind each other to a great distance , and between them is marshy ground .
Those who had been sent out to fish this day met with great success  and the  second Lieutenant struck a fish called the stingray , which weighed near two hundred and fifty pounds .
The next morning a fish of the same kind was catched , which weighed three hundred and fifty pounds .


The name of BOTANY BAY was given to this place , from the large number of plants collected by Messrs. Banks and Solander .
This country produces two kinds of wood which may be deemed timber  one of which is tall and strait , like the pine , and the other is hard , heavy , and dark-coloured , like lignum vitae : it yields a red gum , like sanguis draconis , and bears some resemblance to an English oak .
There are mangroves in abundance , several kinds of palm , and a few shrubs .
Among other kinds of birds , crows were found here , exactly like those of England .
There is great plenty of water-fowl among the flats of sand and mud  one of which is shaped like a pelican , is larger than a swan , and has black and white feathers .
These banks of mud abound with cockles , muscles , oysters , and other shell-fish , which greatly contribute towards the support of the natives , who sometimes dress them on shore , and at other times in their canoes .
They likewise catch many other sorts of fish with hook and line


While captain Cook remained in the harbour , the English colours were displayed on shore , daily , and the name of the ship , with the date  of the year , was carved on a tree near the place where they took in their water .


They sailed from BOTANY BAY on the 6th of May , 1770  at noon were off a harbour which they called PORT JACKSON , and in the evening , near a bay , to which they gave the name of BROKEN BAY .
The next day , at noon , the northermost land in sight projected so as to justify the calling it CAPE THREE POINTS .
On Wednesday the 9th , they saw two exceeding beautiful rainbows , the colours of which were strong and lively  and those of the inner one so bright , as to reflect its shadow on the water .
They made a complete semicircle , and the space between them was much darker than the rest of the sky .
On Thursday they passed a low rocky point , which was named POINT STEPHENS , near which was an inlet , denominated PORT STEPHENS .
Next day they saw smoke in several places on the shore  and in the evening discovered three remarkably high hills , near each other , which the Captain named the THREE BROTHERS .


On Sunday the 13th they saw the smoke of many fires on a point of land , which was therefore called SMOKEY CAPE .
As they proceeded northward from BOTANY BAY , the land appeared high and well covered with wood .
On Tuesday morning , by the assistance of their glasses , they discovered about a score of the Indians , each loaded with a bundle , which they  imagined to be palm-leaves , to thatch their houses .
They traced them for more than an hour , during which time they took not the least notice of the ship  at length they left the beach , and were lost behind a hill , which they gained by a gentle ascent .
- At noon the Captain discovered a high point of land , which he called CAPE BYRON .
In the evening they discovered breakers at a considerable distance from the shore  so that they were obliged to tack , and get into deeper water  which having done , they lay with the head of the vessel to the land till the next morning , when they were astonished to find themselves farther to the southward than they had been the preceding evening , notwithstanding they had a southerly wind all night .
In the morning they passed the breakers , near a peaked mountain , which was named MOUNT WARNING  and the point off which they lay was called POINT DANGER .
The next day they saw more breakers , near a point which was distinguished by the name of POINT LOOK-OUT , to the north of which lies a bay , which Captain Cook called MORETON 'S BAY  and the north point of which he named CAPE MORETON .
Near this place are three hills , which were called the GLASS HOUSES , from the very strong resemblance they bore to such buildings .


On the 18th they descried a point so unequal , that it looks like two small islands lying under the land  and it was therefore called  DOUBLE ISLAND POINT .
At noon , by the help of glasses , they discovered some sands , which lay in spots of several acres , which they observed were moveable , and that some of them had not been long in their present situation , as they saw trees half buried , and the tops of others still green  likewise the naked trunks of some that had been destroyed by the sand .
At this time two beautiful water-snakes swam by the ship , which seemed to be distinguished from land-snakes , only by their broad and flat tails , which it was thought were useful to them in swimming .
On the 19th they sailed by a point of land , on which a large number of the Indians were assembled , from whence it was called INDIAN HEAD .
They soon afterwards saw many more of the natives , and observed smoke in the day-time , and fires by night .
The next day they saw a point , which was named SANDY CAPE , from two large tracts of white sand that were on it .
They next passed a shoal which was called BREAK SEA SPIT , because they had now smooth water , after having long encountered a high sea .
They had , for some days past , seen the sea-birds , called boobies , none of which they had met with before  and which , from half an hour before sun-rising , to half an hour after , were continually passing the ship in large flights : from which it was conjectured , that there was a river or inlet of shallow water to the southward , where they  went to feed in the day , returning in the evening to some islands to the northward .
In honour of Captain Hervey , this bay was called HERVEY 'S BAY .


On the 22d , by the help of their glasses , they discovered that the land was covered with palm-nut trees , none of which they had seen since they quitted the islands within the tropic .
The next morning early the Captain took a party of men , and being attended by Tupia , and the several gentlemen on board , went on shore to examine the country .
They landed a little within the point of a bay , which led into a large lagoon , by the sides of which grows the true mangrove , as it also does on some bogs , and swamps of salt-water which they discovered .
There were many nests of a singular kind of ant , as green as grass , in the branches of these mangroves .
When the branches were disturbed they came forth in great numbers , and bit the disturber most severely .
These trees likewise afforded shelter for immense numbers of green caterpillars , their bodies were covered with hairs , which , on the touch , gave a pain similar to the sting of a nettle , but much more acute .
These insects ranged themselves side by side on the leaves , thirty or forty together , in a very regular manner .
They saw , among the sand banks , many birds larger than swans , which they imagined were pelicans  and they shot a kind of bustard , which weighed seventen  pounds .
This bird proved very delicate food , and gave name to the place , which was called BUSTARD-BAY .
They likewise shot a duck of a most beautiful plumage , with a white beak They found vast numbers of oysters of various sorts , and , among the rest , some hammer oysters of a curious kind .
While the gentlemen were in the woods , several of the natives came down and took a survey of the ship , and then departed .
The gentlemen on shore saw fires in many places , and repairing to one of them , they found about a dozen small fires burning near each other  but the people were gone , and had left some shells and bones of fish they had just eaten .
They likewise saw several pieces of soft bark , about the length and breadth of a man , which they judged had been used as beds .
This kind of encampment was in a thicket well defended from the wind  and as the place was much trodden , and there was no appearance of a house , it was imagined that they spent their nights , as well as days , in the open air : even Tupia shook his head , and exclaimed , Taata Enos ! '
`` Poor wretches ! '' '
They sailed the next morning , and on the day following were a-breast of a point , which lying immediately under the tropic , the Captain called CAPE CAPRICORN , on the west side of which they saw an amazing number of large birds resembling the pelican , some of which were near five feet high .


 On the 26th they stood between a range of almost barren islands , and the main land , which is mountainous .
They had here very shallow water , and anchored in sixteen feet , which was not two feet more than the ship drew .
Mr. Banks tried to fish from the cabin windows , but the water was too shallow .
The ground indeed was covered with crabs , which greedily seized the bait , and held it till they were above water .
These crabs were of two kinds , one of a very fine blue , with a white belly , and the other marked with blue on the joints , and having three remarkable brown spots on the back .
The Captain having sent some men in a boat a-head to sound , they returned with an account , that there was not water enough for the ship to pass through , upon which they tacked about and stood back again .
In the morning they sailed to the northward , and to the northermost point of land the Captain gave the name of CAPE MANIFOLD , from the number of high hills appearing above it .
Between this cape and the shore is a bay called KEPPEL 'S BAY , and some islands bearing the name of the same gentleman .
On the 28th , being determined to keep the main land close aboard , which continued to tend away to the west , they got among another cluster of islands  they were here again greatly alarmed , having on a sudden but three fathom water , in a ripling tide  they immediately put the ship about , and hoisted out the boats in  search of deeper water  after which they stood to the west with an easy sail , and in the evening , came to the entrance of a bay .
On the 29th , in the morning , the master was sent with two boats to sound the bay  and the ship was no sooner under sail , than the boats made the signal , and the ship accordingly came to an anchor .
As they observed the tide to flow and ebb considerably , they imagined this bay to be the entrance of a river which ran up the country : in this place therefore the Captain intended to lay the ship a-shore and clean her bottom  and accordingly landed , in search of a proper place for the purpose .


In this excursion Messrs. Banks and Solander attended Captain Cook .
They found walking extremely incommodious , the ground being covered with grass , the seeds of which were sharp , and bearded , so that they were continually sticking in their cloaths , whence they worked forwards to the flesh , by means of the beard .
They were likewise tormented with the perpetual stinging of musquetos .
Several places were found convenient to lay the ship a-shore  but they could meet with no fresh water .
In the interior parts of the country they found gum-trees , on the branches of which were white ants nests formed of clay , as big as a bushel .
On another tree they found black ants , which formed their lodging in the body of it , after they had eaten away the pith  yet the trees were  in a flourishing condition .
They found butterflies in such incredible numbers , that whatever way they looked , many thousands were to be seen in the air  while every bough and twig was covered with multitudes .
They likewise discovered on dry ground , where it was supposed to have been left by the tide , a fish about the size of a minnow , having two strong breast fins , with which it leaped away as nimbly as a frog : it did not appear to be weakened by being out of water , nor even to prefer that element to the land  for when seen in the water it leaped on shore , and pursued its way .
It was likewise remarked , that where there were small stones projecting above the water , it chose rather to leap from one stone to another , than to swim through the water .


On the 30th the Captain went ashore very early , and having gained the summit of a hill , took a survey of the coast , and adjacent islands  which being done , he accompanied Dr. Solander up an inlet , which had been discovered the preceding day  but the weather proving unfavourable , they returned early to the ship , having seen only two Indians , who followed the boat a considerable way along the shore  but the tide running strong , they did not think it prudent to wait for them .
This day Mr. Banks went with a party on shore , and having met with a piece of swampy ground , covered with mangroves , they resolved to pass it , which  they did , up to the knees in mud , and sometimes crawling on their hands , when they had slipt between the branches of trees , which were interwoven on the surface of the swamp .
Having performed this disagreeable task , they arrived at a spot where the natives appeared to have slept on the grass , and where there were the remains of a fish supper , which had been roasted by four small fires .
The second Lieutenant , at another place , saw the track of a large animal , near a gully of water : he likewise heard the voices of the Indians , but did not see any .
Two turtles were seen at this place , some water-fowl , and a few small land-birds .


As no water was to be found , the Captain called the inlet THIRSTY SOUND , which they left on the 31st of May , and having sailed round three small islands , anchored in fifteen fathom water .
On the 1st of June they got under sail , having a number of islands in sight , as far as the eye could reach .
On the second at noon they saw a high promontory , which was called CAPE HILLSBOROUGH , and seemed to abound in wood and herbage , distributed on hills , plains , and in vallies .
There are a number of small islands in this neighbourhood , on some of which they saw smoke arising in different places .
On Sunday the 3d they discovered a point , which was named CAPE CONWAY , and between that and Cape Hillssborough a bay , which took the name of REPULSE BAY .
 The land about CAPE CONWAY is diversified by hills and dales , lawns and woods , and forms a delightfully verdant appearance .
By the help of their glasses they discovered three people , on one of the islands , and a canoe , with an outrigger , like those of Otaheite .
They this day named the islands , CUMBERLAND ISLANDS , in honour of the Duke  and a passage which they discovered was called WITSUNDAY 'S PASSAGE , from the day on which it was seen .
At day-break , on Monday , they were a breast of a point , which took the name of CAPE GLOUCESTER .
Names were likewise this day given to three other places , viz .
HOLBORNE ISLE , EDGCUMBE BAY , and CAPE UPSTART , which latter was so called , because it rises abruptly from the low lands that surround it .


On Tuesday , when near the shore , they saw very large columns of smoke rising from the low-lands .
This day they gave name to CLEAVELAND BAY , the east point of which was called CAPE CLEAVELAND , and the west MAGNETICAL ISLE , because the compass did not traverse well when they were near it .
The points , as well as the main land within them , lay high , and form a barren , rugged and rocky coast .
On the afternoon of Thursday they saw several large columns of smoke , likewise some canoes , and several natives , with some trees , that they thought were those of cocoa-nut  in search of which fruit Messrs. Banks and Solander went  ashore with Lieutenant Hicks  but they returned in the evening with a few plants , which they had gathered from the cabbage palm , and which had been mistaken for the cocoa-tree .
On Friday they gave the name of POINT HILLOCK to a point of land  between which and Magnetical Isle the shore forms HALIFAX BAY , which affords shelter from all winds .
At six this evening they were a-breast of a point of land , which was named Cape Sandwich , near which lies ROCKINGHAM BAY .
Hence they ranged northward along the shore , towards a cluster of islands , on one of which about forty men , women and children were standing together , and looking at the ship with a curiosity never observed among these people before .
The north point of Rockingham bay was called DUNK ISLE , which is scarcely to be distinguished from the shore , it lies so very near it .
On Saturday morning they were a-breast of some small islands , which were named FRANKLAND 'S ISLES  near which lie two places , which were called CAPE GRAPTON and GREEN ISLAND .
Here Messrs. Banks and Solander went ashore with the Captain , whose chief view were to procure water , which not being easily to be got , they soon returned on board , and the next day arrived near TRINITY BAY , which was so called , because it was discovered on Trinity Sunday .


As no accident remarkably unfortunate had befallen our adventurers , during a navigation of  more than thirteen hundred miles , upon a coast every where abounding with the most dangerous rocks and shoals  no name expressive of distress had hitherto been given to any cape or point of land which they had seen .
But they now gave the name of CAPE TRIBULATION to a point which they had just discovered , as they here became acquainted with misfortune .


This cape is in sixteen degrees six minutes south latitude , and 214 degrees 39 minutes west longitude .


At six in the evening they shortened sail , to avoid the danger of some rocks , which were seen a head , and to observe whether any islands lay in the offing , as they were now near the latitude of those islands said to have been discovered by Quiros .
They kept standing off from six o'clock till near nine , with a fine breeze and bright moon .
They had got from fourteen into twenty-one fathom water  when suddenly they fell into twelve , ten , and eight fathom , in a few minutes .
Every man was instantly ordered to his station , and they were on the point of anchoring , when , on a sudden , they had again deep water , so that they thought all danger was at an end , concluding they had sailed over the tail of some shoals which they had seen in the evening .
They had twenty fathom and upwards before ten o'clock , and this depth continuing some time , the gentlemen , who had hitherto been upon deck , retired to  rest  but in less than an hour the water shallowed at once from twenty to seventeen fathom , and , before soundings could be again taken , the ship struck against a rock , and remained fixed , but from the motion given her by the beating of the surge .
Every one was instantly on deck , with countenances fully expressive of the agitation of their minds .
As they knew they were not near the shore , they concluded they had struck against a rock of coral , the points of which being sharp , and the surface so rough , as to grind away whatever is rubbed against it , tho ' with a gentle motion  they had reason to dread the horror of their situation !


The sails being taken in , and boats hoisted out to examine the depth of water , they found that the ship had been carried over a ledge of the rock , and lay in a hollow within it .
Finding that the water was deepest eastern , they carried out the anchor from the starboard quarter , and applied their whole force to the capstern , in hopes to get the vessel off , but in vain .
She now beat so violently against the rock , that the crew could scarcely keep on their legs .
The moon now shone bright , by the light of which they could see the sheathing boards float from the bottom of the vessel  till at length the false keel followed , so that they expected instant destruction .
Their best chance of escaping seemed now to be by lightening her  but as they had struck at high water , they would  have been but in their present situation , after the vessel should draw as much less water as the water had sunk : but their anxiety abated a little , on finding that the ship settled to the rocks as the tide ebbed .
They , however , flattered themselves , that if the ship should keep together till next tide , they might have some chance of floating her .
They therefore instantly started the water in the hold , and pumped it up .
The decayed stores , oil jars , casks , ballast , six of their guns , and other things , were thrown over-board , in order to get at the heavier articles  and in this business they were employed till day-break , during all which time it was observed , that not an oath was sworn  so much were the minds of the sailors impressed with a sense of their danger .


At day-light they saw land at eight leagues distance  but not a single island between them and the main , on which part of the crew might have been landed , while the boat went on shore with the rest  so that the destruction of the greater part of them would have been inevitable , had the ship gone to pieces .
It happened , however , that the wind died away to a dead calm before noon .
As they expected high water at eleven o'clock , every thing was prepared to make another effort to free the ship  but the tide fell so much short of that in the night , that she did not float by eighteen inches , though they had thrown over-board near fifty tons  weight : they now , therefore , renewed their toil , and threw over-board every thing that could be possibly spared .
As the tide fell , the water poured in so rapidly , that they could scarcely keep her free by the constant working of two pumps .
Their only hope now depended on the midnight tide , and preparations were accordingly made for another effort to get the ship off .
The tide began to rise at five o'clock , when the leak likewise encreased to such a degree , that two more pumps were manned  but only one of them would work : three , therefore , were kept going till nine o'clock , at which time the ship righted  but so much water had been admitted by the leak , that they expected she would sink as soon as the water should bear her off the rock .
Their situation was now deplorable beyond description  and the imagination must paint what would baffle the powers of language to describe .
They knew that when the fatal moment should arrive , all authority would be at an end .
The boats were incapable of conveying them all on shore  and they dreaded a contest for the preference , as more shocking than the shipwreck itself : yet it was considered , that those who might be left on board , would eventually meet with a milder fate than those who , by gaining the shore , would have no chance but to linger the remains of life among the rudest savages in the universe , and in a country , where  fire-arms would barely enable them to support a wretched existence .


At twenty minutes after ten the ship floated , and was heaved into deep water  when they were happy to find that she did not admit more water than she had done before  yet as the leak had for a considerable time gained on the pumps , there was now three feet nine inches water in the hold .
By this time the men were so worn by fatigue of mind and body , that none of them could pump more than five or six minutes at a time , and then threw themselves , quite spent , on the deck , amidst a stream of water which came from the pumps The succeeding man being fatigued in his turn , threw himself down in the same manner , while the former jumped up and renewed his labour  thus mutually struggling for life , till the following accident had like to have given them up a prey to absolute despair .


Between the inside lining of the ship 's bottom , which is called the ceiling , and the outside planking , there is a space of about seventeen or eighteen inches The man who had hitherto taken the depth of water at the well , had taken it no farther than the ceiling  but being now relieved by another person , who took the depth to the outside planking , it appeared by this mistake , that the leak had suddenly gained upon the pumps , the whole difference between the two plankings .
- This circumstance deprived them  of all hopes , and scarce any one thought it worth while to labour , for the longer preservation of a life which must so soon have a period : but the mistake was soon discovered  and the joy arising from such unexpected good news inspired the men with so much vigour , that before eight o'clock in the morning they had pumped out considerably more water than they had shipped .
They now talked confidently of getting the ship into some harbour  and set heartily to work to get in their anchors  one of which , and the cable of another , they lost : but these were now considered as trifles .
Having a good breeze from the sea , they got under sail at eleven o'clock , and stood for the land .


As they could not discover the exact situation of the leak , they had no prospect of stopping it within side of the vessel  but the following expedient , which one of the Midshipmen had formerly seen tried with success , was adopted .
They took an old studding sail , and having mixed a large quantity of oakham and wool , chopped small , it was stitched down in handfuls on the sail , as lightly as possible  the dung of their sheep and other filth being spread over it .
Thus prepared , the sail was hauled under the ship by ropes , which kept it extended till it came under the leak , when the suction carried in the oakham and wool from the surface of the sail .
This experiment succeeded so well , that ,  instead of three pumps , the water was easily kept under with one .


They had hitherto had no further view than to run the ship into an harbour , and build a vessel from her materials , in which they might reach the East Indies  but they now began to think of finding a proper place to repair her damage , and then to pursue their voyage on its original plan .
At six in the evening they anchored seven leagues from the shore  and found that the ship made fifteen inches water an hour during the night  but as the pumps could clear this quantity , they were not uneasy .
At nine in the morning they passed two islands , which were called HOPE ISLANDS , because the reaching of them had been the object of their wishes at the time of the shipwreck .
In the afternoon the Master was sent out with two boats to sound , and search for a harbour where the ship might be repaired .
They anchored at sun-set , in four fathom , two miles from the shore .
One of the Mates being out in the pinnace , returned at nine o'clock , reporting , that he had found just such a harbour as was wanted , at the distance of two leagues .


At six o'clock the next morning they sailed , having previously sent two boats a-head , to lie on the shoals that they saw in their way .
They soon anchored about a mile from the shore , when the Captain went out , and found the channel very narrow , but the harbour was better  adapted to their present purpose , than any place they had seen in the whole course of their voyage .
As it blew very fresh this day and the following night , they could not venture to run into the harbour , but remained at anchor during the two succeeding days , in the course of which they observed four Indians on the hills , who stopped and made two fires .


The men by this time began to be afflicted with the scurvy , and their Indian friend , Tupia , was so bad with it , that he had livid spots on both his legs .
Mr. Green , the astronomer , was likewise ill of the same disorder  so that their being detained from landing was every way disagreeable .
The wind continued fresh till Sunday the 17th , but they then resolved to push in for the harbour , and twice ran the ship a-ground  the second time of which she stuck fast  on which they took the booms , foreyard , and fore top-masts down , and made a raft on the side of the ship  and , as the tide happened to be rising , she floated at one o'clock .
She was now soon got into the harbour , where she was moored along the side of a beach , and the anchors , cables , c. immediately taken out of her .


On Monday morning they erected a tent for the sick , several of whom were brought on shore as soon as it was ready for their reception .
They likewise built a tent to hold the provisions and stores , which were landed the same day .
 The boat was now dispatched in search of fish for the refreshment of the sick , but she returned without getting any  but Tupia employed himself in angling  and living entirely on the produce of his industry , recovered his health very fast .
Mr. Banks , in an excursion up the country , saw the frames of several Indian houses , which appeared to have been abandoned some time : while the Captain , having ascended one of the highest hills , observed the high land to be stoney and barren , and the low land near the river over-run with mangroves , among which the salt-water flowed every tide .


On Tuesday the Captain ordered the smith 's forge to be set up , and directed the armourer to prepare the necessary iron work for the repair of the vessel .
He likewise ordered out the officers stores , water , c. in order to lighten the ship .
This day Mr. Banks crossed the river to view the country , which was little else than sand-hills .
He saw vast flocks of crows and pigeons , of the latter of which he shot several , which were most beautiful birds .
On the day following , as they were removing the coals , the water rushed in , near the foremast , about three feet from the keel  so that it was resolved to clear the hold entirely  wherefore they took out all the coals , and the next day warped the ship higher up the harbour , to a station proper for laying her a-shore , in order to stop the leak .


 Early in the morning of the 22d the tide left the ship , and they proceeded to examine the leak , when they found that the rocks had cut through four planks into the timbers , and that three other planks were damaged .
In these breaches not a splinter was to be seen , the whole being smooth , as if cut away by an instrument : but the preservation of the vessel was owing to a very singular circumstance .
One of the holes was large enough to have sunk her , even with eight pumps constantly at work  but this hole was in a great measure stopped up by the fragment of the rock being left sticking in it .
They likewise found some pieces of the oakham , wool , c. which had got between the timbers , and stopped many parts of the leak which had been left open by the stone .
Exclusive of the leak , great damage was done to various parts of the ship 's bottom .


While the smiths were engaged in making nails and bolts , the carpenters began to work on the vessel  and some of the crew were sent across the river to shoot pigeons for the sick .
These people found a stream of fresh water , discovered many Indian houses , and had sight of a mouse-coloured animal , extremely swift , and about the size of a greyhound .
On the 23d they saw plenty of fish , but catched only three .
This day many of the crew saw the animal above-mentioned  and one of the seamen declared he had seen the Devil , which he described  in the following words , ' `` He was as large , says he , as a one gallon keg , and very like it  he had horns and wings , yet he crept so slowly through the grass , that if I had not been afeard , I might have touched him . '' '
It appeared afterwards , that this poor fellow had seen a bat , which is almost black , and as large as a partridge  and his own apprehensions had furnished his Devil with horns .


The repairs on the starboard side having been finished the preceding day , the carpenters began to work under the larboard bow , on Sunday the 24th .
- This day Mr. Gore and a party procured a bunch or two of wild plantains , and a few palm cabbages , for the refreshment of the sick  and the Captain and Mr. Banks saw the animal abovementioned , which had a long tail , that it carried like a greyhound  it leapt like a deer , and the point of its foot resembled that of a goat .


The ship was now examined abaft , when it was discovered , that she had received but little injury in that quarter .
The carpenters continued to work on her whenever the tide would permit .
The vessel was now in a position which threw all the water abaft  and Mr. Banks having removed his whole collection of plants into the bread-room , they were this day found under water , by which some of them were totally destroyed  but , by great care , most of them were restored to a state of preservation .


 The ship being in part repaired , they twice attempted to float her , by lashing a number of casks under her bottom  but their endeavours proving fruitless , they were obliged to wait for the next spring tide .
This day a plant was found , the leaves of which were almost as good as spinnage .
They likewise found more cabbage trees , some wild plantain , and a fruit of a deep purple colour , and the size of a golden pippin  which , after being kept a few days , tasted like a damson .


The carpenter was now engaged in caulking the ship , and the men employed in filling water and other necessary business  while the Captain amused himself in catching fish for the sick .
On the 28th Mr. Banks took some of the crew up the country , to shew them a plant which served them for greens , and which the inhabitants of the West Indies call Indian kale .
Here they saw a tree notched for climbing , in the same way as those seen in Botany bay .
They also met with nests of white ants , from a few inches to five feet in height .
Mr. Gore was up the country , where he saw prints of the feet of men , and the tracks of three or four kinds of animals .


On the day following the boat took as many fish as allowed a pound and an half to each man .
A Midshipman saw a wolf , exactly resembling those of America .
On the 30th the Captain ascended a hill to take a view of the  sea , when , to his great concern , he observed innumerable sand-banks and shoals , in every direction  but there was an appearance of a passage to the northward , the only way he could think of getting clear , as the wind constantly blows from the south-east .
Mr. Gore this day saw two straw-coloured animals , of the size of a hare , but shaped like a dog .
So much fish was taken , that each man had two pounds and a half  and plenty of greens were gathered , which being boiled with the pease , their fare was deemed excellent .


On Sunday July the 1st , all the men had permission to go on shore , except one from each mess , who went on the fishing party , and again met with great success .
A fire was this day observed about a mile up the river .
The master having been sent in the pinnace , in search of a channel , returned on Tuesday , with an account that he had found a passage out to sea , between the shoals , which consisted of coral rocks , many of which were left dry at low water .
He found some cockles so large , that one of them was more than sufficient for two men  and likewise plenty of other shell-fish , of which he brought a supply to the ship , in his return to which he had landed in a bay where some Indians were at supper  but they instantly fled , leaving some sea-eggs , and a fire for the dressing them .
This day they succeeded in an attempt to float the ship  when they found that ,  by the position she had lain in , she had sprung a plank , so that it was again necessary to lay her ashore .
An alligator swam by her several times this day .


On the 4th she was laid ashore on a sand-bank , and the next day floated at high water , and moored off the beach , in order to receive the stores on board .
This day Mr. Banks crossed the harbour , and found , on a sandy beach , a great number of fruits , such as they had not seen before  among which was a cocoa-nut , which Tupia said had been opened by a crab , and which was judged to be what the Dutch call Beurs Krabbe .
The vegetable substances which Mr. Banks picked up were encrusted with marine productions , which is said to be a proof of their having been brought far by sea .


Mr. Banks and a party having taken a boat up the river , on the 6th , with a view to make an excursion in the country , returned on the 8th .
- They examined some parts of the country , which differing but little from what they had already seen , they followed the course of the river , which they at length found contracted into a narrow channel , bounded by steep banks , which were adorned with trees of a most beautiful appearance , among which was the bark-tree .
The land was low and covered with grass , and seemed capable of being cultivated to great advantage .
They saw several animals , one of which was judged to be a wolf .
 At night they made a fire , and took up their quarters on the banks of the river  but the night was rendered extremely disagreeable by the stings of the musquitos , which pursued them into the smoke , and almost into the fire .
At break of day they sat out in search of game , and saw four animals , two of which were chaced by Mr. Banks 's greyhound  but they greatly outstripped him in speed , by leaping over the long thick grass , which incommoded the dog in running .
It was observed of this animal , that he leaped or bounded forward on two legs , instead of running on four .
Having returned to the boat , they proceeded up the river , till it contracted to a brook of fresh water , but in which the tide still rose considerably .
When they stopped for the night , they saw a smoke at a small distance , on which three of them approached it , but the Indians were gone .
They saw the impression of feet on the sand , below high-water mark , and found a fire still burning in the hollow of an old tree .
At a small distance they saw several huts , and observed ovens dug in the ground  the remains of a recent meal were likewise apparent .
They now retired to their resting-place , and slept on plantain-leaves , with bunches of grass for their pillows , on the side of a sand-bank , under the shelter of a bush .


The tide favouring their return in the morning , they lost no time in getting back to the  ship .
The master , who had been seven leagues at sea , returned soon after Mr. Banks , bringing with him three turtle , which he took with a boat-hook , and which together weighed near eight hundred pounds .
He was sent out next morning , and Mr. Banks accompanied him with proper instruments for catching turtle  but , not being successful , he would not go back that night  so that Mr. Banks , after collecting some shells and marine productions , returned in his own small boat .


In the morning the second Lieutenant was sent to bring the Master back , soon after which four Indians , in a small canoe , were within sight .
The Captain now determined to take no notice of these people , as the most likely way to be noticed by them .
This project answered : two of them came within musket-shot of the vessel , where they conversed very loud : in return the people on board shouted , and made signs of invitation .
The Indians gradually approached , with their lances held up , not in a menacing manner , but as if they meant to intimate they were capable of defending themselves .
They came almost along-side , when the Captain threw them cloth , nails , paper , c. which did not seem to attract their notice .
At length one of the sailors threw them a small fish , which so pleased them , that they hinted their design of bringing their companions , and immediately rowed for the shore .
In the interim , Tupia  and some of the crew landed on the opposite shore .
The four Indians now came quite along-side the ship  and having received farther presents , landed where Tupia and the sailors had gone .
They had each two lances , and a stick with which they throw them .
Advancing towards the English , Tupia persuaded them to lay down their arms , and sit by him , which they readily did .
Others of the crew now going ashore , the Indians seemed jealous , least they should get between them and their arms  but care was taken to convince them that no such thing was intended , and more trifles were presented to them .
The crew staid with them till dinner-time , and then made signs of invitation for them to go to the ship and eat  but this they declined , and retired in their canoe .


These men were of the common stature , with very small limbs  their complexion a deep chocolate  their hair black , either lank or curled , but not of the wool kind  the breast and upper lip of one of them were painted with streaks of white , which he called Carbanda , and some parts of their bodies had been painted red .
Their teeth were white and even , their eyes bright , and their features rather pleasing : their voices were musical , and they repeated several English words with great readiness .


The visit of three of these Indians was renewed the next morning , and they brought with them a fourth , whom they called YAPARICO   who appeared to be a person of some consequence .
The bone of a bird , about six inches long , was thrust through the gristle of his nose : and indeed all the inhabitants of this place had their noses bored , for the reception of such an ornament .
These people being all naked , the Captain gave one of them an old shirt , which he bound round his head like a turban , instead of using it to cover any part of his body .
They brought a fish to the ship , which was supposed to be in payment for that given them the preceding day : after staying some time , with apparent satisfaction , they suddenly leaped into their canoe , and rowed off , from a jealousy of some of the gentlemen who were examining it .


Three Indians visited Tupia 's tent on the 12th of July , and after remaining some time , one of them went for two others , whom he introduced by name .
Some fish was offered them , but they seemed not much to regard it , and , after eating a little , gave the remainder to Mr. Banks 's dog .
Some ribbands which had been given them , to which medals were suspended round their necks , were so changed by smoke , that it was difficult to judge what colour they had been  and the smoke had made their skins look darker than their natural colour  from whence it was thought that they slept close to their fires , as a preventative against the sting of the musquitos .
Both the strangers had bones  through their noses , and a piece of bark tied over the forehead  and one of them had an ornament of strings round his arm , and an elegant necklace made of shells .
Their canoe was about ten feet long , and calculated to hold four persons  and when it was in shallow water they moved it by means of poles .
Their lances had only a single point , and some of them were barbed with fish-bones .
On the 14th Mr. Gore shot one of the mouse-coloured animals abovementioned .
It chanced to be a young one , weighing no more than thirty-eight pounds  but when full grown they are as large as a sheep .
The skin of this beast , which is called Kanguroo , is covered with short fur , and is of a dark mouse-colour : the head and ears are somewhat like those of a hare : this animal was dressed for dinner , and proved fine eating .
The ship 's crew fed on turtle almost every day , which were finer than those eaten in England , owing to their being killed before their natural fat was wasted , and their juices changed .


On the 17th Messrs. Banks and Solander went with the Captain into the woods , and saw four Indians in a canoe , who went on shore , and walked up without sign of fear .
They accepted some beads , and departed , intimating , that they did not chuse to be followed .
The natives being now become familiar with the ship 's crew , one of them was desired to  throw his lance , which he did with such dexterity and force , that though it was not above four feet from the ground at the highest , it penetrated deeply into a tree at the distance of fifty yards .
The natives now went on board the ship , and were well pleased with their entertainment .
On the 19th they saw several of the women , who , as well as the men , were quite naked .
They were this day visited by ten of the natives , who seemed resolved to have one of the turtle that was on board , which they repeatedly made signs for , and being as repeatedly refused , they expressed the utmost rage and resentment  and one of them , in particular , having received a denial from Mr. Banks , he stamped , and pushed him away in the most violent manner .
At length they laid hands on two of the turtles , and drew them to the side of the ship where their canoe lay  but the sailors took them away .
They made several similar attempts , but being equally unsuccessful , they leaped suddenly into their canoe , and rowed off .
At this instant the Captain , with Mr. Banks , and five or six seamen , went ashore , where they arrived before the Indians , and where many of the crew were already employed .
As soon as the Indians landed , one of them snatched a fire-brand from under a pitch kettle , and running to the windward of what effects were on shore , set fire to the dry grass , which burnt rapidly , scorched a pig to  death , burnt part of the smith 's forge , and would have destroyed a tent of Mr. Banks 's , but that some people came from the ship just in time to get it out of the way of the flames .
In the interim the Indians went to a place where the fishing nets lay , and a quantity of linen was laid out to dry , and there again set fire to the grass , in spite of all persuasion , and even of threats .
A musket loaded with small shot was now fired , and one of them being wounded , they ran away , and this second fire was easily extinguished  but the other burnt far into the woods .


The natives continuing still in sight , a musquet charged with ball was fired near them  upon hearing which they soon got out of sight : but their voices being soon heard in the woods , and seeming to come nearer , the Captain , with a few people , went to meet them .
When they were in sight of each other , both parties stopped , except an old Indian , who advanced before the rest a little way , but soon halted , and speaking a few words , retreated to his brethren , and they all retired slowly together .
The English having seized some of their darts , followed them about a mile , and then sat down , the Indians sitting about an hundred yards from them .
The old man again came forward , having in his hand a lance with a point .
He stopped and spoke several times , on which the Captain made signs of friendship .
The old Indian now  turned to his companions , and having spoken to them , they placed their lances against a tree , and came forward as in friendship  whereupon their darts which had been taken were returned , and the whole quarrel seemed to be at an end .
The Indians having accepted some trinkets , walked amicably toward the coast , intimating , by signs , that they would not fire the grass again .
They sat down opposite the ship , but would not go on board  and they accepted a few musquet-balls , the use and effect of which the Captain endeavoured to explain to them .
When Captain Cook got on board he saw the woods burning at the distance of two miles .


The master having been sent to search for a passage to the northward , returned with an account that he could not find any .
By the night of the 20th the fire had extended many miles round them on the hills , which at night formed an appearance that was very striking .
On the 22d they killed a turtle , through both shoulders of which stuck a wooden harpoon , which the Indians had striken it with , and the wound was quite healed .
The next day one of the seamen , who had strayed from his company , met with four Indians at dinner : he was alarmed at this unexpected meeting , but had prudence enough to conceal his apprehensions , and sitting down by them , gave them his knife , which having all looked at , they returned : he would then have left them  but they chose to detain him till , by  feeling his hands and face , they were convinced he was made of flesh and blood like themselves : they then dismissed him , directing him the nearest way to the ship .


Mr. Banks having gone on shore in search of plants , found the cloth , which had been distributed among the natives , lying in a heap , as a commodity of no value .
On the 24th , Messrs. Solander and Banks found several marking nuts [ the Anacardium orientale ] on the ground  but their search for the tree that bore them was fruitless .
On the 26th Mr. Banks catched a female animal , called the Opossum , with two young ones .


By the 29th the ship was ready for sea  but there was not water sufficient for her to pass the bar .
On the first of August they found that their pumps were all rotten  but as the ship admitted only an inch of water in an hour , they hoped she would be stout enough to bear the voyage .
On the 4th of this month they put to sea , the pinnace going a-head to keep sounding , and at noon came to an anchor , when the Captain gave the name of CAPE BEDFORD to the northermost point of land in sight , and that of ENDEAVOUR RIVER to the harbour which they had quitted .


The provisions they obtained while in this harbour , consisted of turtle , which they went some miles to sea to catch  oysters of three different sorts , large cavalhe or scomber , large  mullets , some flat fish , a great number of small scombri , and skate or ray fish  purslain , wild beans , the tops of coccos , and cabbage palms .
Of quadrupedes there are goats , wolves , and pole-cats , and a spotted animal of the viverra kind  and several kinds of serpents , only some of which are venomous .
Dogs are the only tame animals  the land-fowls are kites , crows , hawks , loriquets , cockatoos , parrots , pigeons , and small birds of various kinds , the names of which were not known : the water-fowls are wild geese , curlieus , hens , whistling ducks , which perch on trees , and some few others .
The soil produces the gum tree , and various other kinds of wood , and coarse grass : the whole of the country is well watered , and ant hills abound in every part of it .


On the 4th the Captain ascended to the mast-head , to look at some shoals which threatened great danger  and he saw several of them above the water .
This day such a quantity of fish was catched , as allowed a dividend of two pounds to each man .
During the six following days they struggled incessantly to sail safely past the shoals and breakers , by which they were every way surrounded  but , for the present , their attempts were vain .
On the 10th they were between a head-land , and three islands , which had been discovered on the preceding day  and began to conceive hopes that they were out of danger  but this not proving the case , the head-land  received the name of CAPE FLATTERY .
Some land was now seen from the mast-head , which was generally taken for the main  but the Captain judged it to be a cluster of islands  and during this diversity of opinion , the ship came to an anchor .
The Captain now landed , and ascending a high point , took a survey of the sea coast , by which he was confirmed in his opinion , that what they had seen was not any part of the main , but a number of islands .
On the point where he stood were seen the prints of human feet , in white sand of an exquisite fineness , and the spot was denominated POINT LOOKOUT .


Early on the 11th Mr. Banks and the Captain went to visit the largest of three islands , which had been seen from the point the preceding day .
Having gained the summit of the highest hill , they beheld a reef of rocks , on which the sea broke in a frightful manner  but the thickness of the weather preventing a perfect view , they lodged under a bush during the night , in the hope of having a better prospect in the morning  but the weather then proved worse than it had been on the preceding day  yet , as they saw what had the appearance of a channel between the reefs , a person was sent to examine it , who found it very narrow .
They now set out to return to the ship , after giving the name of LIZARD ISLAND to this place ,  from their having seen no animals but lizards on it .


On their return they landed on a low sandy island , which abounded in birds of various kinds , among which were eagles , a nest of the young of which they took , and called the place EAGLE ISLAND .
On this spot they saw the nest of some bird , which was built with sticks on the ground , it was near three feet in height , and twenty-six round .


During the interval of their absence from the ship , the master had landed on several low islands , where he had seen great heaps of turtle shells , and found the fins of them which the Indians had left hanging on the trees , so fresh , that they were dressed and eaten by the boat 's crew .


After a conversation held among the officers , it was their concurrent opinion , that it would be best to leave the coast , and stand out to sea : and in consequence of these sentiments they sailed on the 13th of August , 1770 , and got through one of the channels in the reef  happy to be once more in an open sea , after having been surrounded by dreadful shoals and rocks for near three months .
They had now sailed above a thousand miles , during all which run they had been obliged to keep sounding , without the intermission of a single minute  a circumstance which , it is supposed , never happened to any ship but the Endeavour .


 The islands from one of which the passage to the open sea had been observed , were called the ISLANDS OF DIRECTION .
They abound in turtle and other fish , and on the beach were found bamboos , cocoa-nuts , pumice-stone , and the seeds of plants , which were supposed to be carried thither by the trade winds , as the plants themselves do not grow in the country .


Having anchored on the 14th , they steered a westerly course on the following day , to get sight of the land , that a passage between that land and New Guinea might not be missed , if there was any such passage .
Early in the afternoon they had sight of land , which had the appearance of hilly islands , but it was judged to be a part of the main  and they saw breakers between the vessel and the land , in which was an opening , to get clear of which they set all their sails , and stood to the northward till midnight , and then went on a southward tack for about two miles , when the breeze died away to a dead calm .
When day-light came on they saw a dreadful surf break at a vast height within a mile of the ship , towards which the rolling waves carried her with great rapidity .
Thus distressed , the boats were sent a-head to tow , and the head of the vessel was brought about , but not till she was within one hundred yards of the rock , between which and her there was nothing left but the chasm , made by the last wave which had washed her side , and which had risen and  broke to a wonderful height on the rock : - but , in the moment they expected instant destruction , a breeze , hardly discernible , aided the boats in getting the vessel in an oblique direction from the rock .
The hopes however , afforded by this providential circumstance , were destroyed by a perfect calm which succeeded in a few minutes  yet the breeze once more returned , before they had lost the little ground which had been gained .


At this time a small opening was seen in the reef , and a young officer being sent to examine it , found that its breadth did not much exceed the length of the ship , but that there was smooth water on the other side of the rocks .
Animated by the hope of preserving life , they now attempted to pass the opening  but this was impossible  for it having become high water in the interim , the ebb tide rushed through it with amazing impetuosity , carrying the ship about a quarter of a mile from the reef , and she soon reached the distance of near two miles , by the help of the boats .
When the ebb tide was spent , the tide of flood again drove the vessel very near the rocks , so that their prospect of destruction was renewed , when they discovered another opening , and a light breeze springing up , they entered it , and were driven through it with a rapidity that prevented the ship from striking against either side of the channel .
The ship now came to an anchor , and her crew were  grateful for having regained a station , which they had been very lately most anxious to quit .


The name of PROVIDENTIAL CHANNEL was given to the opening through which the ship had thus escaped the most imminent dangers .
A high promontory on the main land in sight , was denominated CAPE WEYMOUTH , and a bay near it WEYMOUTH BAY .
This day the boats went out to fish , and met with great success , particularly in catching cockles , some of which were of such an amazing size , as to require the strength of two men to move them .
Mr. Banks likewise succeeded in his search for rare shells , and different kinds of coral .


On the 18th they discovered several small islands , which were called FORBES 'S ISLANDS , and had sight of a high point of land on the main , which was named the BOLT HEAD .
On the 19th they discovered several other small islands , the land of which was low , barren , and sandy .
A point was seen , and called CAPE GRENVILLE , and a bay which took the name of TEMPLE BAY .
In the afternoon many other islands were seen , which were denominated BIRD ISLES , from their being frequented by numerous flocks of birds .


On the 20th many more small islands were seen , on one of which there were a few trees , and many Indian huts , supposed to have been erected by the natives of the main land , as temporary habitations during their visits to these  islands .
On the 21st they sailed through a channel , in which was a number of shoals  and gave the name of YORK CAPE to a point of the main land which forms the side of the channel .
A large bay is formed to the south of the cape , which was called NEWCASTLE BAY , and in which are several little islands .
On the north side of the cape the land is rather mountainous , but the low parts of the country abound with trees .
The islands discovered in the morning of this day , were called YORK ISLES .
In the afternoon they anchored between some islands , and observed , that the channel now began to grow wider : they observed two distant points , between which no land could be seen , so that the hope of having at length explored a passage into the Indian sea began to animate every breast : but , to bring the matter nearer to a certainty , the Captain took a party , and being accompanied by Messrs. Solander and Banks , they landed on an island , on which they had seen a number of Indians , ten of whom were on a hill , one of them carrying a bow , and a bundle of arrows , the rest armed with lances  and round the necks of two of them hung strings of mother-of-pearl .
Three of these Indians stood on the shore , as if to oppose the landing of the boat  but they retired before it reached the beach .


The Captain and his company now ascended a hill , from whence they had a view of near  forty miles , in which space there was nothing that threatened to oppose their passage  so that the certainty of a channel seemed to be almost ascertained .
Previous to their leaving the island , Captain Cook displayed the English colours , and took possession of all the eastern coast of the country , from the 38th degree of south-latitude , to the present spot , by the name of NEW SOUTH WALES , for his Sovereign the King of Great Britain  and three vollies of small arms being fired , and answered by an equal number from the Endeavour , the place received the name of POSSESSION ISLAND .


The next morning they saw three naked women collecting shell-fish on the beach  and weighing anchor , gave the name of CAPE CORNWALL to the extreme point of the largest island on the north-west side of the passage : some low islands near the middle of the channel receiving the name of WALLIS 'S ISLES  soon after which the ship came to an anchor , and the long-boat was sent out to found .


Towards evening they sailed again , and the Captain landed with Mr. Banks on a small island , which was frequented by immense numbers of birds , the majority of which being boobies , the place received the name of BOOBY ISLAND .
They were now advanced to the northern extremity of New Holland , and had the satisfaction of viewing the open sea to the westward .
The north-east entrance of the passage  is formed by the main land of New Holland , and by a number of islands which took the name of the PRINCE OF WALES 'S ISLANDS , and which Captain Cook imagines may reach to New Guinea : these islands abound with trees and grass , and were known to be inhabited , from the smoke that was seen ascending in many places .


To the passage which they had sailed through , Captain Cock gave the name of ENDEAVOUR STREIGHTS  we shall now proceed to a more accurate description of the country they had discovered  with an account of its productions , and of the manners and language of its inhabitants .


New South Wales is a much larger country than any hitherto known , which is not deemed a continent , being larger than all Europe  which is proved by the Endeavour having coasted more than two thousand miles , even if her tract was reduced to a strait line .
Northward of the latitude of thirty-three degrees , the country is hilly , but not mountainous  but to the southward of that latitude , it is mostly low and even ground .
The hills in general are diversified by lawns and woods , and many of the vallies abound with herbage  though , on the whole , it can not be deemed a fertile country .
To the northward the grass is not so rich , nor the trees so high as in the southern parts  and almost every where , even the largest trees grow  at a distance of not less than thirteen yards asunder .
In all those places where the land forms a bay , the shore is covered with mangroves , which grow about a mile inland , in a stinking ground , which the spring tides always overflow .
In some parts there are bogs , covered with thick grass , and there is plenty of underwood in the vallies : the soil in general seems unfit for cultivation , though there are many spots where the arts of tillage might be attended with success .


Salt creeks run in many directions through the country , which likewise abounds in springs and brooks of fresh water , but has no rivers of any considerable size  yet it is supposed to be upon the whole well watered , as the time when the ship was on the coast , was the driest season of the year .
All parts of the country produce the gum tree , which yields a resin like the sanguis draconis .


There are palm-trees of three kinds , two of which are found only in the northern district .
One of these produces nuts resembling chesnuts , the hulls of which being sound near where the natives had made fires , it was supposed that they were eatable  but some of the seamen having eaten of them , were taken very ill : upon which they were given to the hogs , but two of these died in about a week , and it was a work of difficulty to recover the rest .
The second sort of palm is much like the true cabbage tree  of the West Indies , and yields a large cabbage of a tolerable flavour .
The third sort , which abounds in the southward parts , produces a small cabbage of the most agreeable taste  and its nuts , which are fine food for hogs , grow in the greatest abundance .
This country also produces a tree , on which grows a kind of purple apple , which tastes like a damascen , after keeping it a few days : - a fig-tree , the fruit of which tastes very indifferently : - and a tree , the fruit of which is flat on the sides like a cheese , but its colour is that of a plumb .


Among the plants there is one , the leaves of which are like those of the bulrush , which yeilds a bright yellow resin , exactly like gambouge , but it does not stain : this plant had a very agreeable smell , but it is not known to what uses it might be applied .
There are two kinds of yams , one round , and covered with stringy fibres , and the other shaped like a radish  but both of them are pleasant to the taste : besides these , the country produces purslain , and a kind of wild parsley .
A fruit of a bad taste was found , which resembled a pineapple , and another , the kernel of which was soft , but it was otherwise like a cherry .


Besides the quadrupedes already mentioned , there is one , the belly of which is totally white , and the back brown , with white spots : it is much like a polecat , and the Indians call it Quoll .
- There are vast numbers of beautiful  pigeons , many of which were shot by the seamen  and the other land-birds are eagles , hawks , cranes , herons , bustards , crows , quails , doves , parrots , paroquets , cockatoos , and some other birds of very elegant plumage .


The insects are few in number , among which the musquito and the ant are the chief .
The ants are of four kinds .
The first are perfectly green , and live on trees , in which they build curious nests , by bending down the leaves , and gluing them together with an animal juice : thousands of them joined to keep the leaf in its proper position , while many others were employed in the gluing them .
Being disturbed in their work , the leaves , which are four or five inches in breadth , flew back with a force which was thought much superior to the united strength of these insects .
Those who disturbed them paid for their curiosity , by being stung in a very severe manner .


The second kind of ants are quite black , and live in the inside of the branches of trees , after they have worked out the pith .
Some of the branches being gathered , millions of these animals issued from every broken twig .


The third sort took up their lodging in the root of a plant that twines round the trunk of other trees .
This root , which they hollowed for their purpose , was cut into great numbers of passages which ran across each other  yet the plant appeared not to have been injured .
 These were not more than half the size of the red ant of this country , but , upon being disturbed , they crawled over the body in thousands , and put their disturbers to the pain arising from exquisite tickling .


The fourth kind were like the white ants of the East Indies  and had one sort of nests , as big as an half peck loaf , hanging from the boughs of the trees , and composed of several minute parts of vegetables , stuck together by a glutinous matter , supposed to have been supplied from their own bodies .
The cells had a communication with each other , and had openings which led to other nests on the same tree : they had likewise a hollow covered passage to another nest on the ground , at the root of a different tree from that on which the former nest was suspended .
The ground nests are six feet in height , and almost as much in breadth  the outside being plaistered with clay of near two inches in thickness : these have a subterraneous passage to the roots of the trees near which they stand  from whence the ants ascend , by covered ways , up the trunk and branches .
As these ground-built houses are proof against the invasion of the rain , it is supposed that the ants retire to them during the wet season .


The seas in these parts produce variety and plenty of fish , among which are mullets , sea-crayfish , and crabs .
On the shoals are found the rock , pearl , and other oysters  and the most  delicate green turtle , besides those enormous cockles which have been already mentioned .
Alligators are found in the rivers and salt creeks .


This country does not appear to be inhabited by numbers any way proportioned to its great extent : not above thirty being ever seen together but once , which was when those of both sexes and all ages got together on a rock off Botany-bay , to view the ship .
None of their villages consisted of more huts than would afford shelter for fourteen or fifteen men  and these were the largest numbers that ever assembled with a view to attack the English .
No part of the country appeared to be cultivated  whence there must necessarily be fewer inhabitants inland , than on the sea coast .


The men are well made , of the middle size , and active in a high degree  but their voices are sort even to effeminacy .
Their colour is the chocolate  but they were so covered with dirt , as to look almost as black as negroes .
Their hair is naturally long and black , but they commonly crop it short  in some few instances it is slightly curled , but in common quite strait .
It is always matted with dirt , yet wholly free from lice : their beards are thick and bushy , but kept short by singing .
The women were seen only at a distance , as the men constantly left them behind when they crossed the river .


The chief ornament of these people is the bone that is thrust through the nose , which  the sailors whimsically termed their spritsail yard : but besides this they wore necklaces formed of shells , a small cord tied twice or thrice round the arm between the elbow and the shoulder , and a string of plaited human hair round the waist .
Some few of them had an ornament of shells hanging across the breast .
Besides these ornaments , they painted their bodies and limbs white and red , in stripes of different dimensions  and they had a circle of white round each eye , and spots of it on the face .
Their ears were bored , but they did not wear ear-rings .


These people accepted whatever was given them , but seemed to have no idea of making an adequate return  and they would not part with their ornaments for any thing that was offered in exchange .
Their bodies were marked with scars , which they signified were in remembrance of the deceased .


Their huts were built with small rods , the two ends of which were fixed into the ground , so as to form the figure of an oven  they are covered with pieces of bark and palm-leaves .
The door of this building , which is only high enough to sit upright in , is opposite to the fireplace  they sleep with their heels turned up towards their heads  and even in this posture the hut will not hold more than four people .
In the northern parts , where the weather was warmer , one side of the houses was left open , and the  other opposed to whatever wind might blow at the time ?
these huts were only built for temporary use , and left behind when they removed to other parts of the country  but [ ... ] th [ ... ] ir stay was only for a night or two , they had no other protection from the weather than what the grass and bushes afforded .
While the huts on the main land were turned from the wind , those on the islands were turned towards it  a kind of proof that they visit the islands in fine weather , and enjoy the refreshing breeze while they sleep .


These huts are furnished with a kind of bucket for fetching water , made of an oblong piece of bark tied up at each end with the twig of a tree  and this is the only furniture of the house .
On their backs they have a kind of ba [ ... ] , of the size and form of a cabbage - [ ... ] , in which they carry the [ ... ] r fish hooks and [ ... ] es , the [ ... ] lls of which they make these hooks , the ornaments which they wear , some points of darts , and two or three [ ... ] of paint  and in this narrow compass lies all their [ ... ] hes .


They feed on the kangaroo and on several kinds of birds , when they can catch them  they likewise eat ya [ ... ] s , and various kinds of fruit , but the principal [ ... ] le of their subsistence is fish .
They were frequently observed with the leaves of a [ ... ] in the [ ... ] r mouths , but whether it had the qualities either of tobacco or [ ... ] tle could not be known , but it was observed not to discolour the teeth or l [ ... ] p [ ... ] .


 [ ... ]


 The natives of New South Wales make use of spears or lances  but these are very differently constructed : those that were seen in the southern parts of the country had four prongs , pointed with bone , and barbed  and the points were rubbed with a hard kind of wax , the smoothness of which made an easier passage into what was struck by them .
On the contrary , the lances in the northern parts have only one point : the shafts of them are of different lengths , from eight to fourteen feet , are made of the stalk of a plant not unlike a bulrush , and consist of several joints let into each other , and tied together .
The points of these lances are sometimes made of fish-bones , and sometimes of a hard heavy wood : they are barbed with other pieces of wood or bone , so that when they have entered any depth into the body , they can not be drawn out without tearing the flesh in a shocking manner , or leaving splinters behind them .


When the natives intend to wound at a considerable distance , they discharge this instrument with a throwing-stick  but if the object be near them , it is thrown from the hand only .
The throwing-stick is a piece of smooth , hard , red wood , half an inch thick , two inches broad , and about three feet in length , having a cross piece near four inches long at one end , and a small knob at the other .
A small hollow is made in the shaft of the lance , near the point ,  and in this hollow the knob is received  but , on being forced forward , it will easily slip from it .
The lance being placed on this throwing-stick , the Indian holds it over his shoulder , shakes it , and then throws both lance and stick with his utmost power , but as the cross piece strikes the shoulder , the sudden jerk stops the stick , while the lance is driven forward with amazing rapidity , and is generally so well aimed , that a mark at the distance of fifty yards is more certainly struck with it , than by a bullet from a gun .


These people make use of shields , made of the bark of trees , of about eighteen inches broad , and three feet long .
Many trees were seen from whence the bark had been taken , and others on which the shields were cut out , but not taken away .


In the northern parts of this coast , the canoes are formed by hollowing out the trunk of a tree  and it was conjectured , that this operation must have been performed by fire , as the natives did not appear to have any instrument proper for the purpose .
The canoes are in length about fou [ ... ] teen feet and so narrow that they would be frequently overset , but that they are provided with an o [ ... ] ger .
The natives row them with paddles , using both hands in that [ ... ] ployment .


The canoes in the southern parts are formed only of a piece of bark four yards long , fastened  together at each end , and the middle kept open by pieces of wood passing from side to side .
In deep water these are rowed by paddles , of about a foot and a half in length , the rower having one in each hand  but in shallow water they are pushed forward by means of a long stick .
As these vessels are extremely light , and draw very little water , the natives run them on the mud banks in search of shell-fish , some of which , it is probable , they broil and eat as soon as they are taken , as it was remarked , that in the center of these vessels there was usually a fire burning on a quantity of sea-weed .


The natives have no tools but a wooden mallet , a kind of wedge , and an adze , made of stone , with some pieces of coral and shells , which may possibly be applied to the purposes of cutting .
They polish the points of their lances , and their throwing-sticks , with the leaves of a tree that appears to be the ficus riduola , or wild fig , which bites with a sharpness , almost equal to that of a rasp .


Four people is the greatest number that a canoe will contain , and when more than this number were to pass a river , three were landed out of the first freight , and one man went back [ ... ] r the rest .


That the natives of this country sometimes [ ... ] ge war with each other is evident , from their being possessed of shields and weapons  yet [ ... ] ot a single wound was seen on any of their bodies :  and , if they are neither destroyed in war , nor carried off by famine , it will be difficult to form a judgment by what means the number of the inhabitants are so reduced , as to subsist on the products of the country : after all , it will , perhaps , be best to attribute this circumstance to the wisdom of that Providence , which distributes all its blessings with the most unbounded goodness , and the most consummate wisdom .


END OF THE THIRD VOLUME .
Notes * .
Horrid , wanton murder !
- If discoveries are to be purchased at such a price , the southern hemisphere had better have remained unknown .


VOLUME THE FOURTH .


LONDON .
[ ... ] Corner of St. Paul 's Church-Yard .
MDCC [ ... ] X [ ... ] III .


1 .
CAPTAIN COOK 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .
In 1768 , 1769 , 1770 and 1771 .


 THE short intercouse which the English gentlemen had with the inhabitants of New Holland , prevented them from obtaining so perfect a knowledge of the language of these people as could have been wished  but , as it is an object too curious to be passed over in silence , we shall give our readers the most particular account that could be procured .
They articulated their words very distinctly , though they made a great motion with their lips when they were speaking , and their utterance was rather vociferous , particularly when they intended to shew their disapprobation of any thing .
When they were pleased , they would manifest their satisfaction by saying hee , with a long flexion of the voice , in a loud and shril tone .
They frequently repeated the word tut , when in company with the English , several times together , which was supposed to be an expression of astonishment and admiration  upon the whole , their language was neither harsh nor inharmonious , as will appear from the following vocabulary .


A VOCABULARY of the language of the inhabitants of NEW HOLLAND .


Wageegee , The head .
Eiyamoac , The crown of the head .
Moree , The hair of the head .
Walloo , The temples .
Peete , The forehead .
Meul , The eyes .
Garbar , The eye-brows .
Melea , The ears .
Bonjoo , The nose .
Yembe , The lips .
Mulere , The teeth .
Unjar , The tongue .
Tacal , The chin .
Waller , The beard .
Doomboo , The neck .
Morcol , The throat .
Coyor , The breast .
Gippa , The belly .
Mocoo , The back .
Aco , The arms .
Mangal , The hands .
Eboorbalga , The thumb .
Nakil , The little finger .
Pongo , The knees .
Peegoorga , The legs Edamal , The feet .
Kolke , The nails .
Bamma , A man .
 Mootjel , A woman .
Dunjo , A father .
Tumurree , A son .
Tennapuke , The hole made in the nostrils for the reception of the bone ornament .
Cotta , A dog .
Poteea , Fish .
Putai , A turtle .
Tabugga , A fly .
Walboolbool , A butterfly .
Zoocoo , Wood .
Maianang , Fire .
Poorai , Water .
Poapoa , Earth .
Galan , The sun .
Wulgar , The clouds .
Kere , The sky .
Boota , To eat .
Chucula , To drink .
Marra , To go .
Mingoore , To dance .
Mailelel , To swim .
Aibudje , To yawn .
Poona , To sleep .
Wonananio , Asleep .
Tocaya , Sit down .
Eya  ba , That or this .
Te , A , or the .
 We shall now proceed to give an account of their passage from New South Wales to New Guinea , with a recital of the incidents which happened on their landing on the last mentioned country .
- Early in the morning of the 24th of August 1770 , the cable broke near the ring , in the attempt to weigh the anchor  on which another anchor was dropped , which prevented the ship 's driving .
As the loss of an anchor might have been attended with future ill consequences , the boats were sent to sweep for it  but their first attempt being unsuccessful , they were dispatched again in the afternoon , when it was found , and the ship being brought up to it , they weighed it  yet , unfortunately , just as they were going to ship it , the hawser slipped , and all their labour was frustrated .
Determined , however , not to lose the anchor , they re-applied their endeavours on the following morning , when they were attended with success .


Soon after the anchor was weighed , the ship got under sail , steering north-west , and in a few hours one of the boats , which was a-head , made the signal for shoal-water .
The ship instantly brought to , with all her sails standing , and a survey being taken of the sea around her , it was found that she had met with another narrow escape , as she was almost encompassed with shoals  and was likewise so situated between them , that she must have struck before  the boat 's crew had made the signal , if she had been half the length of a cable on either side .
In the afternoon she made sail with the ebb tide , and got out of danger before sun-set , when she brought to for the night .


The meeting with these shoals having determined the Captain to alter his intended course , he sailed again the next morning ( Sunday the 26th ) and soon got into deep water .
They now steered a westward course , and , as no land was within sight , held it on till the dusk of the evening , when they shortened sail , and made opposite tacks during the night .
The next morning they pursued their voyage , again shortening sail at night , and tacking till day-break of the 28th , when they steered due north , in search of New Guinea .


They now observed many parts of the sea covered with a kind of brown scum , to which the sailors gave the name of Spawn .
It is formed of an incredible number of minute particles , each of which , when seen through the microscope , was found to consist of a considerable number of tubes , and these tubes were subdivided into little cells .
The scum being burnt , and yeilding no smell like what is produced by animal substances , it was concluded that it was of the vegetable kind .
This scum , which has been often seen on the coast of Brazil , generally makes its appearance near the land .
- A bird , which is called the Noddy ,  was found this evening among the rigging of the ship .
Land having been seen this day from the mast-head , they stood off and on all night , and at day-break they sailed towards it with a brisk gale .


Between six and seven o'clock they had sight of a small island , distant about three miles from the main land , which has already been distinguished by the names of St. Bartholomew , and Whermoysen .
It is a very flat island , clothed with trees , among which is the cocoa-nut  and was judged to be inhabited , by the smoke of fires which were seen on several parts of it .
The boats were now sent out to sound , as the water was shallow  but as the ship , in sailing two leagues , had found no increase in its depth , signals were made for the boats to return on board , and the vessel stood out to sea till midnight , and then tacked , and stood in for land till the morning .
When they were about four leagues distant from it , they had sight of it from the deck , and its appearance was still flat and woody .
Abundance of the brown scum was still seen on the surface of the sea , and the Tars , convinced that it was not spawn , gave it the whimsical name of Sea-saw-dust .


The ship now held a northward course , barely within sight of land , till the 3d of September  and as the water was but just deep enough to navigate the vessel , many unsuccessful attempts were made to bring her near enough to  get on shore : it was therefore determined to land in one of the boats , while the ship kept plying off and on .


In consequence of this resolution , on the 3d of September , the Captain , accompanied by Messrs. Banks and Solander , and attended by the boat 's crew and Mr. Banks 's servants , set out in the pinnace  but when they came within two hundred yards of the shore the water was so shallow , that they were obliged to leave the boat , in the care of two of the sailors , and wade to land .
They were no sooner clear of the water , than they saw several prints of human feet on the sand , below high-water-mark , from whence it was evident , that the natives had been very lately there .
About one hundred yards from the water there was a thick wood , along the borders of which they walked till they arrived on the banks of a brook of water , on which was situated a fine grove of cocoa-nut trees , which abounded with fruit .


At a small distance from the trees stood an Indian hut , which had been thatched with their leaves , of which some yet remained  and round the hut were scattered many cocoa-nut-shells , the fruit of which seemed to have been lately gathered .
Not far from this grew the bread-fruit tree , and a number of plantains .


Our adventurers were now near a quarter of a mile from the pinnace , when three of the natives ran out of the woods , about one hundred  yards beyond them , shouting in the most violent manner .
They instantly ran towards our countrymen , the first of the three throwing something out of his hand , which flew on one side of him , burning in the same manner as gunpowder , but making no noise , while the other two threw their lances .
The English now fired  when the natives stopped , and cast another lance , on which the muskets were loaded with ball , and again fired .
- The poor Indians now ran off with expedition , having , most probably , been wounded in the unequal conflict .
Captain Cook and his companions , unwilling farther to injure those who could not originally have intended them any harm , retreated hastily to the boat , while the men , that had been left in the care of her , made signals that more of the natives were advancing towards the coast  several of these were soon seen , and stood still , as if waiting for the main body of their companions .
Captain Cook and the party having reached the boat , rowed a-breast of the natives , who by this time were assembled to the number of about eighty .
Their stature was nearly the same with that of the inhabitants of New South Wales , but their colour was not quite so dark : but , like them , they wore their hair cropped short .
During the survey that was taken of them , they continued letting off their fires , a few at a time , in a kind of regular platoons  they were discharged by means of a piece of stick , almost  like a hollow cane , which being swung sideways , produced fire and smoke exactly like that occasioned by the firing of small arms .
The crew on board the ship saw this strange phenomenon , and thought the natives had firearms .
The gentlemen having satisfied their curiosity by attentively looking at these people , fired some musquets above their heads , the balls from which being heard to rattle among the trees , the natives deliberately retired .
The lances which had been thrown soon after the gentlemen landed were made of a reed or bamboo cane , and the points were made of hard wood , barbed in several places  it is imagined , that these lances were discharged by means of a throwing stick , as they flew with great swiftness above sixty yards .


When this party returned to the ship , some of the officers entreated the Captain to send men on shore to cut down the cocoa-nut trees , in order to procure the nuts  but this , with equal wisdom and humanity , he refused  sensible that the poor Indians , who could ill brook even the landing of a small party , on their coast , would risk their lives , and of course sacrifice them , in defence of their property .
The whole coast of this country is low-land , but cloathed with a richness of trees and herbage , which exceeds all description .


On Monday , the 3d of September , 1770 , the ship got under sail , and early in the morning  of the 6th passed two small islands , on the latter of which Captain Cook would have landed , but as they had then only ten fathom water , and as the ground was rocky and the wind blew fresh , he might have endangered the safety of the ship .
They now sailed at a moderate rate , with various soundings , till three o'clock the next morning , after which they had no ground with one hundred and twenty fathom .
Before noon they had sight of land , which was conjectured to be either the Arrou Islands , or Timor Laoet  but they are not accurately laid down in any of the charts hitherto published .


On the evening of the 9th they saw what had the appearance of land , and the next morning were convinced that the first land they had seen was Timor , and the last Timor Laoet .
The ship stood off and on during the night , when a number of fires were seen on the island , and the next morning smoke was seen in several places , from whence it was conjectured that the place was well peopled .
The land near the shore was covered with high trees , not unlike pines  farther back were cocoa-trees and mangroves : there were many salt-water creeks , and several spots of ground which appeared to have been cleared by art  and the whole country rose , by gradual slopes , into hills of a very considerable height .


As the land and sea breezes were now very slight , they continued in sight of the island for  two days , when it was observed that the hills reached , in many places , quite to the sea coast , and where that was not the case , there were large and noble groves of the cocoa-nut tree , which ran about a mile up the country , at which distance great numbers of houses and plantations were seen : the plantations were surrounded with fences , and extended nearly to the summits of the most lofty hills , yet neither the natives nor cattle were seen on any of them , which was thought a very extraordinary circumstance .
Fine groves of the fan-palm shaded the houses from the rays of the sun .


On the 16th they had sight of the little island called ROTTE  and the same day saw the island SEMAU , at a distance to the southward of Timor .
The island of Rotte is chiefly covered with brushy wood without leaves  but there are a number of fan-palm trees on it , growing near the sandy beaches  and the whole consists of alternate hills and vallies .
The island of Semau is not so hilly as Timor , but resembles it greatly in other respects .


At ten o'clock this night a dull reddish light was seen in the air , many parts of which emitted rays of a brighter colour , which soon vanished , and were succeeded by others of the same kind .
This phenomenon , which reached about ten degrees above the horizon , bore a considerable resemblance to the Aurora Borealis , only that the rays of light which it emitted had  no tremulous motion .
It was surveyed for two hours , during which time its brightness continued undiminished .


As the ship was now clear of all the islands which had been laid down in such maps as were on board , they made sail during the night , and were surprized the next morning at the sight of an island to the west south-west , which they flattered themselves was a new discovery .
Before noon they had sight of houses , groves of cocoa-nut trees , and large flocks of sheep .
This was a welcome sight to people whose health was declining for want of refreshments  and it was instantly resolved to attempt the purchase of what they stood so much in need of .
The second Lieutenant was immediately dispatched in the pinnace , in search of a landing-place  and he took with him such things as it was thought might be acceptable to the natives .


During Mr. Gore 's absence , the people on board saw two men on horseback upon the hills , who frequently stopped to take a view of the vessel .
The Lieutenant soon returned , with an account that he had entered a little cove , near which stood a few houses : that several men advanced , and invited him to land  and that they conversed together as well as they could by signs .
He reported that these people were very like the Malays , both in person and  dress  that they had no other arms but a knife , which each of them wore stuck in his girdle .


As the Lieutenant could not find any place in which the ship might come to an anchor , he was dispatched again with money and goods , to buy such necessaries as were immediately wanted for those who were sick .
Dr. Solander attended the Lieutenant , and , during their absence , the ship stood on and off the shore .
Soon after the boat had put off , two other horsemen were seen from the ship , one of whom had a laced hat on , and was dressed in a coat and waistcoat , of the fashion of Europe .
These men rode about on shore , taking little notice of the boat , but regarding the ship with the utmost attention .
As soon as the boat reached the shore , some other persons on horseback , and many on foot , hastened to the spot , and it was observed that some cocoa-nuts were put into the boat , from whence it was concluded , that a traffick had commenced with the natives .
A signal being made from the boat , that the ship might anchor in a bay at some distance , she immediately bore away for it .


When the Lieutenant came on board , he reported that he could not purchase any cocoa-nuts , as the owner of them was absent , and that what he had brought were given him  in return for which he had presented the natives with some linen .
The method by which he  learnt that there was a harbour in the neighbourhood , was by the natives drawing a kind of rude map on the sand , in which the harbour , and a town near it were represented  it was likewise hinted to him that fruit , fowls , hogs , and sheep , might be there obtained in great abundance .
He saw several of the principal inhabitants of the island , who wore chains of gold about their necks , and were dressed in fine linen .
The word Portuguese being frequently repeated by the Indians , it was conjectured , that some natives of Portugal were on the island , and one of the boat 's crew being of that kingdom , he spoke to the islanders in his own language , but he soon found that they had only learnt a few words , of which they did not know the meaning .
While the natives were endeavouring to represent the situation of the town near the harbour , one of them , in order to be more particular in directions , informed the English that they would see something , which he endeavoured to describe by placing his fingers across each other  and the Portuguese sailor took it for granted , that he could mean nothing but a cross .
When the boat 's crew were on the point of returning to the ship , the gentleman who had been seen on horseback in the dress of Europe came down to the beach  but the Lieutenant did not think it proper to hold a conference with him , because he had left his commission on board the ship .


 In the evening , when the ship had entered the bay to which they had been recommended , an Indian town was seen at a small distance  upon which a jack was hoisted on the fore-top-mast head : presently afterwards three guns were fired , and Dutch colours were hoisted in the town : the ship , however , held on her way , and came to an anchor at seven in the evening .


The colours being seen hoisted on the beach the next morning , the Captain concluded , that the Dutch had a settlement on the island : he therefore dispatched the second Lieutenant , to acquaint the Governor , or other principal resident , who they were , and that the ship had put in for necessary refreshments .
The Lieutenant having landed , he was received by a kind of guard of something more than twenty Indians , armed with muskets , who having taken down the colours from the beach , proceeded without the least military order  and thus escorted him to the town where the colours had been hoisted the preceding evening .


The Lieutenant was now conducted to the Raja , or King of the island , to whom , by means of a Portuguese interpreter , he made known his business .
The Raja said , he was ready to supply the ship with the necessary refreshments  but that he could not trade with any other people but the Dutch , with whom he was in alliance , without having first obtained their consent  but that he would make application  to the Dutch Agent , who was the only white man among them .
To this Agent , whose name was Lange , and who proved to be the person that was seen from the ship in the European dress , a letter was dispatched  and in a few hours he came to the town , behaved politely to the Lieutenant , and told him , he might buy what he thought proper of the inhabitants of the island .


This offer being freely made , and readily accepted , the Raja and Mr. Lange intimated their wishes to go on board the ship , and that two of the boat 's crew might be left as hostages for their safe return .
The Lieutenant gratified both these requests , and took them on board just before dinner was served .
It was thought that they would have sat down without ceremony  but , after some hesitation , the Raja intimated his doubts , whether , being a black , they would permit him to sit down with them .
The politeness of the officers soon removed his scruples , and the greatest good humour and festivity prevailed among them .
As Dr. Solander , and another gentleman on board , were tolerable proficients in Dutch , they acted as interpreters between Mr. Lange and the officers , while some of the sailors , who understood Portuguese , conversed with such of the Raja 's attendants as spoke that language .
The chief part of the dinner was mutton , which the Raja having tasted , he begged an English sheep , and  the only one which they had left was given him : he then asked for a dog , and Mr. Banks gave him his grey-hound  and a spying-glass was presented to him , on Mr. Lange 's intimating that it would be acceptable .


The visitors now told Captain Cook , that there was great plenty of fowls , hogs , sheep and buffaloes on the island , numbers of which should be conveyed to the sea shore on the following day , that he might purchase what was necessary for the recovery of the sick , and for sea stores .
This welcome news gave great spirits to the company , and the bottle went so briskly round , that Mr. Lange and his companions became almost intoxicated : they had , however , the resolution to express a desire to depart , before they were quite drunk .
When they came upon deck , the marines were under arms to receive them  and the Raja intimating , that he should be glad to see them exercise , the Captain gave orders that he should be indulged , and three rounds were fired : he was equally pleased and surprized at their manoeuvres , and particularly charmed when they cocked their firelocks , exclaiming violently , ' `` that all the locks made but one click . '' '
This being ended , Messrs. Solander and Banks went ashore with the visitors , who were saluted at their departure with nine guns , which they returned with three cheers .


 When they came to the town , the English gentlemen tasted their palm wine , which was sweet , and not unpleasant : it is made of the fresh juice of the tree , without being fermented .
The houses of the natives consisted of nothing more than a floor of boards , over which was a roof of thatch , supported by pillars about four feet in height .


On the following day the Captain , attended by several gentlemen , went on shore to return the Raja 's visit  but their principal intention was , to buy the refreshments which had been mentioned the preceding day .
When they landed , they were chagrined to find , that the cattle had not been driven down to the beach .
They went on to the town , where they observed , that the house of assembly , and some few other houses which had been built by the Dutch East India Company , were distinguished from the houses of the natives by having a piece of wood , almost in the shape of cows horns , fixed at each end of the roof  and these they concluded were what the Portuguese sailor had imagined to be crosses , from the Indian having crossed his fingers when he was describing the town .


The Raja was at the house of assembly , surrounded by many of his principal subjects  and Mr. Lange also attended .
Captain Cook having informed them , that he had loaded his boat with goods , which he wished to exchange  for necessary refreshments , permission was given him to land his effects .
The Captain now endeavoured to make an agreement for the hogs , sheep , and buffaloes , which were to be paid for in cash  but this business was no sooner hinted at than Mr. Lange took his leave , having first told the Captain , that he must make his agreement with the natives  and adding , that he had received a letter from the Governor of Concordia , in Timor , the contents of which should be disclosed at his return .


As they had now no fresh provisions on board , the gentlemen were unwilling to return to the ship before they had dined  they therefore requested the Raja 's permission to buy a small hog and some rice , and hoped he would order his people to dress the dinner .
To this the Raja very obligingly replied , that if the gentlemen had stomachs to eat of Indian cookery , he would have the honour of considering them as his guests .
A dinner being thus procured , the Captain sent off the boat to bring liquors from the ship .


Late in the afternoon the company sat down on mats , which had been spread for them on the floor , having been first conducted to a servant , who had a vessel made of the leaves of the fan-palm , containing water to wash their hands , in which the Indian assisted them .
Having waited some time for the Raja , they enquired the reason of his absence , and were informed ,  that the person who gave the entertainment never partook of it  but that the Raja was ready to come and taste of what was provided , if the gentlemen entertained any idea that the meat was unwholesome : having assured the natives , that they did not harbour any such suspicion , they began their dinner , which consisted of pork and rice , very excellent of their kinds , served up in thirty-six dishes , and three earthen bowls filled with a kind of broth , in which the pork had been boiled : the spoons were formed of leaves , but were so small , that the hunger of the guests would scarcely allow them patience to use them .


When dinner was ended , the Captain invited the Raja to drink wine with him  but this he declined , saying , that the man who entertained company should never get drunk with his guests , and that the only certain way to avoid drunkenness , was to refrain from tasting the liquor .
The gentlemen left the remains of their dinner to their servants and the boat 's crew , who not being able to eat it all , the Raja 's female servants , who came to take away the utensils , insisted that they should take with them all that remained .


When the bottle had circulated some time , Captain Cook began to enquire after the cattle that were promised to be driven down to the beach  when Mr. Lange informed him , that in the letter which he had received from the  Governor of Concordia , instructions were given , that if the ship should touch at the island , and be in want of provisions , she should be supplied  but that he was not to permit her to remain longer than was absolutely necessary : that no presents were to be made to the natives of low rank , nor even left with their superiors to be divided among them after the ship had sailed : but , he added , that any trifling civilities received from the Indians , might be acknowledged by a present of beads , or other articles of very small value .
It is a very probable conjecture , that the whole of this story was of Mr. Lange 's own manufacture , and solely calculated to draw all the presents of any value into his own pocket .


Soon after this the Captain was informed , that some sheep had been driven down to the beach  but had been conveyed away before the men could get money from the ship to pay for them  and that not a single hog or buffaloe had been driven down : but that a small number of fowls , and a quantity of the palm-syrup had been bought .
Heartily vexed to be thus disappointed of the chief articles which were wanted , the Captain remonstrated with Mr. Lange , who told him , that if he and his officers had gone to the spot , they might have purchased any thing they pleased  but that the Indians imagined , the seamen would impose on them with counterfeit money .


 This story was no more credited than the former  but not to lose more time in a case of such urgency , the Captain instantly repaired to the beach  but there were no cattle to be bought .
During his absence Lange informed Mr. Banks , that the Indians were offended , that the seamen had not offered gold for what they had to sell , and that no other metal would purchase their commodities : but Mr. Banks , disdaining to hold farther conversation with a man who had been guilty of such repeated subterfuges , left him abruptly .
Some hours before this , the Raja had assigned a much more probable reason for the cattle not being brought to the beach , saying , that the buffaloes were too far up the country to be driven thither in the time .
In the evening the gentlemen returned to the ship , not a little displeased at their disappointment .


On the 20th the Captain and doctor Solander went again on shore , and while the latter proceeded to the town in search of Lange , the Captain staid on the beach , with a view to buy cattle .
At this place was an old man , who had been distinguished by the name of the prime minister , because he appeared to be invested with considerable authority  and the Captain now presented him with a spying-glass , in order to make a friend of him .
At present there was nothing brought for sale but a small buffaloe , for which five guineas were demanded .
Tho '  the Captain knew that this was double its value , yet he bid three guineas , as he was willing to begin dealing at any rate : the person who had it to sell said , he could not take the money till the Raja had been informed what was offered  on which a man was sent to him , who soon came back with a massage , that five guineas would be the lowest price : this the Captain refused to give  on which a second messenger was dispatched , who staying a long time , Captain Cook was anxiously expecting his return , when he saw Dr. Solander coming towards the beach , escorted by more than a hundred persons , some of whom had lances in their hands , and the rest were armed with muskets .
When the Doctor arrived at the marketing-place , he informed the Captain , that Lange had interpreted to him a message from the Raja , the substance of which was , that the natives were averse to all traffick with the English , because they would not give above half the real worth of the things which were offered for sale  and that all trading whatever should be prohibited after that day .


A native of Timor , whose parents were Portuguese , came down with this party , and delivered to the Captain what was pretended to be the order of the Raja , and which was in substance the same as what Lange had told Dr. Solander  but it was afterwards discovered , that this man was a confederate of Lange 's , in the scheme of extortion .
The English gentlemen  had at the same time no boubt , but that the supposed order of the Raja was a contrivance of these men  and while they were debating how they should act in this critical conjuncture , anxious to bring the affair to a speedy issue , the Portuguese began to drive away such of the natives as had brought palm-syrup and fowls to sell , and others who were now bringing sheep and buffaloes to the market .


Just at this juncture Captain Cook happening to look at the old man who had been distinguished by the name of prime minister , imagined that he saw in his features a disapprobation of the present proceedings  and , willing to improve the advantage , he grasped the Indian 's hand , and gave him an old broad sword .
This well-timed present produced all the good effects that could be wished : the prime minister was enraptured at so honourable a mark of distinction , and , brandishing his sword over the head of the impertinent Portuguese , he made both him , and a man who commanded the party , sit down behind him on the ground .
The whole business was now accomplished : the natives , eager to supply whatever was wanted , brought their cattle in for sale , and the market was soon stocked .
For the first two buffaloes Captain Cook gave ten guineas  but he afterwards purchased them by way of exchange , giving a musket for each  and at this rate he might have bought any number he thought proper .
 There seems to be no doubt but that Lange had a profit out of the first two that were sold , and that his reason for having said that the natives would take nothing but gold for their cattle , was , that he might the more easily share in the produce .
Captain Cook purchased of the natives of this island some hundred gallons of palm-syrup , a small quantity of garlick , a large number of eggs , some limes and cocoa-nuts , thirty dozen of fowls , three hogs , six sheep , and nine buffaloes .


Having at length obtained these necessary refreshments , Captain Cook prepared for sailing from this place  but before we attend him on his voyage , it may be proper to give a description of the island , with an account of its produce , and the customs and manners of its inhabitants .


The island of SAVU is situated in 10 degrees 35 minutes south latitude , and 237 degrees 30 minutes west longitude , and has hitherto been very little known , or very imperfectly described .
Its length is between twenty and thirty miles  but its breadth could not be ascertained by Captain Cook , who saw only the north side of it .
The harbour in which the ship lay was called Seba , from a district of the country so denominated  and there are two other bays on different parts of the island .
At the time the Endeavour lay there it was near the end of the dry season , when it had not rained for almost  seven months , nor was there a running stream of fresh water to be seen , and the natives were supplied only by small springs , situated at a distance up the country : yet even in this dry season the appearance of the island was enchanting beyond description .
Near the coast the land is level , and well clothed with the palm , called Arecas , and cocoa-nut trees : farther off the ground rises in the most gradual ascent , and is covered with fan palm trees even to the tops of the hills , so as to present a regular grove to the eye .
The rains in this country cease in March or April , and fall again in October or November : and these rains produce abundance of indico , millet , and maize , which grow beneath the noblest trees in the universe .


Besides these articles , the island produces tobacco , cotton , betle , tamarinds , limes , oranges , mangoes , Guinea corn , rice , callevances , and water melons .
A trifling quantity of cinnamon was seen , and some European herbs , such as garlic , fennel , cellery and marjoram : besides which , there are fruits of various kinds , and particularly the blimbi , which has a sharp taste , and is said to be a very fine pickle , but it is not eaten raw  its length is from three to four inches , it is nearly as thick as a man 's thumb , of an oval form , covered with a very thin skin of a light green , and contains a number of seeds ranged in the shape of a star .


 Several buffaloes were seen on this island , which were almost as large as an ox  and from a pair of enormous horns of this animal which Mr. Banks saw , it was conjectured , that some of them were much larger  yet they did not weigh more than half as much as an ox of the same apparent size , having lost the greater part of their flesh through the late dry weather  the meat however was juicy , and of a delicate flavour .
The horns of these animals bend backwards , they have no dewlaps , nor scarce any hair on their skins , and their ears are remarkably large .
The other tame animals on the island are dogs , cats , pigeons , fowls , hogs , goats , sheep , asses and horses .


Few of the horses are above twelve hands high , yet they are full of mettle , and pace naturally in an expeditious manner : the natives ride them with a halter only .
The hogs of this country , are fed on the husks of rice , and palm-syrup mixed with water , and are remarkably fine and fat .
The sheep are not unlike a goat , and are therefore called cabritos  their ears , which are long , hang down under their horns  their noses are arched , and their bodies are covered with hair .
The fowls are of the game kind , and though they are rather large , the hen lays a very small egg .
The sea-coast furnishes the inhabitants with turtle , but not in any great abundance .


 The natives of the island of Savu are rather below the middle stature  their hair is black and strait , and persons of all ranks , as well those that are exposed to the weather , as those that are not , have one general complexion , which is the dark brown .
The men are well formed and sprightly , and their features differ much from each other : the women , on the contrary , have all one set of features , and are very short and broad built .


The men have silver pincers hanging by strings round their necks , with which they pluck out the hair of their beards  and both men and women root out the hair that grows under the arms : the hair of the womens heads is tied in a club behind , while that of the men is fastened by a comb to the top of the head : the men wear a kind of turban on the head , formed of muslin , cotton , or even silk handkerchiefs  but the heads of the women have no covering .


The dress of the men consists of two pieces of cotton cloth , one of which is bound round the middle , and the lower edge of it being drawn pretty tight between the legs , the upper edge is left loose , so as to form a kind of pocket , in which they carry their knives and other things : the other piece being passed under the former , on the back of the wearer , the ends of it are carried over the shoulders , and tucked into the pocket before .
The women draw the upper edge of the piece round the waist tight , while  the lower edge , dropping to the knees , makes a kind of petticoat : the other piece of cloth is fastened across the breast , and under the arms .
This cloth , which is manufactured by the natives , is died blue while in the yarn  and , as it is of various shades , its look when it comes to be worn is very beautiful .


The ornaments of the natives of Savu are very numerous , and consist of rings , beads worn round the neck and on the wrists , and chains of plaited gold wire , likewise worn round the neck : these things were worn by both sexes  but the women had likewise girdles of beads round their waists , which helped to keep up the petticoat .
Many of the boys wore brass wire passed several times round the arms , above the elbow : and some of the men , who were said to be the sons of the Rajas , wore rings of ivory , above an inch thick , and two inches broad , on the same part of the arm .
One man possessed a silver-headed cane , supposed to have been a present from the Dutch East India Company , as their mark was engraven on the silver .
The Raja , and the principal officer of his houshold , were commonly habited in night gowns of ordinary chintz  but one time , when Captain Cook waited on the Raja , he was dressed in a black stuff robe .


Most of the men had their names marked on their arms , and the women a black ornament just under the bend of the elbow , impressed so  that it could not be rubbed out .
On enquiry it was found , that this practice had been common among the Indians long before they were visited by any Europeans  and it was said , that the necks and breasts of the inhabitants of the adjacent islands were marked with circles .


It could not be certainly known how these black marks were impressed  but the following extract from M. Bossu 's account of some Indians who dwell on the banks of the Akanza , a river in North America , will afford a very probable conjecture how the operation is performed .
- ' `` The Akanzas ( says this writer ) have adopted me , and , as a mark of my privilege , have imprinted the figure of a roe-buck upon my thigh , which was done in this manner : an Indian having burnt some straw , diluted the ashes with water , and , with this mixture , drew the figure upon my skin  he then retraced it by pricking the lines with needles , so as at every juncture just to draw the blood , and the blood mixing with the ashes of the straw , forms a figure which can never be effaced . '' '


The houses on the island of Savu are of different lengths , from twenty feet to four hundred , according to the rank of the inhabitant , and are fixed on posts about four or five feet from the ground .
The houses are generally divided into three rooms of equal size , the center room being set apart for the use of the women   and sometimes smaller rooms are enclosed from the sides of the building , the whole of which is thatched with the leaves of the palm-tree .


The natives eat of all the tame animals which the island produces , but they prefer the hog to all the rest  next to hogs flesh they admire that of the horse , to which succeeds the Buffalo , and then the poultry  and they like the flesh of cats and dogs much better than that of goats and sheep .
Fish is not eaten but by the poorer people , nor even by them , but when some business demands their attendance near the sea-coast  and then each man has a small casting net , which he wears tied round his body when he has not occasion to use it .


The fan-palm is the most remarkable , and most useful tree that grows on the island , its uses being equally great and various : soon after the buds put forth the natives cut them , and tying under them little baskets formed of the leaves of the tree , a liquor drops into them , which has the taste of a light wine , and is the common liquor of all the inhabitants .
The men climb the trees twice a day to bring down this liquor  but as a great deal more is thus obtained than can be consumed by drinking , a part of the remainder is made into coarse sugar , very excellent of its kind  and the rest is boiled in earthen pots , till it is reduced to a syrup , resembling treacle , but of a much finer flavour  and with this syrup the natives fatten  their hogs and dogs .
The leaves of the tree are applied to the various uses of making tobacco-pipes , umbrellas , cups , baskets , and the thatching of houses .
The fruit of this tree is nearly of the size of a full grown turnip  but the natives are not fond of it , nor do they suffer much of it to come to perfection , as they wound the blossoms for the sake of the liquor that distils from them  the kernels of the fruit must be eaten before it is ripe , otherwise they are so hard , that the teeth will not penetrate them .


As wood for firing is very scarce on the island , the natives , by the following method , make a very little of it answer the ends of cookery and distillation .
A hollow is dug under ground , in a direct line , about two yards long , with a hole at each end , one of which is large and the other small  the fire is put in at the largest hole , while the smaller one serves for a draught .
Circular holes are made through the earth , which covers this cavity  and on these holes are set earthen pots , which being large in the middle , and smaller towards the bottom , the fire acts upon a considerable part of their surface .
These pots contain , most commonly , about eight or nine gallons each , and they are kept continually boiling , with a very trifling quantity of fuel , such as a palm-leaf , or a dry stalk  in this  manner all their victuals are boiled , as well as their syrup and sugar .


Both the men and women chew betle and areca , mixed with a sort of lime , composed of shells and coral stones  and as they frequently add tobacco to the other ingredients , and acquire this disgustful practice almost in their infancy , there is not a sweet breath , or a sound set of teeth in the whole island .
They sometimes smoke tobacco , and the women , particularly , swallow the smoke .
Their pipes are made of the palm-leaf , about the size of a goose quill , and half a foot long , in one end of which they put the tobacco designed for smoking .


The island consists of five divisions , each of which has a Raja , or chief Governor , of its own .
These divisions are called TIMO , MASSARA , REGEEUA , LAAI , and SEBA .
It was on this last division that our English adventurers went on shore : the Raja of which was between thirty and forty years of age , and remarkable for his corpulency .
He governs his people with the most absolute authority , but takes on him very little of the parade , or pomp of royalty .
The prime minister , who has been heretofore mentioned , appeared to be invested with great power , and almost wholly to direct the actions of the Raja  yet , such were the abilities and integrity of this man , that the people universally adored him .
When any dispute happens among  the natives , it is instantly settled by the Raja and his counsellors , in the most equitable and satisfactory manner .


The history of this island depends chiefly on the authority of Mr. Lange , the Dutch factor , who informed Captain Cook , that it was able to raise seven thousand three hundred fighting men , on the shortest notice .
These are armed with lances , spears , muskets , targets , and pole-axes , which last are not unlike a wood-bill , only that they are much heavier , and have strait edges .
The natives are so expert in the use of their lances , that they will throw them with such force and exactness , as to pierce a man through the heart at the distance of sixty or seventy yards .
Notwithstanding this skill and disposition for war , it is said , that the Rajas have lived in the most perfect harmony for several ages .


While Captain Cook was on the island he saw a great gun before the town-house , and some swivels and pateraroes  but the great gun , which was almost consumed by rust , lay with the touch-hole to the ground , and the swivels and pateraroes were not in their carriages .
In the town-house were a number of spears and targets , of as many different sizes as there were weapons  and with these the natives were armed when they came down with Dr. Solander , with a view to influence the market .
The insides of the muskets were almost destroyed by rust , though  their outsides were kept clean and bright : the men had very little , if any , powder or ball in their cartridge-boxes  but a piece of paper was put into each hole , as if they had been properly furnished .
It has been already mentioned , that they marched in the most irregular manner  and each man brought with him a little tobacco , a fowl , or some other trifle , for sale .


The inhabitants of Savu are divided into five ranks  the Rajas , the land-owners , manufacturers , labourers , and slaves .
The land-owners are respected in proportion to the extent of their lands , and the number of their slaves , which last are bought and sold with the estates to which they belong  but when a slave is bought separately , a fat hog is the price of the purchase .
Though a man may sell his slave in this manner , or convey him with his lands , yet his power over him extends no farther , for he must not even strike him without the Raja 's permission .
The estates of these land-owners are of very different extent  for some of them possess not above five slaves , and some five hundred .
When a man of rank goes abroad , one of his slaves follows him , with a silver hilted sword or hanger , ornamented with horse hair tassels  while another is furnished with a little bag , containing tobacco , betle , areca , and lime  and even the Rajas themselves take no farther state upon them .


 The natives of Savu entertain a veneration for antiquity , superior , perhaps , to that of any other people in the world .
Their principal boast is a long line of venerable ancestors : the houses that have been well tenanted for successive generations are held in the highest esteem  and even the stones , which are worn smooth by having been sat upon for ages , become valuable from that very circumstance : the man whose progenitors have bequeathed him any of these stones , or whose opulence has enabled him to purchase them , causes them to be ranged round his habitation , for his servants and slaves to sit upon .


In the chief town of each district the Raja causes a huge stone to be set up , as a monument of his reign .
Thirteen such stones were seen in the province of Seba , and the remains of many others , that have suffered greatly by the wasting hand of time .
These stones are all placed on the top of a hill , and some of them are so enormously large , that it is impossible to conceive by what contrivance they could have been placed in such a situation , nor could any information in this respect be obtained from the natives .
From these monuments it is evident , that the island has been regularly governed for a series of ages past .


On the death of a Raja , proclamation is made that all his subjects shall hold a solemn festival  on which they proceed to the hill where these  stones are erected , and feast for several weeks or months , killing every animal that can be found , to furnish out the treat , which is daily served upon the monumental stones .
When the whole stock is exhausted , they are compelled to a severe fast  and when it happens that the feast ends in the dry season , when they can not get vegetables to eat , they have no other subsistance than the palm syrup and water , till the few animals that escape the general massacre have bred a sufficient number for a fresh supply  except indeed that the adjacent districts may afford some relief .
The natives of Savu have an instrument with which they clear the cotton of its seeds , which is only about seven inches in height , and fourteen in length  but is constructed on common mechanical principles .
They have likewise a machine  with which they spin by hand , in the same manner as the women of England did , before the use of spinning-wheels was known .
The yarn they make is dyed as before-mentioned , and they were once observed to be dying some girdles for the women , of a deep red colour .


The natives in general are robust and healthy , and had the appearance of being long-lived .
The small-pox has found its way to this island , and is as much dreaded as the pestilence : when this disorder attacks any person , he is carried to some spot at a great distance from any house , where his food is conveyed to him by means  of a long stick , for no one will venture very near the invalid , who is thus left to take his chance of life or death .


The island of Savu having been visited by the Portuguese almost at their first sailing into this part of the world , they established a settlement upon it  but in a little time they were succeeded by the Dutch , who , though they did not formally possess themselves of the island , sent a number of trading vessels to establish a commerce with the natives .
It is thought that the Dutch purchases are chiefly confined to provisions for the supply of the Spice Islands , the inhabitants of which , cultivating almost every spot of ground for the spice trade , breed but a small number of cattle .
A few years ago the Dutch East India Company made an agreement with the several Rajas of the island , by which it was covenanted , that a quantity of rice , maize , and calevances should be annually furnished to the Dutch , who , in return , supply the Rajas with arrack , cutlery wares , linen , silk , and some other things .
Small vessels , each of which is manned by ten Indians , are sent from Timor , to bring away the maize and calevances , and a ship which brings the articles which are furnished by the Dutch , receives the rice on board once a year : and there being three bays on the coast , this vessel anchors in each of them in its turn .
The Rajas accept the Dutch articles of commerce as a present  and  they and their chief attendants drink incessantly of the arrack till it is all gone .
In the agreement abovementioned , the Rajas stipulated , that a Dutch resident should be constantly on the island , to observe that their part of the contract was fulfilled .


The Dutch having thus concluded the treaty , sent Mr. Lange to act as their resident , and a kind of assistant to him , whose father was a Portuguese , and his mother a native of Timor , with one Frederick Craig , whose father was a Dutchman , and his mother an Indian .
Once every two months Lange is attended by fifty slaves on horse-back , and in this state visits each of the Rajas , and , if the crops are ripe , orders vessels to convey them immediately to Timor , so that they are not even housed on the island .
It is a part of Lange 's business to persuade the land-owners to plant , if he sees that there has been any neglect on their part .
He constantly takes with him a quantity of arrack , by the help of which he does not fail of making advantageous bargains with the Rajas .


Lange had been on this island ten years , during all which time he had not seen a white person , except those who came annually in the Dutch ship to carry off the rice .
He is married to an Indian woman , a native of the island of Timor , and he lives in the same manner as the inhabitants of Savu , whose language he speaks better than any other  like them too he  sits on the ground and chews betle , and has so perfectly adopted their manners , that he is an absolute Indian , except in dress and complexion .


Mr. Craig is employed in teaching the children to write and read , and instructing them in the principles of Christianity .
The new testament , a catechism , and some other small books of divinity , have been printed in the language of Savu , and the adjacent islands , at the expence of the Dutch .
Mr. Craig said , there were six hundred Christians in the township of Seba only  yet there is neither a church nor a clergyman throughout the island .


The religion of such of the natives of Savu as have not embraced Christianity , is a singular sort of Paganism , as every man makes choice of his own God , and worships him according to his own fancy  so that the variety of Deities , and the methods of adoring them , are scarcely fewer than the number of inhabitants .
The morality of these people , however , is of the purest kind .
A robbery is scarce ever committed , and a murder is never perpetrated .
When any disputes arise between the natives , they instantly submit the point in debate to the decision of the Raja , and rest perfectly satisfied with his determination .
No man is permitted to marry more than one wife  yet a violation of the marriage bed , or even the crime of simple fornication , is almost wholly unknown among them .
Happy people !
the purity of whose  morals renders them fit objects of the envy and emulation of the Christian world .


Of the islands in the neighbourhood of Savu , the principal is Timor , which is annually visited by the Dutch residents on the other islands , in order to make up their accounts .
Some of the towns on the north side of Timor are in the hands of the Portuguese  but the Dutch possess the far greater proportion of the island , on which they have built a fort , and erected several store-houses .


There are three small islands , called the Solars , which produce a great abundance of the various necessaries of life , that are carried in small vessels to the Dutch settlement on the island of Timor : these islands are low and flat , and one of them has a commodious harbour .


Westward from the Solars lies the little island of Ende , which is yet in the possession of the Portuguese , who have built a considerable town , called Larntuca , on the north-east point of it  and close to the town is an harbour where ships may ride in safety .


The island of Rotte has a Dutch resident on it , whose business is similar to that of Mr. Lange on the island of Savu : Rotte produces , besides such things as are common to the other islands , a considerable quantity of sugar , which is now made to a great degree of perfection .


There is likewise a small island lying to the westward of Savu , the chief produce of which  is areca-nuts , of which the Dutch receive , in exchange for European commodities , as large a quantity every year as will load two vessels .


A French ship was wrecked on the coast of Timor , about two years before the Endeavour was in these seas .
She had been lodged on the rock several days , when the wind tore her to pieces in an instant , and the Captain , with the greater number of the seamen , were drowned  but a Lieutenant and about eighty men having reached the shore , travelled across the country of Concordia , where their immediate necessities were relieved , after which they returned to the wreck , in company with some Dutch and Indians , who assisted them in recovering all their chests of bullion , some of their guns , and other effects : which being done , they returned to Concordia , where they remained several weeks  but , in this interval , death made such havock among them , that not above half their number remained to be sent to their native country , which was done as soon as a vessel could be fitted out for that purpose .


To close the account of the island of Savu , it now only remains to give the following specimen of the language of its inhabitants .


Specimen of the language of the inhabitants of the island of SAVU .


Momonne , A man .
Monama , An old man .
 Monecopai , A boy .
Anawuneekee , A child .
Madda , The eyes .
Otaile , The temples .
Sivanga , The nose .
Tangarei , The forehead .
Cavarànga , The cheeks .
Vaio , The tongue .
Lacoco , The neck .
Dùloo , The belly .
Pagàvee , The chin .
Càmaccoò The arms .
Wùlalea , The hand .
Roòtoo , The knees .
Baibo , The legs .
Duneeala , The feet .
Row , Hair .
Gnaca , A dog .
Vavee , A hog .
Doomba , A sheep .
Maio , A cat .
Doleela , A bird .
Dulloo , An egg .
Nudoo , A fish .
Unjoo , A turtle .
Vooe , Fruit .
Nai , Tobacco .
Yirroo , Oranges .
Arre , Rice .
Lodo , The sun .
Wurroo , The moon .
 Booro , Bread .
Cova , A coat .
Capa , A ship .
Sooree , Red .
Bulla , Black .
Sao-lodo , The morning .
Munda-lodo , The evening .
O , Yes .
Gnaa , To eat .
Neenawei , To drink .
Ta eaco , To walk .
Ta rai , To run .
Ta mudje , To talk .
Ta bunge , To sneeze .
Isse , or usse .
One .
Rooe , Two .
Tulloo , Three .
Uppa , Four .
Lumee , Five .
Unna , Six .
Petoo , Seven .
Aroo , Eight .
Saio , Nine .
Singooroo , Ten .
Singooroo isse , Eleven .
The Endeavour sailed from the island of Savu on the 21st of September 1770 , and bent her course westward .
In the afternoon of this day a little flat island was discovered in 10 degrees 47 minutes south latitude , and 238 degrees  28 minutes west longitude , which has not been laid down in any of the charts hitherto published .


When the ship got clear of the several islands before-mentioned , there was a continual swell of the sea from the south , which Captain Cook imputed to the position of the coast of New South Wales , imagining it to have determined the sea in that direction .


On the 28th they steered north-west the whole day , in order to get sight of the land of Java  and on the 30th the Captain received from most of the officers and seamen their respective journals of the voyage , regarding which he advised them to observe the most profound secrecy : and he likewise possessed himself of the log-book .
In the night following there was a storm of thunder and lightning , when the land of Java was seen to the eastward by the brightness of the lightning .
In the morning they had sight of the island of Cracatoa , which is singular for the height of its peak .


Early in the morning of the 2d of October , when the ship was in fifteen fathom water , she was close in with the coast of Java , along which they now steered .
As their faithful Indian friend Tupia was at this time extremely ill , the Captain dispatched a boat to the shore , to endeavour to bring him some refreshing fruits , and likewise to procure grass for the buffaloes .
As soon as the boat landed , the inhabitants assisted  the seamen in cutting grass for the cattle , and in gathering a bunch of plantains and a few cocoa-nuts , for which they received a shilling , and which were brought off to the ship .
The land of Java had a delightful appearance , being every where well covered with trees .


This day they had sight of two Dutch vessels , and an officer being dispatched to one of them , to learn any interesting intelligence , he brought word back , that the Swallow had reached the English channel in safety , that disputes were carried to great lengths at home , in regard to the ministers , and in America , on account of taxes  and that the Russians , Poles and Turks , were embroiled in a war .
The officer said , that the vessels were Dutch East Indiamen , bound from Batavia , one of them to the coast of Malabar , and the other to the island of Ceylon : he said likewise , that there was a kind of packet-boat , which he had been told , was appointed to carry letters from such Dutch ships as came thither to Batavia  but Captain Cook conjectured , that her business was to examine such ships as should pass the Streight .


The ship had now been some hours at anchor  but a light breeze springing up in the evening , they got under sail , and continued to proceed at a slow rate during the night .
On the 3d , in the morning , the Dutch packet-boat was observed sailing after the Endeavour  but she bore away again on the shifting of the wind .


 This changing of the wind obliging the Endeavour to come to an anchor , the master of the packet-boat came along-side of her , in one of the boats belonging to the country , bringing with him rice-birds , monkies , parrots , parroquets , ducks , fowls , turtle , and other things , with an intention to sell them  but as the stock which had been laid in at Savu was not yet consumed , and he had fixed very high prices on his commodities , very few articles were purchased : the Captain , however , bought twenty or thirty fowls , and a small turtle .


The master of the packet-boat had brought with him two books , in one of which he wrote down the Captain 's name , and that of the vessel , to be sent to the Governor and Council of the Indies  and in the other book he requested that some of the gentlemen on board would likewise write down the name of the vessel , with that of the Captain  where she came from , to what port she was bound , and as many particulars respecting any person on board , as themselves might think necessary , to satisfy the curiosity of any of their friends who might afterwards enquire for them .
In this book many Portuguese vessels , and some of other countries had made entries of the same kind  but a Lieutenant on board the Endeavour having written the ship 's name , added only the words , ' `` from Europe  '' ' yet of this the master of the packet took no other notice , than by saying he was  content with whatever they were pleased to write , which was intended solely for the information of their friends .


They now weighed the anchor , and made repeated attempts to sail  but the wind not blowing so as to enable the vessel to stem the current , she lay to till the morning of the 5th , when a Dutch officer came along-side the ship , and sent a printed paper to the Captain , in exceeding bad English  the contents of which were to enquire ,


1st , The ship 's name , and to what nation she belonged ?


2d , Whether she came from Europe , or any other place ?


3d .
What place she had last departed from ?


4th , To what place she was bound ?


5th , How many ships belonging to the Dutch Company had been seen at the last coast the ship had left , and their names ?


6th , If one or more of these ships had been in company with the Endeavour , and was or were sailed for that , or any other place ?


7th , If , during the voyage , any thing remarkable had happened , or been seen ?


8th , If any ships had been seen and hailed at sea , or in the streight of Sunda , and what they were ?


9th , If they had brought any other news worthy of attention , from the place whence the ship took her last departure  or if any thing  else had happened during the voyage , that was worth communicating .


These questions were undersigned , ' `` Batavia , in the castle .
By order of the Governor General , and the Counsellors of India , J. BRANDER BUNGL , Sec . '' '


It was observed , that the officer had many Other papers of the same kind , in French , Dutch , and other languages .
Captain Cook did not think proper to answer any of the above questions , except the first and the fourth .
When the Dutchman observed this , he said , that answers to the other questions were not material  yet he seemed to contradict what he had just advanced , by saying , that he must dispatch the paper to Batavia , and that it would reach that place by noon on the following day .
This incident is particularly recorded , because the examining the ships which sail through the streight , is said to be a piece of Dutch policy of very modern date .


As soon as the Dutch officer was departed , the anchor was weighed  but the ship was obliged to come to an anchor again in about four hours , for want of wind to enable her properly to stem the current .
A breeze soon springing up , the vessel held on her way till the following morning , when she was again obliged to be brought to an anchor , owing to the rapidity of the current .
This day and the next they weighed the anchor , and brought to several  times .
On the 8th they weighed , and stood clear of a large ledge of rocks , which they had been near running fowl of the preceding day  but before noon this day they were once more obliged to anchor near a little island , which was not laid down in any chart that they had on board .
It is one of those that bear the name of the Milles isles  and Messrs. Solander and Banks having landed upon it , collected a few plants , and shot a bat which was a yard long , being measured from the extreme points of the wings  they also killed a few plovers , in all respects like the English golden plover .
On this island , the breadth of which does not exceed one hundred yards , and the length five hundred , they found a house , and a little spot of cultivated ground , and on it grew the Palma Christi , from which the West Indians make the castor oil .


In a little time after the gentlemen came back to the ship , some Malays came alongside , in a boat , bringing with them some pumpkins , dried fish , and turtle for sale : one of the turtles , which weighed near one hundred and fifty pounds , they sold for a dollar , and seemed to expect the same piece of money for their pumpkins  but it being hinted to them that a dollar was too much , they desired that one might be cut , and a piece of it given to them : but this not being complied with , they at length sold six and twenty pumpkins for a  Portuguese petacka .
When they departed they intimated their wishes , that this transaction might not be mentioned at Batavia .


The ship now made but slow way till night , when the land breeze springing up , they sailed to the east south-east , and on the following day , by the assistance of the sea breeze , they came to an anchor in the road of Batavia .
At this place they found a number of large Dutch vessels , the Harcourt East Indiaman from England , which had lost her passage to China , and two ships belonging to the private trade of our India Company .


The Endeavour had no sooner anchored , than a ship was observed , with a broad pendant flying , from which a boat was dispatched to demand the name of the vessel , with that of the Commander , c. To these enquiries Captain Cook gave such answers as he thought proper , and the officer who commanded the boat departed .
This gentleman and the crew that attended him were so worn down by the unhealthiness of the climate , that they appeared but as the shadows of men  which the Captain deemed a sad presage of the havock which death would soon make among his crew  yet at present there was not one invalid on board , except the Indian Tupia : the English tars , whose want of foresight and defiance of danger is notorious , seemed not to entertain the least idea that even sickness would attack a set of men so hardened  as they were by different climates  but alas ?
they had very little idea of the fatal contagion which impregnates the air of Batavia .


The Captain now dispatched an officer to the Governor of the town , to apologize for the Endeavour 's not saluting  for he had but three guns proper for the purpose , except swivels , and he was apprehensive that they would not be heard .


The ship was at this time so leaky , that she made about nine inches water an hour , on the average  part of her false keel was gone  one of her pumps was totally useless , and the rest so very much decayed , that they could not last long .
The officers and seamen concurring in opinion , that the ship could not safely put to sea again in this condition , the Captain resolved to solicit permission to heave her down  but as he had learnt that this must be done in writing , he drew up a petition , and had it translated into Dutch .


On Wednesday the 10th of October 1770 , the Captain and the rest of the gentlemen went on shore , and applied to the only English gentleman then resident at Batavia : this gentleman , whose name was Leith , received his countrymen in the politest manner , and entertained them at dinner with great hospitality .
Mr. Leith informed them , that a public hotel was kept in the town , by order of the Dutch government , at which place merchants and other  strangers were obliged to lodge , and that the landlord of the hotel was bound to find them warehouses for their goods , on the condition of his receiving ten shillings on every hundred pounds of their value  but that as the Endeavour was a King 's ship , her officers , and the other gentlemen , might reside where they thought proper , only asking leave of the Governor , whose permission would be instantly obtained .
Mr. Leith added , that they might live cheaper in this way than at the hotel , if they had any person who spoke the Malay tongue , on whom they could rely in the purchase of their provisions : but as there was no such person among the whole ship 's crew , the gentlemen immediately bespoke beds at the hotel .


In the afternoon Captain Cook attended the Governor General , who received him politely , and told him to wait on the Council the next morning , when his petition should be laid before them , and every thing he solicited would be readily granted .


Late in the evening of this day there happened a most terrible storm of thunder and lightning , accompanied with very heavy rain .
In this storm the main-mast of a Dutch East Indiaman was split and carried away by the deck  and the main-top-mast and top-gallant-mast were torn to pieces  it is supposed , that the lightning was attracted by an iron spindle at the main-top-gallant-mast-head .
The Endeavour ,  which was at a small distance from the Dutch ship , escaped without damage , owing , in Captain Cook 's opinion , to an electrical chain , which conducted the lightning over the side of the vessel : and he recommends chains of the same kind to be taken on board all ships , to whatever part of the globe they may be bound .
A centinel on board the Endeavour , who was charging his musket at the time of the storm , had it shaken out of his hand , and the rammer-rod was broken in pieces : the electrical chain looked like a stream of fire , and the ship sustained a very violent shock .


On Tuesday the 11th Captain Cook waited on the gentlemen of the Council , who informed him , that all his requests should be complied with .
In the interim , the other gentlemen made a contract with the master of the hotel , to furnish them and their friends with as much tea , coffee , punch and tobacco , as they might have occasion for , and to keep them a separate table , for nine shillings a day , English money  but on the condition that every person who should visit them , should pay at the rate of four shillings and six pence for his dinner , and the same sum for his supper and bed , if he chose to sleep at the hotel : they were likewise to pay for every servant that attended them fifteen pence a day .


It was soon discovered , that they had been vilely imposed on  for these charges were above  twice as much as would have been demanded at a private house .
They appeared to live elegantly , but at the same time were but ill supplied .
Their dinner consisted of fifteen dishes , all served up at once  and their supper of thirteen  but of these , nine or ten were of the most ordinary , because the cheapest , poultry , that could be purchased  and even some of these dishes were observed to be served up four times successively : a duck , which was hot at dinner , was brought cold in the evening  the next day it appeared in the form of a fricasee , and was converted to forced meat at night .
Our countrymen , however , only fared as others had done before them : it was the constant custom of the conscientious master of the hotel , to treat all his guests in the same manner , when they first took up their residence at his house : if they took no notice of it , all was well , for the landlord had the better customers of them  if they remonstrated against such treatment , the table was better and better supplied from time to time , till , in the end , they had no reason to complain .


The gentlemen having found fault with their fare , were afterwards supplied in a better manner  but Mr. Banks , not approving the conduct of the master of the hotel , he hired lodgings for himself and his attendants at the adjoining house , for which he agreed to pay five and forty shillings a month : but here Mr.  Banks was disappointed in the hope he had formed of living retired  for scarce a Dutch man had occasion to pass by the house , but he ran in without ceremony , to enquire what was to be sold  for it is a very unusual thing at Batavia , for strangers who are in a private capacity not to be furnished with some articles of traffick .
In this house no person was permitted to sleep , as a guest of Mr. Banks , without his bed being separately paid for .
It is the universal custom here to hire a carriage  and Mr. Banks engaged two , for which he paid eighteen shillings a day : these carriages are open chaises , in which two persons sit commodiously , and are driven by a man sitting on a kind of coach-box .


Their Indian friend Tupia had been till this time on board very dangerously ill , yet persisted to refuse every medicine that was offered him : Mr. Banks now sent for him to his house , in the hope that he might recover his health .
While he was in the ship , and even after he was put into the boat , he was indisposed , and low spirited , in the utmost degree  but the moment he came into the town , his whole frame appeared as if re-animated .
The houses , the carriages , the people , and many other objects , were totally new to him  and astonishment took possession of his features at sights so wonderful : but if Tupia was astonished at the scene , his boy , Tayota , was perfectly enraptured , dancing along the streets in an extacy of joy , and  examining the several objects as they presented themselves , with the most earnest inquisitiveness and curiosity .


Of all the circumstances which engaged the attention of Tupia , nothing struck him so much as the vast variety of dresses worn by the inhabitants of Batavia : he enquired the reason of what appeared so very extraordinary in his eyes , and being informed that the people were of a variety of nations , and that all were dressed according to the mode of their own country , he requested permission to follow the fashion : this request being readily complied with , a person was dispatched to the ship for some South Sea cloth , with which he soon clothed himself in the dress of the inhabitants of Otaheite .
The people of Batavia , who had seen an Indian , brought thither in M. Bougainville 's ship , named Otourou , mistook Tupia for that man , and frequently enquired if he was not the same .


As the necessary repairs of the ship were to be made at Ourust , Captain Cook obtained an order to the superintendant of that island to receive her  and he wrote to the Secretary of the Admiralty , an account of the safe arrival of the Endeavour in the road of Batavia , and dispatched his letter by a Dutch ship that was bound to Europe .


Captain Cook now applied to several persons to advance him money sufficient to defray the  expence of repairing the ship  but not one could be found in the whole town who had the requisite sum in his possession , or , if he had , was willing to advance it : he therefore made application to the Governor , who issued his orders , that he should be supplied out of the treasury of the Dutch East India Company .


Early in the morning of the 18th of October 1770 , the ship got under sail , and proceeded to Ourust  and , in a day or two , the crew began to take out her stores , which were deposited in the wharf on Cooper 's Island  but this business was rendered unavoidably tedious , by several Dutch ships being at the same wharf , taking in their ladings of pepper .


After little more than a week spent at Batavia , the ill effects of the climate began to be severely felt .
Dr. Solander and Mr. Banks were indisposed with fevers  Mr. Banks 's two servants were exceedingly ill  the Indian boy , Tayota , had an inflammation on his lungs  and Tupia was so bad , that his life was despaired of .
Their indisposition was attributed partly to the heat of the climate , and partly to the swampy situation of the town , and the stench of the dirty canals with which it abounds .


By the 26th of the month , very few of the crew were well enough to do duty  and on this day a tent was erected for their reception .
Tupia now requested to be conveyed to the ship , in the hope of breathing a purer air than in the  town  but his request could not be granted , as she was unrigged , and preparations were making to lay her down , in order that she might undergo a thorough repair : on the 28th , however , Mr. Banks attended Tupia to Cooper 's Island , where a tent was pitched for him , in such a situation , where he was alternately refreshed by the land and sea breezes  and the poor creature was extremely thankful that he was so agreeably lodged .
By this time the Surgeon was so ill , that he could not leave his bed  Mr. Banks 's fever was greatly encreased , and Dr. Solander grew worse every day .


The ship was at length laid down on the 5th of November , on which day died Mr. Monkhouse , the Surgeon , whose loss was the more severely felt , as he was a man of skill in his profession , and fell a sacrifice to the pestiferous air of the country , at a time when his abilities were most wanted .
Dr. Solander , though extremely ill , had strength sufficient to see his remains committed to the ground , but Mr. Banks was unable even to pay this last sad duty to a worthy man .


Death now advanced with hasty strides among our adventrous countrymen , who were equally unable to resist his power , or shun his embraces .
Several Malay servants were engaged , to wait on those who were ill  but these people were so remiss in their duty , that it was no uncommon thing for the sick man to leave his bed in  search of his attendant .
The Indian boy , Tayota , paid the debt of Nature on the 9th of this month , and Tupia , whose tender affection for the youth can be equalled only by that of a parent for a favourite child , was so shocked at the loss , that it was evident he could not long survive him .


By this time the ship 's bottom having been carefully surveyed , our countrymen had ample reason to be grateful to that Providence , by which they had been preserved during a passage of several hundred miles , through the most dangerous seas on the face of the globe : for the sheathing in several places was torn from the vessel , the false keel was in a great measure gone , the main keel was damaged in many parts , several of the planks had received great injury , and a part of three of them was thinner than the sole of a shoe !


Messis .
Solander and Banks were now so worn down by their disorders , that the Physician , who attended them , recommended the country air , as the only thing that could possibly restore them to the wishes of their friends .
In consequence of this advice , they hired a country-house of the master of the hotel , who engaged to supply them with slaves , and to furnish their table  but as they had sufficiently experienced the worthlessness of these slaves , they bought two Malay women , who soon became excellent nurses , from that tenderness of Nature which  does so much honour to the sex .
While these gentlemen were taking measures for the recovery of their health , poor Tupia fell a victim to the ravages of his disorder , and to his grief for the deceased Tayota .
When Tayota was first seized with the fatal disorder , he seemed sensible of his approaching end , and frequently said to those that were about him , Tyau mate see , ' `` My friends , I am dying : '' ' he was very tractable , and took any medicines that were offered to him  they were both buried in the island of Edam .


Captain Cook bestows great encomiums on the officers and workmen of the Marine Yard at Ourust , by whose skill and diligence the bottom of the ship was perfectly repaired by the 14th of the month  and he warmly recommends the heaving down with two masts , instead of one , which , he says , is undoubtedly the more expeditious , as well as the safer method .


By this time not above ten men , out of the whole ship 's crew , were able to do duty , and these were employed in getting the water and stores aboard , and in putting up the rigging : the water was purchased at Batavia , at the rate of one hundred and fifty gallons for six shillings and eight pence .


Captain Cook was now taken ill , and Mr. Sporing and a sailor , who attended Messrs. Banks and Solander at their country-house , were  attacked with intermitting fevers  but those two gentlemen grew something better , though their recovery was very slow .
Their house was situated on the borders of a rivulet , which , of course , assisted the circulation of the air  and it was likewise open to the sea breeze .


In the night of the 25th there fell such a shower of rain , for the space of four hours , as even our voyagers had scarce ever remembered .
The water poured through every part of Mr. Banks 's house  and the lower apartments admitted a stream sufficient to have turned a mill .
As this gentleman was now greatly restored in health , he went to Batavia the following day , and was surprized to see , that the inhabitants had hung out their bedding to dry .
The westerly monsoon set in about the 26th of this month : it blows in the day-time from the north , or north-west , and from the south-west during the night : previous to this , there had been violent thunder , and hard showers of rain for several nights .


The musquitos and gnats , whose company had been sufficiently disagreeable in the dry weather , now began to swarm in immense numbers , rising from the puddles of water like bees from a hive : they were extremely troublesome during the night , but the pain arising from their sting , though very severe , seldom lasted more than half an hour  and in the day-time they seldom made their attacks .
The frogs kept a perpetual  croaking in the ditches  a certain sign that the wet season was commenced , and that daily rain might be expected .


The ship being repaired , the sick people being received on board her , and the greater part of her water and stores taken in , she sailed from Ourust on the 8th of December , and anchored in the road of Batavia .
Twelve days were employed in receiving the remainder of her provisions , water , and other necessaries  though this business would have been done in much less time , but that some of the crew died , and the majority of the survivors were so ill , as to be unable to give their assistance .


On the 24th Captain Cook took leave of the Governor , and some other gentlemen , who had distinguished themselves by the civilities they shewed him : but at this juncture an incident occurred , that might have produced consequences by no means desirable .
A sailor belonging to one of the Dutch ships in the road of Batavia , deserted from that vessel , and entered himself on board the Endeavour .
The Captain of the Dutch ship having made application to the Governor , claiming the delinquent as a subject of the States General , the Governor issued his order for the restoration of the man : Captain Cook had but just taken a formal leave of the Governor when this order was delivered to him  and he said , that the man should be given up , if it appeared that he  was a Dutchman .
As the Captain was at this time on shore , and did not intend going on board till the following day , he gave the Dutch officer a note to the Lieutenant , who commanded on board the Endeavour , to deliver the deserter on the condition above-mentioned .
On the following day the Dutchman waited on Captain Cook , informing him , that the Lieutenant had absolutely refused to give up the seaman , saying , that he was an Irishman , and of course a subject of his Britannick Majesty .
Captain Cook applauded the conduct of his officer , and added , that it could not be expected , that he should deliver up an English subject .
The Dutch officer then said , he was authorized , by the Governor , to demand the fugitive as a Danish subject , adding , that his name was entered in the ship 's books , as having been born at Elsineur : to this Captain Cook very properly replied , that the Governor must have been mistaken , when he gave this order for delivering the deserter , who had his option whether he would serve the Dutch or the English  but that in compliment to the Governor , the man should be given up , as a favour , if he appeared to be a Dane  but that , in this case , he should by no means be demanded as a right , and that he would certainly keep him , if he appeared to be a subject of the crown of Great Britain .
The Dutchman now took his leave , and he had not been long gone , before the  Captain received a letter from the commanding officer on board , containing full proof , that the man was an English subject .
This letter the Captain carried to the Shebander , desiring him to lay it before the Governor , and to inform him , that the man should not be delivered up on any terms whatever .
This spirited conduct on the part of Captain Cook had the proper effect  and thus the matter ended .


This day the Captain , attended by Mr. Banks and the other gentlemen who had hitherto lived in the town , repaired on board the ship , which got under sail the next morning .
The Endeavour was saluted by the fort , and by the Elgin East Indiaman , which then lay in the road  but soon after these compliments were returned , the sea breeze setting in , they were obliged to come to an anchor .
Since the arrival of the ship in Batavia road , every person belonging to her had been ill , except the sail-maker , who was more than seventy years old , yet this man got drunk every day while they remained there .
The Endeavour buried seven of her people at Batavia , viz .
Tupia and his boy , three of the sailors , the servant of Mr. Green , the astronomer , and the Surgeon : and at the time of the vessel 's sailing , forty of the crew were sick , and the rest so enfeebled by their late illness , as to be scarcely able to do their duty .


The town of Batavia is situated in six degrees ten minutes south latitude , and one hundred  and six degrees fifty minutes east longitude , from the meridian of Greenwich .
It is built on the bank of a large bay , something more than twenty miles from the Streight of Sunda , on the north side of the island of Java , in low boggy ground .
Several small rivers , which rise forty miles up the country , in the mountains of Blaeuwen Berg , discharge themselves into the sea at this place , having first intersected the town in different directions .
There are wide canals of nearly stagnated water in almost every street , and as the banks of these canals are planted with rows of trees , the effect is very agreeable  but these trees and canals combine to render the air pestilential .
Some of the rivers are navigable , more than thirty miles up the country  and , indeed , the Dutch appear to have chosen this spot to build the town on , for the sake of water-carriage , in which convenience Batavia exceeds every place in the world , except the towns of Holland .


A writer , who published an account of this place near fifty years ago , makes the number of houses at that time 4760 , viz .
1242 Dutch houses , and 1200 Chinese houses , within the walls  and 1066 Dutch houses , and 1240 Chinese houses , without the walls , with twelve houses for the vending of arrack .
The streets of Batavia being wide , and the houses large , it stands on more ground than any other place that has only an equal number of houses .


 In dry weather a most horrid stench arises from the canals , and taint the air to a great degree  and when the rains have so swelled the canals that they overflow their banks , the ground-floors of the houses , in the lower parts of the town , are filled with stinking water , that leaves behind it dirt and slime in amazing quantities .
The running streams are sometimes as offensive as the stagnant canals  for the bodies of dead animals are frequently lodged on the shallow parts , where they are left to putrify , and corrupt the air , except a flood happens to carry them away : this was the case with a dead buffaloe , while the crew of the Endeavour were there , which lay stinking on the shoal of a river , in one of the chief streets , for several days .


They sometimes clean the canals  but this business is performed in such a manner , as scarcely to make them less a nuisance than before  for the bottom being cleared of its black mud , it is left on the side of the canal till it is hard enough to be taken away in boats  and as there are no houses for necessary retirement in the whole town , the filth is thrown into the canals regularly once a day , so that this mud is a compound of every thing that can be imagined disagreeable and offensive .


There is a new church in Batavia , which is a fine piece of building , and the dome of it may be seen far off at sea .
This church is illuminated  by chandeliers of the most superb workmanship , and has a fine organ : most of the other public buildings are ancient , constructed in an ill taste , and give a very compleat idea of Dutch clumsiness .


Their method of building their houses seems to have been taught them by the climate .
On the ground-floor there is no room but a large hall , a corner of which is parted off for the transaction of business : the hall has two doors , which are commonly left open , and are opposite each other , so that the air passes freely through the room , in the middle of which there is a court , which at once encreases the draft of air , and affords light to the hall : the stairs , which are at one corner , lead to large and lofty apartments above .
The female slaves are not permitted to sit in any place , but in the alcove formed by the court  and this is the usual dining-place of the family .


The town of Batavia is encompassed by a river of shallow water , the stream of which is very rapid : within this river , which is of different widths in various places , is an old stone ?
wall , much decayed in many places , and within the wall is a canal that is likewise much wider in some places than in others : so that there is no entering the gates of the town but by crossing two draw-bridges : there are but few guns on the ramparts , and no persons are permitted to walk there .
There is a kind of citadel , or  castle , in the north-east corner of the town , the walls of which are both broader and higher than they are in other parts  it is furnished with a number of large guns , which command the landing-place .


Apartments are provided in this castle for the Governor General and all the Council  and in case of a siege they have orders to retire thither .


In the castle are likewise a number of storehouses , in which the effects belonging to the Company are deposited .
The Company have in their possession large quantities of gun-powder , which is kept in different places , that the lightning may not destroy the whole stock at once  a great number of cannon are likewise laid up within the castle .


There are a great many forts built in different parts of the country , several miles distant from Batavia , most probably erected to keep the natives in submission  and besides these there are a number of fortified houses , each mounting eight guns , and these are so stationed as to command the canals , and the roads on their borders .
There are houses of this kind in many parts of the island of Java , and the other islands in its neighbourhood , of which the Dutch have obtained the possession The Chinese having rebelled against the Dutch in the year 1740 , all their principal houses were demolished by the cannon of one of these fortified  houses , which is in the town of Batavia , where , likewise , there are a few more of them .


The roads of this country are simply banks between the ditches and canals  and the fortified houses being erected among the morasses near these roads , nothing is easier than to destroy them , and consequently to prevent an enemy from bringing any heavy artillery near the town  if , indeed , an enemy be only hindered a short time in his approach , he is effectually ruined , for the climate will preclude the necessity of the use of weapons for his destruction .
Before the Endeavour had been a week at Batavia they began to feel the ill effects of the climate  half the crew were rendered incapable of doing their duty before the expiration of a month .
They were informed , that it was a very uncommon thing for fifty soldiers , out of a hundred brought from Europe , to be alive at the expiration of the first year , and that of the fifty who might happen to be alive , not ten of those would be in sound health , and , probably , not less than half of them in the hospital .
One would imagine that no man of common sense would be tempted to reside at Batavia , for any consideration of interest whatever  yet such is the insatiable thirst of gold , that men will voluntarily r [ ... ] sk the loss of life to obtain it , and even ensure the loss of that health , without which the most splendid fortune can not be enjoyed .


 All the white inhabitants of Batavia are soldiers , and , at the expiration of five years service , they are bound to hold themselves in readiness to go to war , if they should be wanted  and the younger inhabitants are frequently mustered  but as they are neither trained nor exercised after the expiration of the five years abovementioned , the little they have learnt is soon forgotten , and they would probably , if called to action , make as good soldiers as the militia of the city of London .
The Portuguese , who live in this country , employ themselves very much in shooting the deer , and the wild hog , whence they become excellent marksmen .
The Indians , of whatever nation , who reside here , and have either been made free , or were born so , are called Mardykers  but neither these nor the Chinese are acquainted with the use of fire-arms  yet , as these people are said to possess great personal bravery , much might be expected from their expert use of their daggers , swords and lances .


From what has been above written it is evident , that it would be a laborious task to attack Batavia by land  and it is not possible to make any attack at all by sea , for the shallowness of the water would hinder any vessels from advancing within cannon shot of the walls  indeed there is barely depth of water for a ship 's longboat , excepting a narrow channel , called the river , which extends about half a mile into the  harbour , and is strongly bounded on each side with piers  the other end of it being directly under the fire of the castle  while its communication with the canals of the town is prevented by a boom of wood , which is every night shut precisely at six o'clock , and never opened till the following day .


Any number of ships may anchor in the harbour of Batavia , the ground of which is so excellent , that the anchor will never quit its hold .
This harbour is sometimes dangerous for boats , when the sea breeze blows fresh  but , upon the whole , it is deemed the best and most commodious in all India .


There are a considerable number of islands which are situated round the outside of the harbour , and all these are in the possession of the Dutch , who destine them to different purposes .
On one of them , which is called Purmerent , an hospital is erected , on account of the air being purer than it is at Batavia .
In a second , the name of which is Kuyper , are erected a number of warehouses , in which are lodged the rice , and some other commodities , the property of the Dutch East India Company : at this island those ships belonging to different nations , which are to be repaired at Ourust , unlade their cargoes  and it was here that the stores of the Falmouth Man of War were laid up , when she was condemned , on her return from Manilla  her warrant officers , of whom  mention has been made in the account of Captain Wallis 's voyage , were sent to Europe in Dutch ships , about half a year before the Endeavour anchored in the road of Batavia .
A third of these islands , the name of which is Edam , is appropriated to the reception of such offenders , whose crimes are not deemed worthy of death , and hither they are transported from Holland , and detained from five to forty years , in proportion to the turpitude of the offence they have committed  the making of ropes is the principal part of the employment of these criminals .


The environs of Batavia have a very pleasing appearance , and would , in almost any other country , be an enviable situation .
Gardens and houses occupy the country for several miles  but the gardens are so covered with trees , that the advantage of the land having been cleared of the wood that originally covered it , is almost wholly lost  while these gardens , and the fields adjacent to them are surrounded by ditches which yield not the most fragrant smell  and the bogs and morasses in the adjacent fields are still more offensive .


For the space of more than thirty miles beyond the town the land is totally flat , except in two places , on one of which the Governor 's country-seat is built , and on the other they hold a large market  but neither of these places are higher than ten yards from the level of the  plain .
At near forty miles from the town , the land rises into hills , and the air is purified in a great degree  to this distance the invalids are sent by their physicians , when every other prospect of their recovery has failed , and the experiment succeeds in almost every instance , for the sick are soon restored to health  but they no sooner return to the town , than their former disorders visit them .
On these hills the most opulent of the inhabitants have countryseats , to which they pay an annual visit .
Those who reside constantly on the hills enjoy an almost perpetual flow of health  and most of the vegetables of Europe grow as freely here as in their native ground : the strawberry , in particular , flourishes greatly , which is a sufficient proof of the coolness of the air .


The rice of this country is very plentiful , and , in order to be brought to perfection , should lie under water more than half the time it is growing : but they have a sort which grows on the sides of the hills , which is unknown in the West India Islands  this sort is planted when the wet season commences , and the crop is gathered in soon after the rains are over .


The maize which grows near Batavia is gathered while young , and toasted in the ear .
The land likewise produces carrots , pigeonpea , celery , parsley , asparagus , onions , rhadishes , cabbages , lettuces , cucumbers , lentiles , kidney-beans , hysop , sage , rue , Chinese white  rhadishes , which , when boiled , are not unlike a parsnip , common potatoes , sweet potatoes , wet and dry yams , millet , and the egg plant , the fruit of which , when broiled and eaten with salt and pepper , is most exquisite food .


Amazing quantities of sugar are produced here , and , while the quantity is beyond comparison greater , the care of cultivation is inconceivably less than in the West India Islands .
White sugar is retailed at two-pence and two-pence half-penny the pound , and arrack is made of the molasses , with a small addition of rice , and the wine of the cocoa-nut .
The inhabitants likewise raise a little indigo for their own use , but do not export it .


The fruits of this country are near forty in number , and of some of these there are several kinds .
Pine apples grow in such abundance that they may be purchased , at the first hand , for the value of an English farthing  and they bought some very large ones for a half-penny a piece at the fruit shops , though they are excellent eating , it is imagined they are reared to equal perfection in the hot-houses of England .
They grow so luxuriantly , that seven or eight suckers have been seen adhering to one stem .


The sweet oranges of Batavia are good of their kind , but very dear at particular times , The shaddocks of the West Indies , called here Pumplemoeses , have an agreeable flavour .
Lemons were very scarce when the Endeavour  lay in the harbour , but limes were altogether as plentiful , and sold at little more than two-pence the score .
There are many kinds of oranges and lemons , but none of them excellent .
Of mangos there are plenty , but their taste is far inferior to that of the melting-peach of England , to which they have been compared .
It is said that the heat , and extreme dampness of the climate , does not agree with them  yet there are many different kinds of them .
Of bananes there is an amazing variety of sorts , some of which , being boiled , are eaten as bread , while others are fried in batter , and are a nutrimental food : but , of the numerous sorts of this fruit , three only are fit to be eaten : one , indeed , is remarkable , because it is filled with seeds , which are not common to the rest .
Grapes are sold from one shilling to eighteen-pence the pound , though they are far from being good .


The tamarinds are equally cheap and plentiful  but as the method of preserving them , which is in salt , renders them a mere black lump , they are equally nauseating to the sight and the palate .
The water melons are excellent of their kind , and are produced in great abundance .
The pumpkins are boiled as turneps , and eaten with salt and pepper .
This fruit is admirably adapted to the use of voyagers , as it will keep many months without care , and makes an excellent pye , when mixed with the juice of lemons and sugar .
The papaws of this country  are superior to turneps , if the cores are extracted , after paring them when they are green .
The guava has a strong smell , and a taste not less disagreeable : it is probable , that the guava of the West Indies , which many writers have distinguished by their praises , has a very different flavour .
The sweet sop is a fruit that has but little flavour : it abounds in large kernels , from which the pulp is sucked .
The taste of the custard-apple very much resembles the dish from which its name is taken .
The cashew-apple produces a nut which is not unknown in England  but the fruit has such an astringent quality , that the Batavians seldom eat of it : the nut grows on the top of the apple .
The cocoa-nut is plentiful in this country , and there are several kinds of this fruit , the best of which is very red between the shell and the skin .
The jamboo is a fruit that has but little taste , but is of a cooling nature : it is considerably less than a common sized apple , and those that have grown to their full size are always the best  its shape is oval , and its colour the deep red .
Of the jambu-eyer , there are two kinds , the white and the red : they are shaped like a bell , and are something bigger than a cherry : they have no kind of taste but that of a watery acid .
The jambu-eyer mauwar smells like a rose , and its taste is not unlike that of conserve of roses .
The mangostan is of a dark red colour , and not larger than a small apple  to the bottom of  this fruit adhere several little leaves of the blossom , while on its top are a number of triangles combined in a circle : it contains several kernels ranged in a circular form , within which is the pulp , a fruit of most exquisite taste : it is equally nutritious and agreeable , and is constantly given to persons who are troubled with inflammatory or putrid fevers .
The sweet orange of this country is likewise given in the same disorders .
The pomgranate of these parts differs in nothing from that generally well known in England .
The durion takes its name from the word dure , which , in the language of the country , means prickle  and this name is well adapted to the fruit , the shell of which is covered with sharp points shaped like a sugar-loaf : its contents are nuts , not much smaller than chesnuts , which are surrounded with a kind of juice resembling cream  and of this the inhabitants eat with great avidity : the smell of this fruit is more like that of onions , than any other European vegetable , and its taste is like that of onions , sugar , and cream intermixed : the inside of the durion , when ripe , is parted , lengthways , into several divisions .
The nanca is a fruit which smells like garlic and apples mixed together : its size , in the gardens of Batavia , is not greater than that of a middling sized pumpkin , and its shape is nearly the same : it is covered with prickles of an angular form .
They were informed that , at a  place called Madura , it has been known to grow to such an enormous size , as to require the strength of two men to carry it .
The champada is in all respects like the nanca , only that it is not so large .
The rambutan contains a fruit , within which is a stone , that is , perhaps , the finest acid in the world : this fruit is not unlike a chesnut with its husk on  and it is covered with small prickles of a dark red colour , and so soft as to yield to the slightest impression .
The jambolan resembles a damascen , both in colour and size  and is of a very astringent nature .
The boa bidarra tastes like an apple , but is likewise extremely astringent  its size is that of a gooseberry , its form round , and its colour yellow .
The nam nam makes an excellent fritter , if fried in batter , but is not esteemed when raw : the rind of it is rough , its length is about three inches , and its shape not unlike that of a kidney .
The catappa and the canare are two species of nuts , the kernels of which are like those of an almond , but so hard , that it is almost impossible to break them .
The madja contains a pulp of a sharp taste , which is eaten with sugar : this fruit is covered with a very hard shell .
The suntal is a fruit scarcely fit to be eaten , being at once astringent , acid , and of a most unpleasant taste , yet it is publickly sold in the streets of Batavia : it contains a number of kernels , which are inclosed in a thick skin .
The salack is nearly of the size of  a small golden pippin , and contains a few kernels of a yellow colour , the taste of which is not unlike that of a strawberry  but the covering of this fruit is very remarkable , as it consists of a number of scales resembling those of a fish .
The cherrema and the blimbing are two sour fruits , exceedingly well adapted to make sour sauce and pickles .
The blimbing besse is another fruit of the same kind , but considerably sweeter .


Of the fruits not in season when Captain Cook was at Batavia , he mentions the boa atap , and the kimkit , which he saw preserved in sugar  and there are several other sorts which the Batavians are fond of , but they are never eaten by strangers , among those are the moringa , the guilindina , the kellor , and the soccum , this last has the appearance of the bread-fruit , which is produced in the islands of the South Seas , but it is not near so good  tho ' the tree on which it grows is also exactly like the bread fruit tree .


The fruit sold at the common shops is generally too ripe  but in a street , named Passar Pissang , which is inhabited by Chinese fruiterers only , that which is very good may be obtained , but at a price greatly exceeding its value .
The gardens of gentlemen near the town furnish these Chinese fruit-sellers  but the other dealers are supplied from a greater distance up the country , where the inhabitants live by the  cultivation of large tracts of land , for the sole purpose of raising fruit .


It is astonishing to conceive what quantities of fruit are eaten at Batavia .
Two large markets are held weekly , at distant places , for the accommodation of persons residing in different parts of the country  and at these markets the fruit-sellers of the town meet the gardeners , and purchase their goods at very low rates : but as the markets are held on Mondays and Saturdays , those who wish to be supplied with what is fresh , in the middle of the week , must apply to the Chinese dealers above-mentioned , as the heat of the climate renders it unfit for eating in a few days .
At these markets it is common to see ' `` fifty or sixty cart-loads of the finest pine-apples carelessly tumbled together . '' '


The Batavians , and the natives of other parts of the island of Java , strew an immense number of flowers about their houses , and are almost always burning aromatic woods and gums  which , it is imagined , is done by way of purifying the air  the stench that arises from the canals and ditches being exceeding nauseous and disagreeable .


The sweet scented flowers of this country are very numerous , many of which being totally unknown in England , we shall mention a few of the most remarkable .
- The combang tonquin , and combang caracnassi , are very fragrant  flowers , but unlike any thing seen in the gardens of Europe : they are very small , seem to be of the dog 's - bane kind , and both in smell and shape are very much alike .
- The cananga looks more like a bunch of leaves than a flower  its smell is singular , but extremely pleasant .
- The bonja tanjong is of a pale yellow colour , and delightful smell : it is about an inch and a half in circumference , and consists of pointed leaves , which give it the form of a star .
- The champa [ ... ] a smells somewhat like a jonquil , and is otherwise not unlike it , though rather of a deeper yellow : this flower is produced by a large tree .


The [ ... ] dal malam is only mentioned on account of its name , which implies , ' `` the intriguer of the night . '' '
This flower has no kind of smell during the day-time , but on the approach of the night its sweets begin to disclose themselves , and its fragrancy is almost unequalled : in other respects it is the same as the tuberose of England .


All the above-mentioned kinds of flowers being made into nosegays of various shapes , or strung on a piece of thread , are carried through the streets of an evening for sale .
The gardens of the gentlemen afford many flowers besides those above-mentioned , but they do not grow in numbers sufficient to be offered to sale .


This country produces a plant , called pandang , the leaves of which being shred small ,  and mixed with a variety of flowers , the natives , both men and women , fill their clothes and hair with this fragrant mixture , which they likewise sprinkle on their beds , and sleep beneath a profusion of sweets  a single sheet of fine chintz being all the other covering of the bed .


Formerly the island of Java produced no kind of spices but pepper , and the quantity which the Dutch bring annually from thence is very considerable  but the quantity that is made use of in the country is very small , as the people there give the preference to Cayan pepper .
The inhabitants are extremely fond of nutmegs and cloves , but they bear too high a price to be much in use , as the trees which produce them are all become Dutch property .


Cloves are now grown no where but on the island of Amboina , and some little islands near it  the artful Hollanders having possessed themselves of all the trees , in consequence of several subsequent treaties of peace , with the several kings of the other islands  for at the conclusion of every war , the conquerors left the poor Indians still fewer trees , by way of punishment for their opposition , till , in the end , they have destroyed them all .


There are scarce any nutmegs , except on the island of Banda , where they originally grew  this island , however , produces a plenty , equal to the demand of all the world .
On the  coast of New Guinea there are a small number of nutmeg-trees .


The island of Java produces goats , sheep , hogs , buffaloes , and horses .
The horse , which is said to have been met with here when the country was originally discovered , is a small , but nimble animal , being seldom above thirteen hands high .
The horned cattle of this country are different from those of Europe : the flesh is extremely lean , but of a very fine grain .
Both the Chinese and the natives of the island feed on the buffaloe  but the Dutch will neither taste the flesh nor the milk , from a ridiculous idea , that they are productive of fevers .
The sheep are tough and ill-tasted  their skins are hairy , and they have long hanging-ears .
A few sheep from the Cape of Good Hope being at Batavia , Captain Cook bought some of them at the rate of a shilling a pound .


The hogs , especially those of the Chinese breed , are exquisitely fine food , but so extravagantly fat , that the lean is always sold separately .
The butchers , who are Chinese , have no kind of objection to taking off the fat , which they melt , and sell to their countrymen , who eat it with their rice : though these hogs are such fine food , yet the Dutch prefer the breed of Holland , which are consequently sold at extravagant rates .


 Figure 1 .
The illegible of Java  The Portuguese make a practice of shooting the wild hog , and deer of two kinds , with which the neighbourhood of Batavia abounds : these are all good eating , and are purchased at very moderate prices .
The goats of this country are as bad food as the sheep .
Dogs and cats abound on the island , and wild horses and other cattle are found on the mountains at a considerable distance from Batavia .


Few monkies are seen near the town , but there are many of them on the mountains and desart places , where also are a few rhinoceroses , and great numbers of tygers .


The quantity of fish taken here is astonishingly great , and all the kinds of them are fine food , except a few which are very scarce  yet such is the false pride of the inhabitants , that these few scarce sorts are sold at very high rates , while those that are good are sold for a mere trifle , nor are they eaten but by the slaves .
A gentleman with whom Captain Cook dined told him , he could have bought a finer dish of fish for a shilling , than what he had given ten for  but that he should have been the ridicule of all the politer people , if he had gone to so good a market .


The Dutch will not taste of the turtle which are taken here : Captain Cook acknowledges that they are fine eating , though not equal to those catched in the West Indies , even when they are dressed in London .
Mr. Banks shot a  lizard five feet in length , which was extremely well tasted : our adventurers were informed , that some of these animals had been seen , which were full as thick as the thigh of a man .


This country produces an abundance of poultry , as excellent of their kinds as those of England .
The turkies are immoderately dear , and the pigeons not much less so  but the geese , ducks , and fine large fowls are altogether as cheap .


The neighbourhood of Batavia produces snipes of two kinds , one of which was the same as the English : of the Portuguese , who appear to be the only dealers in wild fowl , any number of thrushes might have been purchased .
Our adventurers once , and once only , saw a wild duck in the fields , but never observed any of these birds exposed to sale  and , indeed , wild fowl in general are far from being plentiful at Batavia .
Captain Cook observes , as a singularity respecting the snipe , that he is to be met with in all the quarters of the globe , and is seen in a greater variety of places than any other of the whole feathered creation .


The liquors of the island of Java , are palm-wine and arrack  of the former they have three sorts , the first of which is drunk within a few hours after it is drawn from the tree , and almost in its original state , when it has a moderate sweetness : the second and third sorts are made by fermenting it , and putting various  herbs and roots into it : the first of these liquors will not occasion drunkenness , but the two latter will .
The arrack is so generally known , as not to demand any description .


The natives of Java profess the religion of Mahomet , and of course do not indulge in wine , at least publickly  but not to be exceeded in the vice of drunkenness by their christian neighbours , they are almost constantly chewing opium , which is well known to intoxicate in a high degree .


Exclusive of the Chinese , and the Indians of many different nations , who inhabit the town of Batavia , and the country in its neighbourhood , the inhabitants are , proportionably , a very small number  and even of these not a fifth part are Dutch , or descended from natives of Holland : the Portuguese are more in number than all the other Europeans .


The troops in the Dutch service are composed of the natives of almost all the kingdoms of Europe  but of these the Germans out-number all the others .
When a person of any country goes to reside at Batavia , it is necessary that he first enter as a soldier in the service of the Dutch East India Company , binding himself to serve five years , which being done , he applies to the Council for leave of absence , which being granted of course , he then engages in any business he thinks proper : thus the Dutch have always an army ready to be called forth on any  emergency .
No foreigner , of whatever nation , has any share in the management of public affairs , all places of power , trust and profit , being held by the Dutch .


Though the men of other countries are bound to the observation of the above-mentioned conditions , women , from any part of the globe , may reside and traffick at Batavia unmolested .
Captain Cook was informed that , at the time he was there , the whole place could not furnish fifty women who were natives of Europe , yet the town abounded with white women , who were descended from Europeans , who had settled there at different times , all the men having paid the debt of nature  for so it is , that the climate of Batavia destroys the men much faster than the women .
These women follow the delicate custom of chewing betel , after the example of the native Javanese , whose dress they imitate , and whose manners they copy , in all other respects .


Mercantile business is conducted at Batavia with the slightest trouble imaginable : when a merchant receives an order for goods of any kind , he communicates the contents of it to the Chinese , who are the universal manufacturers .
The Chinese Agent delivers the effects on board the ship , for which they are bespoke , and taking a receipt for them from the master of the vessel , he delivers it to the merchant , who pays the Chinese for the goods , and reserves a considerable  profit , without the least trouble , risk , or anxiety .
But when a merchant imports goods of any kind , he receives them himself , and lodges them in his own warehouses .
It may be wondered , that the Chinese do not ship the goods on their own account  but from this they are restricted , and compelled to sell them to the merchants only .


The inhabitants of Java distinguish the Portuguese by the name of Oranserane , that is , Nazareen men  but they use the general term of Caper , or Casir , respecting all who do not profess the religion of Mahomet  and in this they include the Portuguese .
But the Portuguese of Batavia are so only in name  for they have neither any connection with , or knowledge of , the kingdom of Portugal , and they have changed the religion of the church of Rome , for that of Luther .
With the manners of the Javanese , they are wholly familiarized , and they commonly speak their language , though they are able to converse in a corrupt kind of Portuguese .
They dress in the habit of the country , with a difference only in the manner of wearing their hair : their noses are more peaked , and their skin of a deeper cast than that of the natives .
Some of them are mechanics and artificers , others subsist by washing of linen , and the rest procure a maintenance by hunting .


The Indian inhabitants of Batavia , and the country in its neighbourhood , are not native Javanese ,  but are either born on the several islands from whence the Dutch bring their slaves , or the offspring of such as have been born on those islands : and these having been made free , either in their own persons , or in the persons of their ancestors , enjoy all the privileges of freemen .
They receive the general appellation of Oran [ ... ] m , which implies , ' `` Believers of the true faith . '' '


The various other Indian inhabitants of this country attach themselves each to the original [ ... ] of that , in which either themselves or th [ ... ] ir ancestors were born  keeping themselves apart from those of other nations , and practising both the virtues and vices peculiar to their own countries .
The cultivation of gardens , and the consequent sale of flowers and fruit , afford subsistence to great numbers of them : these are the people who raise the betel and areca , which being mixed with lime , and a substance which is called gambir , the produce of the Indian continent , is chewed by persons of all ranks , women as well as men : indeed some of the politer ladies make an addition of cardamum , and other aromatics , to take off the disagreeable smell with which the breath would be otherwise hunted .
Some of the Indians are very rich , keep a great number of slaves , and live , in all respects , according to the customs of their respective countries  while others are employed  to convey goods by water  and others again subsist by fishing .


The Oranslams feed principally on boiled rice , mixed with a small quantity of dried shrimps and other fish , which are imported from China , and a little of the flesh of buffaloes and chicken : they are fond of fruit , of which they eat large quantities  and with the slower of the rice they make several sorts of pastry .
They sometimes make very superb entertainments , after the fashion of their respective countries  bur , in general , they are a very temperate people : of wine they drink very little , if any , as the religion of Mahomet , which they profess , forbids the use of it .


When a marriage is to be solemnized among the Oranslams , all the gold and silver ornaments that can be procured , are borrowed to deck out the young couple , who on these occasions never fail to make the most splendid appearance .
Sumptuous entertainments are given by those who can afford them , which continue twelve or fourteen days , and frequently more , during all which time the women take care that the bridegroom shall not visit his wife privately , though the wedding takes place previous to the festival .


All these Indians , though they come from different countries , speak the Malay language , if it deserves that name .
On the island of Java there are two or three different dialects  and there is a language peculiar to every small  island  it is conjectured , that the Malay tongue is a corruption of the language of Malacca .


The hair of the people , which is black , without a single exception , grows in great abundance : yet the women make use of oils and other ingredients , to increase the quantity of it : they fasten it to the crown of the head with a bodkin , having first twisted it into a circle , round which circle they place an elegant wreath of flowers , so that the whole head-dress has the most beautiful appearence that imagination can form an idea of .


It is the universal custom , both with the men and women , to bathe in a river once every day , and sometimes oftener , which not only promotes health , but prevents that contraction of filth , which would be otherwise unavoidable in so hot a climate .


The teeth of the Oranslams have some particularities in them well worthy of notice .
With a kind of whetstone they rub the ends of them till they are quite flat and even  they then make a deep groove in the teeth of the upper jaw , in the centre between the bottom of each tooth and the gum , and horizontally with the latter  this groove is equal in depth to a quarter of the thickness of the teeth  yet none of these people have a rotten tooth , though , according to the dentists of England and France , such a thing must be unavoidable , as the tooth is pierced much deeper than  what we call the enamel .
The teeth of these people become very black by the chewing of betel , yet a slight washing will take off this blackness , and the teeth are then perfectly white  but they are very seldom washed , as the depth of the colour is very far from being thought disagreeable .


Almost every person has read or heard of the Mohawks  and these are the people who are so denominated , from a corruption of the word Amock , which will be well explained by the following story and observations .
To run a muck is to get drunk with opium , and then seizing some offensive weapon , to sally forth from the house , kill the person or persons supposed to have injured the Amock , and any other person that attempts to impede his passage , till he himself is taken prisoner , or killed on the spot .
- While Captain Cook was at Batavia , a person whose circumstances in life were independent becoming jealous of his brother , intoxicated himself with opium , and then murdered his brother , and two other men , who endeavoured to seize him .
This man , contrary to the usual custom , did not leave his own house , but made his resistance from within it  yet he had taken such a quantity of the opium , that he was totally delirious , which appeared from his attempting to fire three muskets , neither of which had been loaded , or even primed .


 During the time that Captain Cook was at Batavia , several instances of the like kind occurred , and he was informed by an officer , whose duty it was to take such offenders into custody , that hardly a week passed in the year in which he was not obliged to exercise his authority : the Captain was also told , that jealousy of the women is the usual reason of these poor creatures running a muck , and that the first object of their vengeance is always the person whom they suppose to have injured them .
The officer , whole business it is to apprehend these unhappy wretches , is furnished with a long pair of tongs , in order to take hold of them at such a distance from the point of their weapons , as to insure his personal safety .
When he takes one of them alive he is amply rewarded  but this is not often the case , as they are so desperate as not to be easily apprehended : when they are killed in the attempt to take them , the officer has only the customary gratification .
Those who are taken alive are broken on the wheel , as near as possible to the place where the first murder was perpetrated  and , as they are seldom apprehended without being previously wounded , the time of their execution is sooner or later , according to the opinions of the physicians , whether the wounds are , or are not mortal .


The Oranslams believe that the Devil is the author of sickness , and other misfortunes , on  which account they make an oblation of meat , money , and other things , to him , when they are either sick or in trouble .
When they dream successively for several nights , they have no doubt but that the Devil has enjoined the performance of some act , to discover which they torture their brains in vain , and then apply to the priest , who never fails to interpret the dream in a satisfactory manner .
In consequence of this interpretation , by which it appears that the Devil is in want of money and food , a quantity of each is placed in the leaves of the cocoa-nut tree , and being hung on the bough of a tree by the side of a river , is left till some passenger shall find , and take away the money , which is considered not so much an offering to the Devil , as a fine due for some crime committed  with regard to the food , they imagine that the Devil comes and sucks out the nutritious parts of it , without moving it out of its place .
From this part of the story it seems reasonable to conclude , that the priest , having previous knowledge where the oblation is to be made , takes the money , and leaves the victuals .


This instance of the superstition of these people may be thought very extraordinary  but the following will appear much more so .
They are possessed with an idea , that when one of their wives is brought to bed , a crocodile is born , as a brother to the infant  and they imagine that the midwife conveys the young  crocodile to an adjacent river , into which she puts it , with the utmost care and tenderness .
Those who suppose themselves honoured by the birth of this new relation , fail not to put food in the river for his subsistence  but this is the peculiar duty of the twin brother , who performs this service regularly , at fixed periods , during the whole course of his life  firmly believing at the same time , that sickness or death would be the consequence of an omission on his part .


In the islands of Boutou and Celebes the natives keep crocodiles in their families  and it is conjectured , that the strange idea of the twin crocodile was first conceived in one of those islands : it extends , however , to Java and Sumatra westward , and among the islands to the eastward as far as Ceram and Timor .
It is a matter of perfect astonishment , how even the most ignorant and credulous of the human race , should firmly believe an utter impossibility to occur daily  yet it is certain , that not one of the Indians whom Captain Cook questioned on the subject , entertained the least doubt about the matter .
The crocodiles supposed to be thus born are distinguished by the name of Sudaras , and our readers can not fail of being entertained w [ ... ] th the following story respecting them , which Mr. Banks heard from a young woman who was born at B [ ... ] nco [ ... ] , and having lived among the Eng [ ... ] sh at that place , had  learnt to speak as much of our language as was sufficient to make her story intelligible .


She said that , when her father was on his death-bed , he laid the strongest injunctions on her to feed a crocodile that was his Sudara  that he told her the name by which he might be called up , and the particular part of the river where she would find him .
Soon after the death of her father , she hastened to the river , and calling Radja Pouti ( which signifies white king ) the Sudara crocodile made his appearance , and she fed him with her own hands .
She described him as being more beautiful than crocodiles are in general , for he had a red nose , and spots on his body  his ears were adorned with rings , and his feet with ornaments of gold .
This story will appear the more extravagantly ridiculous , when it is recollected that crocodiles have not any ears .


A man whose mother was a native of the island of Java , and whose father was a Dutchman , was engaged in the service of Mr. Banks during his residence at Batavia .
This man told his master that several Dutchmen , and many Javanese , as well as himself , had seen such a crocodile as was described by the girl who told the preceding story , and that , like her 's , its feet were adorned with gold .
On Mr. Banks 's remarking the absurdity of these tales , and saying that crocodiles had not ears , he replied , that the Sudaras differed considerably  from other crocodiles  that they had ears , though he acknowledged they were small , that their tongues filled their mouths , and that on each foot they had five toes .


There are three tribes of Indians on the island of Batavia , who are called Boetons , Macassars , and Bougis .
These people are firm believers in the existence of the Sudara crocodiles  and they have a custom among them , which , however ridiculous in itself , seems to do honour to their filial and fraternal affections .
At fixed periods they assemble together , and having laden a large boat with various sorts of provisions , they launch her at a spot most likely to be frequented by crocodiles  here they row about , sometimes singing and sometimes weeping , while a variety of musical instruments are played on , till they get sight of a crocodile .
The moment this happens they throw tobacco , betel and victuals of several sorts , over the side of the boat , as a friendly offering to the Sudara crocodiles of their own country  imagining , that by this means they conciliate the affections and good will of their relations , whom they fail not to invoke during the whole of the ceremony .


The Chinese inhabitants of Batavia are , like those of their own country , some of the most industrious p [ ... ] ople on the face of the earth .
They act as embroiderers , dyers of cotton , taylors , carpenters , joiners , smiths , and makers  of slippers : some of them are shop-keepers , and deal largely in the manufactures of Europe and China .
A few of these people live within the walls of the town  but the majority of them take up their residence in a district , named Campang China , which is situated without the walls .
Those of the Chinese , who live in the country , either keep buffaloes and other cattle , the milk of which they sell daily at Batavia , or they procure a subsistence by the raising of rice and sugar canes , and the cultivation of gardens .


Captain Cook observes , that the danger of being hanged for any crime being excepted , there is nothing , however infamous , which a Chinese will refuse to do for gain  and in this opinion he concurs with every preceding writer  so that these people must have taken no small pains to establish their reputation for knavery .
They labour with unwearied diligence , but the moment they have compleated their work they sit down to dice , cards , or some other of the very numerous games which they are expert at  and they follow their sports with such eagerness , that the business of eating and sleeping is frequently suspended .


The cloaths of the Chinese , whether rich or poor , are singularly clean and decent .
Their behaviour is civil even to humility .
They are such temperate eaters , that gluttony is unknown among them  but as their religion does not command them to refrain from any particular  food , they eat a variety of things which are denied to those Indians who profess the Mahometan faith .
Exclusive of vegetables and fish of various kinds , their principal food consists of dogs , cats , lizards , frogs , serpents of several sorts , and hogs .


The Chinese have purchased of the Dutch , at a very large expence , several hundred acres of land in the vicinity of Batavia , for the interment of their dead  for it is a rule , from which they never depart , not to open a grave which has once received the body of one of their countrymen : and hence arises an enormous expence in the purchase of land , which greatly distresses the living , to pay an imaginary honour to the dead .
In order to preserve the body as long as possible from decay , the coffin consists of a piece of solid timber hollowed out : and this being covered with a kind of mortar several inches thick , petrifies in the ground till it is as hard as a flint .
The funeral is attended by the near relations of the deceased , and by a train of women , who are paid for making lamentations .


In these expensive customs , absurd as they are , the Chinese are equalled by the rest of their Batavian neighbours  for every person is buried with a degree of splendour proportioned to the rank he has held in life , and there is a positive law which enjoins the observance of this custom  in consequence of which it frequently  happens , that those who have not money sufficient to pay the just demands on them , are buried in a pompous manner , merely because they have lived elegantly .
In this case persons are employed to take an account of what the man died worth , and , when the funeral expences are defrayed , the surplus is divided among the creditors .


The various inhabitants of the island of Java , whether Dutch , Portuguese or Indians , are all waited on by slaves , whose number is proportioned to the circumstances of the master  but there are laws in force , that no native of the island shall serve as a slave .
These people , the number of which is very great , are bought at Sumatra , and the other eastern islands , at various prices , from ten to twenty pounds  but there have been instances of very beautiful girls being sold at above five times the common market price .
They are fed on boiled rice , and such fish as can be purchased at the lowest rates  a little of which satisfies them , nor indeed do they deserve even the little they eat , for they are idle and sluggish in the highest degree .


The negroes of Africa are purchased at a lower price than any other slaves , and indeed any price whatever exceeds their merit , for they are of the most obstinate dispositions , and thieves , without a single exception .
Those slaves which are purchased from the island of  Celebes are most intolerably lazy , and of so ferocious a disposition , that their employers run the hazard of their personal safety .
The island of Bali furnishes the most useful slaves  and the little island Nias , near Sumatra , supplies female slaves of exquisite beauty  but to these ill-fated women death is the almost certain consequence of even a short residence at Batavia .


The masters of any of these slaves may punish them in whatever way they chuse , so as not to deprive them of life  but when it happens that a slave dies of the punishment he has received , the master is tried , and commonly suffers as a murderer .
From this circumstance it is reasonable to suppose , that the masters are cautious how they beat the slaves with undue severity : it is not indeed very common for them to strike them at all , but they pay an officer , who is called the Marineu , for inflicting the punishment .
The Marineu having heard what is alledged against the delinquent , determines how many stripes he shall receive , and these are given by slaves , whose particular business it is to obey the commands of the Marineu : these strokes are laid on with rods made of rattans split very small .
For a severe whipping the Marineu receives a ducatoon , and a rixdollar for a slighter punishment .
The women slaves are whipped in the house of the master , but the men publickly in the streets .
In  order that these slaves may not be under too great temptations to steal , their masters are compelled to allow them seven pence half-penny weekly for pocket-money .


There is something singular in the subordination observed among the inhabitants of Batavia and the adjacent country .
The man who has been longest in the Dutch East India Company 's service is permitted to gild his coach , while others are allowed to ride in coaches differently painted , according to the length of their services , and others again ride in those that are quite plain .
In like manner the coachmen are dressed in liveries , that have a greater or less quantity of lace on them , or without any lace at all .


The lawyers of Batavia are partial in their administration of justice , to a very reprehensible degree .
When an Indian has committed any crime deemed worthy of death , he is impaled , hanged , or broken on the wheel , without ceremony : on the contrary , if a Christian is capitally convicted , execution very seldom follows the sentence : and , what is more extraordinary , no pains are taken to apprehend the offender , till time enough has been allowed him to run away , if he thinks proper .


The civil officers of justice among the Chinese and Malays are called Captains and Lieutenants , but their decisions are not final , if the party against whom they may decide , thinking  himself aggrieved , should appeal to the Dutch lawyers , in which case the decision of the latter must be abided by .


The Dutch have laid considerable taxes on these people , among which is one for the permission to wear their hair .
When these taxes become due , which is once a month , they hoist a flag on the top of a house , nearly in the center of Batavia , and the man who does not speedily go and pay his money , has reason to repent the omission .


The current money of this country is of different value , from a Dutch doit to a ducat .
When Captain Cook was at Batavia , Spanish dollars sold at five shillings and five-pence each , and the price is seldom much lower .
The Chinese would give only the value of twenty shillings for an English guinea that was almost new , and for those that were old , and much worn , only seventeen shillings .


The milled ducatoons of Batavia are valued at eighty stivers  those that are unmilled at seventy-two  the ducat at one hundred and thirty-two  the imperial rixdollars at sixty  the rupees at thirty  the schellings at six  the double cheys at two and a half  and the doits at a quarter of a stiver .


We shall now proceed to a recital of the incidents which occurred during their passage from Batavia to the Cape of Good Hope  in which we shall trace them with the utmost fidelity ,  omitting not a single circumstance that may either entertain or instruct the reader .


Early in the morning of the 27th of December 1770 , the Endeavour left the road of Batavia , and , after several hindrances , occasioned by the wind being contrary , she stood over for the shore of Java , on the first day of January 1771 .
As many of the ship 's crew , who had been very ill while at Batavia , were now become much worse , the vessel was brought to an anchor in the afternoon of the 5th near Princes Island , with a view to get some necessary refreshments , and likewise to take in wood and water .


Messieurs Solander and Banks now went ashore with the Captain , and they were no sooner landed , than some of the natives conducted them to the King of the island , with whom they endeavoured to make a bargain for some turtle , but the price could not be agreed on .
As our adventurers had no doubt but that they should purchase on their own terms the following day , they left the Indians , and proceeded in search of a proper place to fill water , which was soon found .
As they were about to embark for the ship , they purchased three turtle from some of the natives , but with the strictest injunction , that their Sovereign should not be informed of the transaction .


On Sunday the 6th of January they purchased , at very moderate prices , as many turtle  as they had occasion for , and the whole ship 's company fed on this delicious fish .
The King was at this time at a house situated in a rice field , where Mr. Banks waited on him , and found him cooking his own victuals .


On Monday the inhabitants brought vegetables , deer , fish , fowls and monkies , for sale  and on the following day they brought down a farther number of turtle .


A servant that Mr. Banks had hired at Batavia having acquainted him , that there was a town on the island , his curiosity determined him to have a view of it , and one of the officers of the ship accompanied him on his visit .
As he was apprehensive that the natives would not be pleased at his going to the town , he told such of them as he met , that he was seeking for plants , which , in fact , was a part of the business of the day .
Having come to a kind of village , consisting of a very few houses , they asked an Indian the way to the town , and some other particulars respecting it  but he endeavoured to prevent their proceeding , by representing it as at a very great distance .
When he saw they were resolved to go forward , he proceeded with them , making frequent attempts to mislead them .
When they were within sight of the town , the Indian changed his behaviour at once , and led the way to it .


This place , which contains between three and four hundred houses , is called Samadang , and  is parted by a river into the old and the new town .
Some of the natives , whom the gentlemen remembered to have seen among those who had brought provisions for sale , agreed to carry them from the old town to the new for a trifling gratification .
This was done by means of two little canoes , which were lashed together  and they had no sooner reached the opposite shore , than the Indians shewed them the houses of their Chiefs , and behaved otherwise in the most friendly manner  but as this was the season when the natives live in their rice-grounds , to save their corn from the depredations of the monkies and birds , most of the houses were shut .
When the gentlemen had seen every thing that they thought worthy of notice , they hired a sailing-boat , which conveyed them to the ship time enough for dinner  for the town of Samadang , though at a considerable distance from the place where the Endeavour lay at anchor , is situated at only a small distance from the sea-coast .


On the 12th , while the Captain was on shore giving orders to the people who were cutting wood and filling water , he was told , that one of the natives had stolen an ax .
The thief was unknown  but the Captain , resolved not to pave the way for future depredations of this kind , by taking no notice of the first offence , immediately applied to the King  and in consequence of this application , the ax was brought  down to the watering-place the next day .
The Indian who brought it back said , it was left at his house in the night  but it was suspected , that himself was the thief .


Mr. Banks having several times visited on the King of the island , and given him some trifles that were very acceptable , he waited on him for the last time on the 13th of January , and gratified him very much by a present of a small quantity of paper .
The King asked the reason why the English ships did not touch at the island , as was formerly their custom  when Mr. Banks attributed the omission to the scarcity of turtle , and advised the King to breed buffaloes , sheep and cattle , for the accommodation of his future visitants .


After a stay of ten days at Princes Island , during which they purchased vegetables of various kinds , fowls , deer , turtle , c. the anchor was weighed , and the vessel once more put to sea .


We shall now proceed to a description of the island , which lies in the western mouth of the Streight of Sunda .
It is a small woody island , and has been cleared only in very few places .
Our India ships used to touch at Princes Island to take in water , but they have omitted this practice for some years since , on account , as it is said , of the water being brackish  yet Captain Cook says it is exceeding good , if filled towards the head of the brook .


 The fowls which were purchased at this place cost about five-pence each  the turtle three-farthings a pound , and other fish were proportionably cheap  one hundred of the best cocoa-nuts cost only a dollar , and pumpkins , pine-apples and other fruits , were equally cheap and plenty .


The natives profess the religion of Mahomet , and are so strict in the observance of the feast called Ramadan , that they not only abstain from food till the sun is down , but even from the chewing of betel .
The manners of these people are not unlike those of the Javanese  but they are much more jealous of their wives : during the ten days that the Endeavour lay here , only one woman was seen , and she ran away the moment she was discovered .


The houses are constructed in the form of an oblong square : they are built on pillars four feet above the ground , and well thatched with palm-leaves , as a defence from the sun and rain : the flooring is of bamboo canes , placed at a distance from each other , to admit the air : these houses consist of four rooms , one of which is destined for the reception of visitants , the children sleep in a second , and the two others are allotted , the one for the purpose of cookery , and the other for the bed-chamber of the owner and his wife .
The residence of the King of the island , and that of another person of great authority , has boards on the sides , while  the houses of all the inferior people have walls made of the bamboo cane , slit into small sticks , and wrought across the beams of the building , in the manner of a hurdle .
The King of the island is subject to the Sultan of Bantam .


Captain Cook represents the natives as very honest in their dealings , with the single exception , of demanding more than double the sum they intended to sell for : the goods of each sort which different persons brought to market were all sold together , and the purchase-money divided among the several contributors , in proportion to the quantity that each had given in to the general stock .
When they changed money , they gave two hundred and forty Dutch doits for a Spanish dollar .


The natives speak a language which they call Catta Gunung , that is , the language of the mountains , and they say , that their ancestors came from the mountains of Java , where this language is spoken  that they first settled at New Bay , where the tygers were so numerous , that they could not live in safety , and therefore took up their residence on Prince 's Island : all these people , however , are capable of conversing in the Malay language .


At the time the Endeavour left Princes Island , her crew began to feel , in all its force , the ill effects of the putrid air of Batavia  and soon afterwards the ship was a mere hospital , filled with unhappy wretches , sinking under the rage  of fevers and dysenteries .
In the space of six weeks twenty-three persons died , exclusive of the seven which had been buried at Batavia : these were nine seamen , the Corporal of the marines , the ship 's Cook , two of the Carpenter 's crew , the Carpenter and his Mate , a Midshipman , the old sail-maker , who was in perfect health when all the rest were ill at Batavia , and his Mate , the Boatswain , Mr. Monkhouse , a Midshipman , Mr. Sporing , who accompanied Mr. Banks , Mr. Parkinson , draughtsman to that gentleman , and Mr. Green , the Astronomer .


After a passage in which nothing remarkable occurred , the ship was brought to an anchor off the Cape of Good Hope , on the 15th of March 1771 .
The Captain repaired instantly to the Governor , who said , that such refreshments as the country supplied , should be chearfully granted him  on which a house was hired for the sick , who were to have their board and lodging , on the payment of two shillings a day for each man .


At the time the Endeavour lay at anchor here , an English East Indiaman sailed for the port of London , who had buried above thirty of her crew while she was in India  and at that time had many others severely afflicted with the scurvy  so that the sufferings of the crew of the Endeavour , considering her long absence from  England , is a circumstance not at all to be wondered at .


We shall now proceed to a description of the Cape of Good Hope , in which we shall only mention such particulars as are either wholly new , or such as have been mis-represented by other writers .
The land over the Cape is mountainous , and totally barren  beyond these mountains the country is covered with a light sand , which will not admit of cultivation : there are indeed a few cultivated spots , but they are hardly more than a thousandth part of the whole country .
Provisions are brought to the Cape from a distance nine hundred miles up the country , which is an evident proof of its extreme sterility , notwithstanding what has been heretofore written to the contrary .
While Captain Cook lay here , a farmer came to the Cape , bringing his young children with him , from a distance that took him fifteen days journey  and on his being asked why he had not left his children with some neighbour , he said , there was no inhabitant within five days journey of his farm .
There are no trees that are even two yards in height , except in some plantations in the vicinity of Cape town .


This town consists of near a thousand brick houses , the outsides of which being generally plaistered , they have a very pleasing appearance .
There is a canal in the main street , with two rows of oak-trees on its borders , which are  in a more flourishing state than the other trees of this country : the streets , which cross each other at right angles , are very spacious and handsome .
The inhabitants are chiefly Dutch , or of Dutch extraction : the women are beautiful in a high degree , and possess those blooming countenances which denote the most perfect health : they are most of them mothers of many children , and Captain Cook says , they are the best wives in the world .


The air of the Cape of Good Hope is so pure and salubrious , that a sick person , who goes thither from Europe , whatever be his disorder , almost always recovers his health in a little time  but those who bring diseases with them from the East Indies , have not an equal chance of recovery .


Although this country is naturally so barren , as scarcely to produce any thing , yet the unceasing industry of its inhabitants has so effectually combated the sparing hand of Nature , that there are few places where the necessaries of life are more plentiful , and even what are generally deemed luxuries , are by no means scarce .
The constantia wine is known to be excellent , but the genuine sort is made only at one particular vineyard a few miles from the town .
The gardens produce many sorts of European and Indian fruits , and almost all the common kinds of vegetables .
The cultivated fields yield wheat and barley of equal quality  with that of the growth of England .
The sheep of this country have tails of a very extraordinary size , many of which weigh upwards of a dozen pounds  the meat of this animal as well as of the ox , is very fine food : the wool of the sheep is rather of the hairy kind , and the horns of the black cattle spread much wider than those of England , while the beast himself is handsomer and lighter made .
The cheese has a very indifferent flavour , but the butter is extremely good .
The pork of this country is nearly the same as that of Europe , and there are abundance of goats , but the inhabitants do not eat their flesh .
The country abounds in hares , altogether like those of England  there are several species of the antelope , a plenty of bustards , and two kinds of quails .


When a stranger arrives at the Cape , it is customary for him to board in a private house , and he pays from two shillings to a crown a day , according to the accommodations he expects .
If he appears and behaves as a gentleman , he is invited to the private entertainments which are given by the more opulent of the inhabitants  and this can not fail of being the more acceptable , as there are no places of public diversion in the country .
Horses are here let to hire at six shillings a day , and coaches at one pound four .


The Dutch company have a garden at the extremity of the high street , which is more  than half a mile in length , in the center walk of which are a number of fine oak trees .
A small part of this garden is covered with botanical plants , but all the rest is allotted to the production of the common vegetables for the kitchen : the whole is divided into squares by the form of its walks , and each square is fenced in by oaks cut into small hedges .
There is a menagerie of beasts and birds , many of them known in Europe , at the upper end of this garden  and among the rest is the Coe Doe , a beast not less than a horse , which has those curious spiral horns that have frequently found a place in the cabinets of the curious .


The native inhabitants of this country are usually dressed in a sheep skin thrown across the shoulders , and a little pouch before them , to which is fixed a kind of belt , ornamented with little bits of copper , and beads : round the waists of the women is a broad piece of leather , and rings of the same round their ancles , to protect them from the thorns , which grow in abundance all over the country  a few of them wear a kind of shoe , made of the bark of a tree , but the major part of them go barefooted : both sexes adorn themselves with bracelets and necklaces , made of beads .
None of these people reside at a less distance than four days journey from Cape Town , except a number of the poorer sort , who look after the cattle belonging to the Dutch farmers , and are  employed in various other menial offices .
Their stature is about the same as that of the people of England , from five to six feet in height  but scarce any of them are corpulent : their skins are dark , but this is in a great degree owing to their extreme indelicacy : their hair curls naturally , and falls in finglets of above six inches in length : they are singular for their strength and agility .


Most of the Hottentots speak the Dutch language , without any thing remarkable in their manner  yet , when they converse in their native language , they frequently stop , and make a clucking with their tongues , which has a most singular and ridiculous effect to the ears of a stranger  and , exclusive of this clucking , their language itself is scarcely sounded articulately .


These people are modest to the utmost degree of bashfulness , and , though they are fond of singing and dancing , can hardly be prevailed on to divert themselves with their favourite amusements before strangers : both their singing and dancing are alternately quick and slow in the utmost extreme .


Some of the Hottentots understand the art of melting and preparing copper , with which they make plates , and wear them on their foreheads , as an article of finery .
They are also capable of making knives , superior to those  they can purchase of the Dutch , from whom they procure the iron .


They have the art of making butter by shaking milk in the skin of a beast : with this butter they anoint their skins  or , when they can not procure butter , they use the fat of the sheep .
The principal people are owners of immense herds of cattle  and these clothe themselves with the skins of lions and other beasts , which are adorned with fringes , elegantly designed .


The Hottentots are so dextrous in throwing stones , that they will hit a mark not larger than a crown piece , at the distance of an hundred yards .
They are likewise expert in the use of arrows , and of the lance called an Assagay , the points of which they poison , sometimes with the venom of a serpent , and sometimes with the juice of particular herbs  so that a wound received from either of these weapons is almost always mortal .


Exclusive of what is above recited , they met with nothing respecting these people , but such particulars as have been previously mentioned by various other voyagers , and which will of course be found in the preceding volumes : we shall therefore accompany the ship in her voyage to England .


On the 14th of April , 1771 , the anchor of the Endeavour was weighed , and she once more put to sea , but came to an anchor again  before night near Robin island .
As a few vegetables were wanted , which they had neglected to take in at the Cape , the Captain sent off a boat to the island  but , when she reached the shore , some Dutch soldiers forbad her crew landing , at the hazard of their lives  and the officer who commanded very prudently returned to the ship .
For some time they were puzzled to account for this behaviour on the part of the Dutch  but it was at length recollected , that the Dutch government at the Cape of Good Hope had assigned this island for the reception of such offenders whose crimes were not deemed worthy of death , where their slavery consists in digging lime-stone , for such a number of years as are thought proportionable to the heinousness of their offences : and that a ship belonging to Denmark , which had buried most of her hands , had called at this island , and taken on board a number of these criminals , in order to navigate the vessel to Europe : hence the conduct of the Dutch soldiers was easily accounted for .


The ship sailed again on the following day , when the master of her died , having hastened his death by hard drinking , though , in other respects , he left behind him an excellent character .


On Monday , May-day , they came to an anchor off the island of St. Helena , and , as they proposed to remain three days , Mr. Banks employed  the interval in surveying every object that was thought worthy of notice .


The island of St. Helena rises out of the immense Atlantic ocean , is about eighteen hundred miles from the coast of America , and twelve hundred from that of Africa .
It has the appearance of a huge mountain , the foundation of which is probably at the center of the globe .
It had formerly volcanoes in several parts of it , as is evident from the appearance of the earth and stones in many places  and it looks like a cluster of rocks , bounded by precipices of immense height : as a vessel sails along the coast , the cliffs perpend over her head so as to threaten her instant destruction , and nothing in nature can be conceived more awful than their appearance .


Close to the sea-side stands the town , which had formerly a church of very indifferent architecture , but it is now little better than a heap of ruins , nor is the market-house in a much better condition : most of the houses are also constructed in a vile taste .


As this island is the property of the English East India Company , the inhabitants are not suffered to carry on any trade for their own emolument , but get their livelihood by selling the productions of the island to the crews of the vessels which anchor there for a supply of refreshments .


 St. Helena is so happily situated , with regard to climate , that it would , if properly cultivated , produce the trees , fruits , plants and flowers , of all the different parts of the world .
On the summit of the highest ridges the cabbage-tree flourishes  in the parts below these grow the gum-wood and red-wood , and in the vallies many of the plants of the Indies , and almost all those of Europe  yet these several productions will not grow but on the spots of ground peculiarly adapted to each .


The only white inhabitants of the island are subjects of the King of Great Britain : these employ slaves , who transport goods of all kinds from place to place on their heads  and we are sorry to say , that the inhumanity of our countrymen to these slaves in a disgrace to those who profess the christian faith .
There are a small number of horses at St. Helena , but they are never employed in draught , there being no such thing as a waggon or cart on the island , though in many places the land is not so steep , but that such carriages might easily be drawn .


Ebony-trees are a natural production of the island of St. Helena , but there have not been many of them within the memory of any person now living there .
Snails are found in abundance on the summits of the highest mountains  but the other insects of the island are very few in number .


 On Saturday the 4th of May 1771 , the Endeavour sailed from the road of St. Helena , together with the Portland man of war , and several sail of Indiamen .
They kept company with the man of war and Indiamen till Friday the 10th .
But Captain Cook observing , that they were out-sailed by all the other ships , and consequently imagining that some of them would reach England before him , made signals to speak with the Portland , when the Captain of that vessel came on board , and received from Captain Cook a letter to the Lords of the Admiralty , together with a box , in which were deposited the journals of many of the officers , and the ship 's log books .


On the 23d they lost sight of all the ships they sailed in company with from St. Helena , and in the afternoon of the same day , Mr. Hicks , the first Lieutenant , died of a consumption , with which he had been afflicted during the whole voyage .


No single occurrence worth recording happened from this time , till the ship came to an anchor in the Downs , which was on the 12th of June following .


Whoever has carefully read , and duly considered the wonderful protection of this ship , in cases of danger the most imminent and astonishing , particularly when encircled in the wide ocean with rocks of coral , her sheathing beaten off , and her false-keel floating by her side , a hole  in her bottom , and the men alternately fainting at the pumps , and will yet deny the existence of a particular Providence , and the most gracious and merciful interposition of the Deity , in behalf of our adventrous countrymen , will deserve some share of that censure , which the thinking part of mankind have so liberally and justly bestowed on the Compiler of the account of the Voyage of the ENDEAVOUR .
There is a comfort in the reflection that God is good , which can be felt only by those who acknowledge his mercy , and adore his power .


2 .
ACCOUNT OF MONS .
DE BOUGAINVILLE 's VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD , PERFORMED BY ORDER OF THE FRENCH KING , In the years 1766 , 1767 , 1768 , 1769 .


 A SETTLEMENT having been commenced for the French King , on Falkland 's Islands * , in the month of February 1764 , the Spaniards demanded them as their right , as an appendage to the continent of South America  and France having allowed the propriety of the demand , Mons .
Bougainville was ordered to yield possession of the islands to the Spaniards .


In consequence of the orders he had received , he sailed from the port of Mindin on the 15th of November 1766 , having under his command the frigate la Boudeuse - la Esmeralda ,  and la Liebre  two frigates belonging to Spain , were to join him in the river de la Plata , to the commanding officer of which he was to deliver the settlement  and the l'Etoile , a French store-ship , was to carry him such provisions as were necessary for the long voyage on which he was bound , and to meet him at Falkland 's Islands : but the voyage was necessarily several months longer in compleating than it might have been , on account , as will appear hereafter , of the delay which prevented the l'Etoile from joining Mons .
Bougainville .


The Boudeuse had been at sea only two days when she encountered such a violent storm of wind , as carried away the clue of the fore-sail , broke the top-mast , and main-top-mast , and took off the head of the main-mast .
Thus situated , Mons .
Bougainville found it necessary to put into Brest to refit , and to make some necessary alterations in the stowage of his ship , which was ill calculated , for withstanding the fury of those seas he was to pass , and particularly so for the navigation of the seas round Cape Horn .


And here a reflection will naturally arise , on that fatality , by which those who have the appointment of naval equipments , almost always destine for services of the most imminent danger , vessels totally inadequate for the purpose .
Hence arise orders and counter-orders , till the proper season for performing the most hazardous  parts of the voyage , is lost in the necessary preparation for making it .


On the 5th of December Mons .
Bougainville sailed from the harbour of Brest , having on board the Prince of Nassau-Seighen , three gentlemen who went as volunteers , eleven officers in commission  and warrant-officers , seamen , soldiers , servants and boys , to the number of two hundred .


On the 17th they were in sight of the Salvages , a small flat island , which at each end rises into a hillock : the next day they saw the Island of Palma , and that of Ferro on the 19th .
Mons .
Bougainville was now convinced of a great error in his reckoning , which he attributes to the rapidity of the currents opposite the Streights of Gibraltar .
Having corrected his reckoning , he took a fresh departure , and arrived at Rio de la Plata , without meeting with any thing worthy of notice .


On the evening of the 29th of January they had sight of Rio de la Plata , but as the night was dark and tempestuous , they lay to , with the head of the vessel towards the offing .
The next morning they had a view of the mountains of Maldonado , which , after a ship enters the Rio de la Plata , are the first high lands seen to the north .
At the Maldonados the Spaniards have a small garrisoned town , in the vicinity of which are picked up some beautiful transparent stones  and there is likewise a gold  mine near it , which has been worked for a few years past , but has yielded little profit .


On the morning of the 31st the Boudeuse came to an anchor in the Bay of Montevideo , where the two Spanish ships , which were to take possession of Falkland 's Islands , had been at anchor for some weeks .


Don Philip Ruis Puente , the principal in command of the Spanish vessels , having been appointed Governor of the islands which were to be surrendered by the French , he accompanied Mons .
Bougainville to Buenos Ayres , to settle , with the Governor general , the mode of making the cession : and the Prince of Nassau-Sieghen attended them in this expedition .


The gentlemen made the voyage in a schooner , but a contrary wind preventing their passage by sea , they went on shore above the colony of San Sacramento , and travelled over a prodigious extent of country , in which there were no roads , and where the eye was their only guide .
During this expedition they slept in little hovels constructed with leather , while the tygers howled round them on every side .
Mons .
Bougainville particularly mentions the manner and the danger of their passing the river St. Lucia , which is wide and deep , yet amazingly rapid : - being placed in a long narrow canoe , one side of which was beyond all proportion higher than the other , a horse was fastened on each side the vessel , the master of which pulling off  Figure 2 .
Monsieur de Bougainville Crossing the River St Lucia in a Canoe drawn by Horses  all his cloaths , got into it , and supporting the heads of the horses above the surface of the stream , drove them across it , in the best manner he was able , and , with some difficulty , they stemmed the rapidity of the torrent .
It is necessary for travellers who pass this wild and extensive country to be very careful in finding the fordable parts of the rivers  they usually drive before them a considerable number of horses , in order to take fresh ones as often as those they ride on are jaded .
Monsieur Bougainville having transacted his business at Buenos Ayres , returned to Montevideo on the 16th of February , and was followed in a few days by the Spanish Governor , Don Puente .
Some necessaries of various kinds being taken on board , the vessels were prepared for sailing to Falkland 's Islands .


Our author now gives a long account of the establishment of the Spaniards in Rio de la Plata , of which we shall take no notice , because similar accounts are to be found in a great number of volumes , some or other of which are in the hands of almost every reader .


Our voyagers having caused a small vessel to be laden with cattle for the use of the ship 's companies , they sailed in company , on the 28th of February 1767 , a pilot , acquainted with the coast of Falkland 's Islands , having been previously put on board each of the Spanish ships  but this day they were obliged to bring  their vessels to an anchor , on account of the thickness of a fog , which prevented their seeing land .


The winds now proving contrary , the ships remained at anchor the following day  but as the current of the river ran strongly in their favour , Mons .
Bougainville sent to acquaint the Spanish commander , that his vessel being too near the English sand-bank , off the isle of Flores , he thought it would be proper to sail on the following day , even if the wind should not change in their favour .
To this the Spanish officer replied , that his pilot refused to weigh the anchor till the wind became fair and blew steady : on which Don Puente was acquainted , that the anchor of the Boudeuse would certainly be weighed early the next morning , and that she would either anchor more to the north , or ply to the windward , waiting for the Spanish ships , unless they should be unavoidably separated by the violence of the wind .


The small vessel laden with cattle had not come to an anchor during the preceding night , nor was she seen any more during the voyage  but it was afterwards learnt that she went back to Montevideo , after an absence of three weeks from that place .
The night had been so tempestuous , that all the ships dragged their anchors , and in the morning the Spanish vessels were observed with their main-yards lowered ,  and their top-masts handed : the Boudeuse , however , got under sail , and got out of the river before night , leaving the Spaniards still at anchor .
Mons .
Bougainville had variable , but chiefly bad , weather till the 23d of the month , when he came to an anchor in the Bay of Falkland 's islands , where the Spanish vessels also anchored , on the day following .
These last had suffered extremely through the inclemency of the weather  the cabbin windows of Don Puente 's ship had been broke by the violence of the waves , so that the sea for some time poured into her in torrents  and a number of cattle , destined for the use of the colony at Falkland 's Island , died on the passage .


On the 1st of April Mons .
Bongainville , in the name of the French king , surrendered the island to Don Puente , who received it for his most catholic Majesty , with the ceremony of hoisting the Spanish colours , and the firing of guns from the ships and on shore : Mons .
Bougainville then read a letter , in which his sovereign granted leave to such of the inhabitants as chose to continue their residence , to be under the dominion of Spain : this offer was accepted by some , while others embarked with the garrison , and were conveyed to Montevideo in the Spanish ships .
The whole expence of the French settlement , to the time of its being delivered to the Spaniards , was six hundred and three thousand livres  but as his most Catholic  Majesty took the ships , provisions , and all the stores of every kind , he reimbursed this sum to France .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to make some historical remarks respecting Falkland 's Islands , in which we shall trace him with all possible fidelity .
He says that , in the year 1502 , when Americo Vespucius was on his third voyage for the discovery of America , he sailed along the northern coasts of the islands , and to him , therefore , he allows the honour of being the first discoverer  yet he says that Vespucious knew not whether what he saw was an island , or a part of the main land .
Gouin , a French commander , came to an anchor on these islands , in the year 1700 , as he was returning from a voyage into the South Seas  but Gouin mistook them for Sebald 's isles , which he very near them , Falkland 's Islands being between those , and the island of Beauchesne  so that a ship at anchor on the east side of Sebald 's isles , is within sight of Falkland 's  - Besides Beauchesne 's description of what he took to be Sebald 's , exactly answers to these : for he says there are no woods , that the country is swampy , that there are many fresh-water lakes and marshes on it , and that it abounds in ducks , snipes , wild geese , and teals .


Mons .
Bougainville justly observes , that Falkland 's islands have been but little known and ill described , till within a few years past  They are commonly represented as being covered with woods  but this mistake might very well happen in the accounts of those who only saw them from on board a ship  for what are taken for woods are tall rushes , which grow very close together , and the stalk being dry to the height of five feet from the ground , a large tuft springs from the top of it , so that their number , and the manner in which they grow , form no ill resemblance of a wood .
Great part of the hills on the island are covered with heath , while the rushes grow only on some small isles , and near the sea coast .


In the year 1594 Sir Richard Hawkins had sight of these islands , and called them Hawkins 's Maiden-Land : he says he saw fires on them , and that they were then inhabited : about the commencement of the present century , a French ship , called the St. Louis , came to an anchor on this coast , under the shelter of the isles of Anican , which are some small islands , so called after the privateer of that name  but the commander of the St. Louis did not think it worth his while to examine the country : yet , Mons .
Bougainville observes , that the navigators of all nations have remarked how conveniently they are situated for affording shelter and refreshment to vessels bound to the South-Seas .


France having come to a resolution of sending a colony to settle on Falkland 's islands ,  Mons .
Bougainville , towards the beginning of the year 1763 , made an offer to establish the settlement at his own expence , with the assistance of two of his near relations , Mons .
de Arboulin , and Mons .
de Nerville .
This offer being accepted , the adventrous Frenchman gave orders for the building and equipment of a vessel of twenty , and another of twelve guns , the former of which was called the Eagle , and the latter the Sphinx : and as soon as these vessels had taken in such stores as were necessary for the voyage , and for making the settlement , Mons Bougainville , having previously engaged some acadian families , embarked his officers , seamen and settlers , and sailed from the Port of St. Malo , on the 15th of September , 1763 .


In the course of the voyage he touched on the coast of Brazil , and at Montevideo , at which last place he took a number of horned cattle and horses on board , in order to stock the island to which he was destined .
On the 31st of January , 1764 , Mons Bougainville was within fight of Sebald 's isles , and came to an anchor in a large bay on the eastermost point of Falkland 's islands , on the third of February .


It was soon resolved to form the settlement on the coast of this Bay  and Mons .
Bougainville immediately began to take a survey of the island , to learn what it produced , for the support and convenience of life .
He observes ,  that various kinds of water and land-fowl , and fish , were all its edible productions : and that the reader already knows that there grows no wood , either for firing , or other purposes  but this deficiency , in Mons .
Bougainville 's opinion , might be tolerably well supplied by an excellent kind of turf , which was almost every where to be found in great abundance .


On the first arrival of our adventurers , it was a sight not less pleasing than astonishing , to behold the birds flock round them , with evident curiosity , but without the least signs of timidity : these harmless animals used to perch on those who were standing still , and would at all times submit to be taken with the hand : but they very soon learnt to be shy of the company of those who sought only their destruction .


The colony consisted of nineteen men , five women , and three children  and Mons .
Bougainville having fixed on the spot for their residence , they lost no time in erecting huts , which they covered with rushes , to protect them from the inclemency of the weather .
They likewise built a magazine , and erected a small fort , in the center of which they raised an obelisk , under which they had placed several pieces of money , and a medal , on one side of which was the head of the French king , with the following motto  Tibi serviat ultima thule  and on the other side of the medal was an inscription ,  of which the following is a translation .
- ' `` Settlement of the Isles Malouines , situated in 51 degrees 30 minutes of south latitude , 60 degrees 50 minutes west longitude , from the meridian of Paris , by the Eagle frigate , Captain P. Duclos Guyot , Captain of a fire-ship , and the Sphinx sloop  Captain F. Chenard de la Giraudais , Lieutenant of a frigate , equipped by Louis Antoine de Bougainville , Colonel of infantry , Captain of a ship , chief of the expedition , G. de Nerville , Captain of infantry , and P. d' Arboulin , postmaster general of France : construction of a fort , and an obelisk , decorated with a medallion of his Majesty Louis XV .
after the plans of A. L'Huillier , engineer and geographer of the field and army , serving on this expedition  during the administration of E ' .
de Choiseul , Duke of Stainville , in February 1764 . '' '


Mons .
de Bougainville having promised the settlers , that he would soon bring them more companions , and give them farther assistance , his relation , Mons .
de Nerville , agreed to stay till his return from France , as well to be an hostage for the performance of de Bougainville 's promise , as to encourage the young colonists , by participating in every hardship and danger to which they might be exposed , in a station so far removed from all communication with the rest of mankind .
In return for Mons .
 de Nerville 's kind compliance with the wish of the settlers , he was to be considered as their Governor .


On the 8th of April 1764 , Mons .
Bougainville weighed his anchor , and sailed for Europe , having first taken possession of the islands , in the name , and for the use of his most Christian Majesty .


In the month of January 1765 , Mons .
Bougainville again visited Falkland 's Islands , where he found the settlers in good health , and pleased with their situation .
After he had debarked the stores which he had brought for their use , he sailed to the Streights of Magellan , where he took in timber and pallisadoes , and a number of young trees for planting on Falkland 's Islands  which place he again left on the 27th of April , when the whole number of colonists was only twenty-four .


While Monsieur de Bougainville was on the above-mentioned expedition in the Streights of Magellan , he saw the ships under Commodore Byron 's command  the reader will recollect this circumstance , in the account of Mr. Byron 's Voyage , related in the twenty-first page of the preceding volume .


The colonists on Falkland 's Islands were encreased to about one hundred and fifty , by a number of fresh settlers , which sailed from France in the Eagle , in the year 1765 .
This ship was accompanied by the Etode store-ship ,  which carried provisions to the island .
By this time the Governor , and an officer who took care of the stores , had good houses built of stone , and the rest of the colonists were lodged in commodious huts , having walls composed of sods of earth .
With the wood which Mons .
Bougainville had brought from the Streights of Magellan , they had built several small vessels , adapted to examine the coasts of the island  and three magazines were by this time erected , in which to deposit the public and private stores  several kinds of grain which had been brought from France grew very well , and promised a sufficient encrease  and some train-oil had been made , and seals-skins turned , by the settlers , with which the Eagle was loaded , and returned to France .


In the year 1766 , when an English colony had settled at Port Egmont , Captain Macbride , of the Jason frigate , visited the French settlement , and , to use Mons .
Bougainville 's own words , ' `` pretended that those parts belonged to his Britannic Majesty , threatened to land by force , if he should be any longer denied that liberty , visited the Governor , and sailed away again the same day . '' '


The above , according to Bougainville 's account , was the state of Falkland 's islands , when the French surrendered them to Spain  and he pretends , that the prior claim of Sp [ ... ] in was confirmed by such surrender of those who had made  the first settlement : and perhaps there might be some force in this reckoning , if the prior claim of Spain was founded in justice , and warranted by the laws which have hitherto directed the discoverers of unknown countries .
An Englishman , however , will be glad to see this argument stated in its proper light , by which it will appear , that the right to the possession of these islands , is undoubtedly vested in the Crown of these realms .


The plain state of facts , then , is as follows : as early as the voyage under Sir Thomas Cavendish , in the year 1592 , Captain Davis had sight of these islands : they were seen a second time , in 1594 , as before-mentioned by Sir Richard Hawkins , who gave them the name of Hawkins 's Maiden Land : the third person who saw them was the Dutch voyager Sebald de Waert , who called them Sebald 's Isles , and under this name they are laid down in the Dutch charts .
In the year 1683 they were seen by Dampier , and , in 1689 , by Strong , who gave them their present English name of Falkland Islands , which Dr. Halley , the celebrated astronomer , adopting , they are now so called in all the maps and charts of this country .
During the reign of William and Mary , the English privateers often saw these islands , whereas , according to Mons .
Bougainville 's own account , the first Frenchman who ever saw them was Gouin , no longer ago than the year 1700 .
 From this state of the evidence it does not appear , that the Spaniards visited them at all , and that the French were the last visitors  yet would Mons .
Bougainville have his readers believe , that the Spaniards have the prior claim to their possession , and that this claim has been ratified by the French !
- This reasoning may sound admirably well in the ears of the slaves of two arbitrary monarchs , but will be equally ridiculed and contemned by every sensible subject of our happier , because limited , monarchy .


Monsieur Bougainville now proceeds to give an account of the natural history of , and other particulars respecting , Falkland 's Islands , which , he says , are the result of the observations of his kinsman , Mons .
de Nerville , who resided at the settlement three years .
The picture our ingenious voyager gives of the first appearance of the islands is very striking , and his arguments for and against settling them are very conclusive .
On their first arrival not an object struck their view , except the commodiousness of the port in which the ship lay , which could tempt them to take up their residence on so inhospitable a shore .
The land was in many places broke in upon by the sea  the mountains , unclothed with wood , had the most barren appearance  the fields looked dreary for want of houses and inhabitants  an universal silence reigned , except when the howling of some sea-monster disturbed the solemn stillness  while  a dull and gloomy sameness of appearance added horror to the whole picture .


Discouraging as this scene appeared , our adventurers knew that all would yield to time and diligence , and that the labour of the industrious would not go unrequited : indeed some consolation arose in their breasts , on viewing the place in a more favourable light .
The climate had that kind of temperature likely to afford health , strength , and long life , and was therefore preferable to the noxious air of those regions where the sickening inhabitant faints under the scorching heat of the vertical sun : the island produced a number of plants , admirable in the cure of the scurvy , and other disorders incident to the sailor 's life .
The fish and the birds were most exquisitely delicious , and there were amphibious animals in immense numbers , while there were none of the fierce or the poisonous kind .
Cascades and rivulets fell from the mountains , which at the same time sheltered the fisherman from the violence of the winds , so that he could sport or labour in the spacious bay , in perfect security : meadows of an immense extent promised constant pasturage for any number of flocks and herds , which might feed at pleasure , undisturbed by any tyrant lord of the soil .
These various advantages , in the opinion of our adventurers , were sufficient to recompence them for the dangers and fatigue  of the voyage , and a pledge for the full reward of their future labours .


The situation of Falkland 's Islands is between fifty-one and fifty-two degrees and a half of south latitude , and sixty-five degrees and a half of west longitude from Paris .
From the entrance of the Streights of Magellan , and from the coast of Patagonia , their distance is about 250 miles .


The harbours are large , and well defended by small islands most happily disposed  and even the smallest vessels may ride in safety in the creeks : while fresh water is easily to be obtained , as the small rivers which descend from the mountains discharge themselves into the sea .
The tides do not rise and fall at any stated times , but depend on the force with which the wind agitates the waves of the sea  it was , however , observed , that just before high water , the sea rises and subsides , with a quick motion , three times within the space of fifteen minutes  and that at the full of the moon , and during the equinoxes and solstices , this motion is much greater than at any other time .


Those winds that blow from between the south and west , and the north and west points , prevail more than others  but in general the winds vary as in most other countries .
In summer time the winds usually blow from some point between the north-west and south-west .
It is remarkable , that these winds rise with the  rising sun , encrease in force as the sun advances to the meridian , blow most violently just at noon , decrease again with the declining sun , and totally cease about the time of its setting .
The tides also frequently add to the violence of these winds , and not unfrequently change their direction .


The blowing of the winds in winter is a certain indication of the weather .
If they come from the south-east , they are not so violent as the summer winds from the same quarter  but they are accompanied with slight fogs .
When they blow between the south and west points , hoar frost , hail and snow , are the certain consequences  and the weather is wet and foggy , when they come from the points between the north and the west .
The snow which comes with the south and west winds is but small in quantity , and commonly disappears from the ground in a day or two , except what lodges on the summits of the high mountains , where it will remain about two months .
The running streams are never frozen , and the lakes and stagnate-pools have seldom been covered with ice strong enough to bear the weight of a man two days together .
In the spring and autumn there are slight hoar frosts , which being changed to a kind of dew by the warmth of the sun , are rather nutrimental than prejudicial to the vegetable productions .
There is seldom any thunder or lightning , nor is the climate hot or  cold in any extraordinary degree .
Throughout the year the nights are , in general , star-light , serene , and fair  and , upon the whole , the climate is very favourable to the constitution .


The fresh water of these islands is extremely good , and in great plenty : the beds of some of the rivers are a kind of tuft , which gives a yellowish cast to the water , yet does not affect its taste  but the bottom of most of the rivers is either sand or gravel .


The depth of the soil in the vallies is more than sufficient for the purposes of plowing  but , before our adventurers could proceed to cultivation , they were obliged to extract the roots of plants , which every where intersected and choaked up the ground for near a foot deep : these roots they dried and burnt , and they then made a rich manure for the ground from which they had been cleared .
Under the first land is a layer of black earth , ten inches or more in depth  under that again a yellow soil , beneath which are stones and slate  but these stones are not found on the little adjacent islands .
The sea-coast is , in most places , composed of stones , which are very fit for the purposes of building  and there are beds of a hard fine grained stone , in several spots on the island  likewise another kind of stones , in which are particles of tale .
Our settlers found a kind of stone which split in pieces easily , and with which they made grind-stones , to give an edge to their instruments .
 In the quarries they met with a stone of a yellowish hue , which , when first taken out , was so soft as to be cut with a knife  but it soon grew hard when exposed to the open air .
The island likewise yeilded earth fit for making bricks and potters-ware , and plenty of sand and clay .


In many parts of the country there are marshy places , which produce a sort of rushes with sharp points , the remains of the roots of which being continually wasting , form the turf that was used for firing , which burnt exceeding well , and had nothing offensive in its smell .


A plant of the gramen kind grows on a stalk which has a sweetish flavour , and is extremely nutrimental for cattle , who like it better than any other kind of pasturage .
This plant flourishes on the sea-coasts , and on the little isles , where it bends till the stalks unite , forming a kind of harbour , to which the sea-lions and the seals occasionally retreat .
Our adventurers , in several excursions , found these natural built houses , a very agreeable defence against the inclemency of the weather , and the more so , as the dry leaves which had fallen off formed a bed , by no means to be despised .


The above mentioned plant is the largest that grows on the island , which likewise produces many shrubs that were very useful in heating ovens , and other purposes of firing .
A kind of heath , which grows in great plenty ,  bears a red fruit , which is eaten by the fowls and birds .


A plant was discovered which resembles a shrub , but having been tasted , it was thought fit for the brewing of beer : happily our colonists were supplied with malt and molasses , to which they added the beer-plant , and were enabled at all times to brew a very wholesome kind of spruce-beer , which was an admirable specific for the scurvy .
This plant was likewise infused in water , in which those who had contracted any illness , while out at sea , bathed themselves , and it was found to be a fine restorative : when pressed , it yeilded a mealy substance , of a fragrant smell , and a glutinous nature : the leaves of this plant are small , of a clear bright green , and dentated .


Other vegetables in abundance were found , which were used as antiscorbutics  particularly water-cresses , sorrel , wild parsley , a kind of maiden-hair , and a species of celery .


But the most extraordinary vegetable production of Falkland 's Islands , is a kind of resinous gum-plant , of which we shall speak more particularly , as it is wholly unknown in these parts of the globe .
Though this is called a plant , it is without leaves , branches , or any apparent stalk  and , except in colour , which is that of a bright green , it more resembles a lump of earth rising from the common surface of the ground .
It does not grow to the height of  more than eighteen inches , and its breadth in different plants is from two feet to two yards and upwards : the smaller plants have the form of an hemisphere , and their circumference is regular  but when they come to the full size , they terminate in irregular bunches and hollows : there are drops of a tough yellow matter , as big as a pea , on different parts of its surface , which smell like turpentine .
Mons .
Bougainville having cut this plant close to the ground , found that it arose from a stalk , from which grew an immense number of shoots , consisting of leaves resembling stars , laying one within the other .
The outsides of these shoots , which are exposed to the air , are green , and the insides white : they contain a viscid milky juice , which is likewise found in the roots and the stalk .
The roots extending horizontally , frequently produce fresh shoots at a distance , so that there is no instance of one of these plants being found alone .
The resin of this plant was found to be a good medicine for the cure of slight wounds  but this resin was often washed away by the rains , or wasted by the influence of the air  yet , however contradictory it may appear , it would not dissolve except in spirits : some of the seeds were brought to Europe , in order to attempt the cultivation of so singular a curiosity in the vegetable world .


The island on which our colonists had taken up their residence is divided from east to west  by a chain of hills , to the south of which they found another plant , not unlike the resinous gum-plant , which , however , did not yield any resin , but produced beautiful yellow flowers  neither was it of so firm a texture , nor was its green of the same shade  yet , in other respects , the resemblance was very strong .
On the hills was found a species of Maiden-hair , which grew to a great height , and the leaves of it were shaped like the blade of a sword .
The hills likewise abounded with various kinds of plants , which had the appearance of holding a middle station between stones and vegetables .
It was apprehended , that these might have been successfully used in dying , and our colonists proposed to have made the experiment if they had remained longer on the island .


The place produces flowers in a considerable variety , but only one of them has any smell , which is like that of a tuberose  this flower is perfectly white .
A true violet was seen , which was of a regular light yellow colour .


A fruit was found , of the size of a pea , which received the name of the lucet , from its resemblance to the North American fruit of that name : its colour is white , but the side which is exposed to the sun changes to a red : it has the smell of orange-blossoms , and a very agreeable flavour : its branches , which creep along the ground , produce leaves of dark green , which are round and shining , and these  leaves infused into milk give it a delicious taste : the flowers grow in large numbers on the borders of lakes , and the plant delights in a moist soil .
Besides the lucet only one other fruit was found , which grows on long branches , in the same manner as the strawberry , but it has the appearance of a mulberry , which name it received , and its leaves are like those of the hornbeam .


Our colonists found but few sea-plants which they could apply to any use  but all the coast of the harbour was lined with sea-weeds , which were serviceable in breaking the force of the waves in stormy weather .
Many kinds of coralines , of various beautiful colours , and a great number of curious shells and spunges were washed on shore by the force of the tides .
Among the shells were the smooth and striated muscle , scallops , whelks , and a bivalve shell , of a very singular kind , named la Poulette .


Sea lions and seals are the only amphibious animals found in these parts  but there are great varieties of fish on the coasts , scarce any of which are known in Europe .
It sometimes happens that the whales , getting too near the shore , are stranded in the bays , where their remains have been seen .
Bones of great magnitude have been found far up the country , where the force of the waters could not have conveyed them , which Mons .
Bougainville  deems a proof that the soil is encreased , or the sea diminished .


The only quadruped found on Falkland 's island is of a species between the fox and the wolf , and our author therefore calls him the wolf-fox : the tail of this animal is more bushy than that of the wolf , and he lives in a kennel which he digs in the ground , on the downs by the sea-side .
At one time of the year the wolf-fox is so lean as to appear almost starved , from whence it is imagined that he fasts for a considerable time : he is about as large as a sheep-dog , and barks very much like one , only that his yelp is not so loud .
He subsists principally on wild fowl , in search of which he travels in such a direct line from one day to another , that when our adventurers first beheld his track , they imagined that the island was inhabited , and that the natives had made the path .
Mons .
Bougainville makes it a matter of wonder how the wolf-fox can have been conveyed to these islands , without considering , that land-animals having got on large pieces of ice , which being broken by the sea , they have frequently been conveyed to places very remote from those of their first residence .
The circumstance of ice so broken from the shore is not uncommon on the coast of Greenland .


These islands and their coasts produce land and water-fowls in incredible numbers , many of which are the prey of falcons , hawks , eagles  and owls  while the eggs and the young birds are destroyed by the wolf-fox .
- The smaller fish are destroyed by the whales , the amphibious animals , and the voracious birds , some of which are constantly flying close over the surface of the waters , while others perch themselves on the rocks to watch the event .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a description of such birds as were found on the islands , which could be applied to any kind of use , omitting those that could not be rendered serviceable to the colonists .


The swan is perfectly white , except its feet and its neck , the former of which are of a flesh-colour , and the latter as black as jet .


Of wild geese there are four kinds , only one of which feeds on dry ground .
It has very high legs , and a neck of great length : its flight is much more free than that of the English goose  it walks with equal ease , and does not cackle like the common goose .
The feathers of the male are white except on the wings , which have a mixture of ash-colour and black : the wings of the female are of various colours  and its body is yellow .
It seldom lays more than six eggs .
The flavour of these birds is agreeable , and they were found to be very nutritious : exclusive of those which are hatched on the island , large flocks fly thither with a westerly wind which blows in the autumn , so that they were generally to be taken in great  abundance , and formed a principal part of the subsistence of the settlers .
Those which came in the autumn were easily known from those resident on the island , by their not being shy .


The other three kinds are of various colours  yellow , white , black , and ash-colour  they are not by far so beautiful as those above described : and as they live entirely on fish , their flesh acquires a disagreeable taste  one of these three species seldom rises from the surface of the water , and is almost constantly making a very disagreeable noise .
A soft thick down , either grey or white , grows under the feathers of all these geese , as it does likewise under those of the swan .


The rivers and ponds of Falkland 's islands abound in teals of two species , and two of wild ducks : of the latter some are perfectly white , and others totally black , but in other respects they resemble those of England and France .
These birds are all exquisite fine food , and to be procured in any numbers .
One kind of the teal is very small  but the other is as large as the duck , and its bill is blue .
The bellies of some of them are also covered with feathers of a flesh-colour .


The island produces a bird which Mons .
Bougainville calls the Diver , but , from the description he gives of it , it is conjectured to be the Grebe , which abounds on the lake of Geneva , and of the skin of which the most  elegant muffs and tippets are made .
Of these Divers there are two kinds , of which the most plentiful has brown feathers , with no other variation than that the feathers on the belly are of a somewhat lighter colour than those on the back .
The belly of the other kind is white , and the back grey  and the feathers on the belly are very thick , shining and soft .
The eyes of these birds are as bright as rubies , and are encircled with a ring of white feathers .
The female hatches only two young birds at a time , which she carries on her back , not subjecting them to the coldness of the water , till feathers have taken place of the down with which they are hatched .
The toes of this bird are thin , and of a green colour , and being round towards the claw , they are not unlike the leaves of some plants : their feet are not webbed , as is common among water-fowl , but their toes are separate , having a strong membrane on each side .


The colonists gave the name of Saw-bills to two kinds of birds which bore a great similitude to each other , the chief difference consisting in their size , and in the bellies of most of them being white , while a few were observed to have brown feathers on the belly : the feathers on the rest of the body are of a dark blue , as soft as silk , and grow very close together .
Their feet are webbed and flesh coloured , and their bills pointed : they lay their eggs on the rocks ,  where great numbers of them live together  and they subsist on fish , thousands of which they destroy .
Our settlers not only ate the eggs of these birds , but frequently killed many scores of them at a time , and their flesh was found to be excellent food .
They had so little apprehension of being catched , that it was an easy matter to knock them down with a stick , and in this manner they were usually taken .
A bird called by the Spaniards Quebrantahuessos , which measures more than two yards from the extremity of its wings , destroys the saw-bills .
This bird of prey has a long bill , with two hollow tubes of the same kind of substance as the bill , and its feet are webbed : some of the seamen called this bird the Albatross , but it differs considerably from the common bird of that name , nor is it an easy matter to determine precisely on its species , from the imperfect account which Mons .
Bougainville has given of it .


Gulls , mews , and terns , of different beautiful plumage , served to direct our colonists what was the proper time for taking of pilchards .
These birds , flying in large flocks over the surface of the water , dart on the pilchard and swallow it  presently they catch another of these fish , and then they disgorge the one which had been previously swallowed , and so on .
When the pilchards are not in season , they feed on various other sorts of small fish .
The eggs  of these birds were found in great abundance upon the leaves of a plant , on the borders of the marshes , and they proved to be very good eating .


Three kinds of penguins breed on the island , one of these is a remarkably grand and elegant bird , the belly of which is a clear white , the back a kind of blue , and it has a ruff round its neck near the head , of a bright yellow , which descending towards the belly , separates the white feathers from the blue ones  these birds do not live together in numbers , but seek the most quiet and retired places of abode .
One of them being caught , with an intention of being brought to France , soon grew so tame , that it followed the person who fed it  its food was bread , fish and flesh  but there was something more wanting for its sustenance , for it gradually lost its fatness till it died .
The second kind of penguin answers to the description of that bird in Anson 's voyage * .
The third kind of penguins lay their eggs among the high cliffs of the rocks , where they reside together in immense numbers , never seeking that solitude of which the first kind are so fond .
They are much smaller than the others , and were named hopping penguins , from their method of moving , which is very much like  hopping  they have gold-coloured feathers , which form a kind of eye-brows , and a tuft of the same colour , which they raise when they are displeased .
This bird has a very chearful look , and its general colour is a deep yellow .


At different times , but not frequently , three kinds of petrels were seen by our adventurers .
These birds build their nests on the sea-coasts , where their young were sometimes found , covered with down .
One sort of them is quite white , their bills red , and not unlike a pigeon a second sort is larger , and the third smaller than the pigeon  and these two sorts have white feathers on the belly , while every other part of the body is black .


Eagles were also seen of three different species , two of which are black , with white and yellow feet , and the other is of a dull white : all these subsist on snipes , and other small birds , which they seize every opportunity to destroy .


Egrets , a species of the heron , were frequently seen on the island : they make a disagreeable noise , not much unlike the barking of a little dog  and they never take any food till towards the evening .


Two kinds of the thrush came regularly to the island in the autumnal months , one of which was of the same colour as the European thrush  and the other yellow , except on the belly , which was spotted with black .
There was a third kind of thrush , which lived  on the island throughout the year , the feathers on the belly of which are of a bright red : this was called the Red-bird , and though Mons .
Bougainville ranks it among the thrushes , it is probably no other than the red-breast of America .


A bird which they called the Sea-pie , was constantly seen on the coasts , the feet of which were white , the bill red , and the feathers black and white .
This bird whistles a kind of note , which the colonists found it easy to imitate , and by that means they came near enough to catch them without much trouble : they subsist on shrimps , which they pick up after the ebbing of the tide .
- Such is Mons .
Bougainville 's description of the sea-pie  but if it be the true bird of that kind , oysters form a part of its subsistence  for when the tide is out , these fish are left on the sand , and the sea-pie , forcing open the shell with his bill , swallows the oyster  whence he is also called oyster-catcher .


Great numbers of curlews , the same as those of Europe , were constantly seen in the summer  and snipes of the European kind were found in abundance .
It is easy to shoot these birds , as they fly in a regular manner .
At the time when they are breeding , they ascend to a great height , and having sung some time in the air , they drop at once into their nests , which are built on the ground , in the open field , where it is most free from grass or other herbage ,  so that these nests are very easily found : the snipes are excellent food if dressed towards the decline of the year  but in the breeding season they are lean , and not so fit to eat .


The amphibious animals of Falkland 's islands are seals and sea-lions , which having been before-mentioned , and being described in many books of voyages , we shall only add , that they frequently travel in very numerous companies three or four miles up the country , to feast on the herbs , and repose themselves in the warmth of the sun .


Of the fish which were found on the coasts of Falkland 's islands , one that was taken in the greatest plenty was called the Mullet , from the likeness it bears to the European fish of that name : the colonists dried many of these , which were full a yard in length : the seals prey on these fish whenever they can catch them  but , by a natural instinct , they are taught to avoid these voracious enemies , by sheltering themselves in holes , among slimy ground , on the banks of the rivers , and in these places they were frequently taken .
A fish called the gradeau , about twelve inches in length , was found in great abundance  and another , named the sardine , was found only at the commencement of the winter season .
Some white porpoises were taken in the bays , when the weather was fair , and some eels in those cavities of the rocks which were filled with water .
A fresh  water fish was found , about the size of a trout , without scales , the colour of which was green .
Many smaller fish were catched with the hook and line , among them was one species , the head of which resembled that of a pike , and it had no scales : a few soals were found  and Mons .
Bougainville is of opinion , that a greater number of those , and many other different kinds of fish , might have been procured , if there had been hands sufficient to have constantly spared a proper number to attend the sea-fishery .
The shell-fish found at this place were muscles , a very small kind of shrimp , a crab , the feet of which were blue , and a kind of cray-fish , or prawn , the colour of which was naturally red , without boiling : but our author says , these were only taken through curiosity , as their taste was much inferior to those European fish which are nearly of the same species .


The above is a faithful detail of the natural history of Falkland 's islands , as far as it could be learnt by the French settlers , during a residence of three years  if they had continued longer in the country , there is no doubt but that their discoveries would have been greater , and their account more accurate : from such as it is , however , it will probably be thought , by the English reader , that these islands are by no means so barren and inhospitable a spot , as our ministerial writers took the pains to represent  them , as soon as it was known , that our people in power had formed the disgraceful resolution of permitting the prior claim of England to this extensive country , to yeild to the imperious demand of the haughty Spaniards .


It must , indeed , appear evident to the unprejudiced view of the intelligent reader , that these islands might , in the course of a few years , be made a very valuable possession : as they abound in fowl and fish of various useful kinds , while their amphibious animals , the sea-lions and seals , would yeild a quantity of grease and train-oil , which might make no inconsiderable articles of commerce  and what astonishing crops of wheat , barley , and every kind of European grain might not be raised on a tract of land that is many hundred miles in extent !
It is true the islands do not naturally produce any trees  but it would be easy to carry thither the seeds of some , and young trees of other kinds  and there is no doubt , but that they would flourish in a country situated , with regard to the south pole , nearly as Ireland is with regard to the north .


As true Englishmen , we can not help expressing a wish that the day may yet arrive , when some Statesman of sense and spirit may re-urge and insist on the right of Great Britain , to the possession of Falkland 's islands .
The reader will excuse this digression , and prepare to attend  Mons .
Bougainville in the course of his voyage .


After waiting at these islands till the 2d of June 1767 , in expectation of the Etoile store-ship , and finding that she did not arrive , Mons .
Bougainville considered , that as his vessel would hold no more than six months provisions , and that he had only two on board , it would be an act of rashness to attempt the crossing the great pacific ocean alone  he therefore resolved to steer to Rio Janeiro , at which place he had appointed the Etoile to join him , in case any unforeseen accident should prevent her reaching Falkland 's islands before he left the harbour of that place .


They had fine weather from the 2d till the 20th of June , on which day they had sight of the mountains on the main land of Brasil  and they saw the entrance of Rio Janeiro on the day following .
A number of fishing-boats being observed near the shore , Mons .
Bougainville hoisted Portuguese colours , and ordered a cannon to be fired  on which a boat put off to the ship , and a pilot was engaged to conduct her into the road .


The coast of this country is broken by a number of small hills , which serve to give an agreeable variety to the prospect .
The country is rather mountainous , and well clothed with woods .


 The ship having arrived off the Port of Santa Cruz , a Portuguese officer was sent to enquire the reason of her sailing into it  on which Mons .
Bougainville sent one of his officers to acquaint the Viceroy of the Brasils , with the motives for his touching there , and to enquire whether if he should salute the fort , the compliment would be returned .


The answer which the French officer received from Count d'Acunha , marks that singular haughtiness and arrogance , for which some of the Portuguese Governors are not a little famous : - the Count said , that when a person bowed to another whom he might casually meet in the street , he was not previously certain that his compliment would be returned , and that if Mons .
Bougainville should fire his guns by way of salute , he ( the Viceroy ) had then to consider what was proper to be done .
As this answer was by no means satisfactory to Mons .
Bougainville , he , with that spirit of pride becoming a gentleman and an officer , disdained to fire a single gun .


About the same time a canoe was dispatched from the Captain of the Etoile , to inform Mons .
Bougainville of the safe arrival of that vessel , which now lay in the port .
The Commander , Mons .
de la Giraudais , sent word , that instead of leaving France in the month of December , various accidents had combined to detain him two months beyond that time : that  when he had been three months at sea , his rigging was so greatly damaged , and his vessel admitted so much water , that he was obliged to make the harbour of Montevideo , whence he sailed for his present station , and had come to an anchor but a few days before Mons .
Bougainville 's arrival .


The Etoile had at this time salt provisions sufficient to supply both the vessels for almost a year and a half  but as her stock of bread and legumes was insufficient for the consumption of more than seven weeks , Mons .
Bougainville resolved on sailing to Rio de la Plata , to take in a stock of those articles , as neither flour , wheat , nor biscuit could be purchased at Rio Janeiro .


On the 22d of June 1767 , Mons .
Bougainville and his officers paid a visit to the Viceroy of the Brasils , which was returned three days afterwards on board the Boudeuse  when the Viceroy gave permission for the purchase of a sloop , which our adventurers imagined might be very serviceable during the long voyage they proposed to make .
The Chaplain of the Etoile having been murdered , some days before the arrival of the Boudeuse , under the windows of the Viceroy 's palace , that gentleman promised that he would endeavour to find out , and severely punish , the perpetrators of the horrid deed  but Mons .
Bougainville complains much of his remissness in the execution of this necessary piece of justice .


 The Viceroy , contrary to his usual custom , continued to behave with politeness to the French officers , for several days after this visit  and acquainted them , that he proposed to honour them with an elegant collation in bowers of orange-trees and jasmine , on the banks of the river  and he actually gave orders , that a box at the opera should be assigned for their reception .
Here , says our author , a band of mulatoes performed the best pieces of metastasio , while the compositions of the greatest geniuses Italy ever produced , were ' `` executed by an Orchestra , which was under the direction of a hump-backed Priest , in his canonicals . '' '


We can not avoid making a remark on the illiberal and ungentleman-like manner in which Monsieur Bougainville recites this part of his narrative  for it would be in a high degree ridiculous to suppose that the Priest , because he had the misfortune to be crooked , should be , by that circumstance , the less qualified to conduct a band  nor can we see , if the works represented were , as our author calls them , divine , the great impropriety of their being under the direction of a Priest , nor of that Priest 's being dressed in the habit of his order .
The French are ambitious of being accounted the best bred people in the world  they claim a kind of exclusive right to politeness  but they are only the smugglers and monopolizers of that commodity , to the injury of the fair  traders , the English , the Scots , the Hibernians , whose open sincerity , and manly freedom of behaviour , gives the lie to the French assumption of a superior gentility .
It is evident , from many instances in Mons .
Bougainville 's voyage , that a Frenchman can , when he pleases , be guilty of a savage illiberality of conduct , that would disgrace the untutored boor of the wilds of Siberia , or the still more uncultivated savage of the uncivilized parts of America .


At this time there lay in the harbour of Rio de Janeiro , a French ship , called the Morning Star , and a Spanish man of war , named the Diligent  and , while the Viceroy behaved with all imaginable politeness to the Frenchman , he had artfully protracted the stay of the Spaniard no less than eight months , during all which time her Commander had not been able to procure the articles necessary for the repair of his vessel , and without which she could not proceed on her voyage .
In this dilemma , Don Francesco de Medina , Captain of the Diligent , applied to Mons .
Bougainville , for the assistance of his carpenters and caulkers , who were immediately sent , both from the Boudeuse and the Etoile .


The complaisance with which the Viceroy treated the gentlemen on board the French vessels , surprised the Spaniards , who told them , that they must not long expect so great a share of his favour  and they had soon reason to be  convinced , that the prediction was founded in truth  for though the Viceroy had permitted Mons .
Bougainville to purchase a sloop , and he had actually agreed for one , his Excellency thought proper to forbid the delivery of it  and notwithstanding they had contracted with this tyrannical Viceroy for the purchase of some timber from the royal Dock-yards , he afterwards changed his mind , and would not let them have it .
He even went so far as to refuse Mons .
Bougainville , and the gentlemen on board his ships , permission to lodge in a house near the town , while the Boudeuse was repairing , notwithstanding the owner of the house had consented to accommodate the French officers .


Mons .
Bougainville , piqued at these repeated instances of the Viceroy 's want of good manners , and his total inattention to the common rights of humanity , determined to pay him a visit , to remonstrate with him on the glaring impropriety of his conduct : taking with him therefore two of his officers , he repaired to the house of the Viceroy , who was agitated with the most furious passion the moment Mons .
Bougainville began to speak , and commanded him to leave the house  this , however , he refused to do , but kept his seat for some time , even after the Viceroy had called his guards , who , with more prudence than their master had shewn , neglected to obey his summons , and the French gentlemen left the house , without seeming  to have caused any disturbance .
Not long after their departure , an additional number of guards were placed round the palace , and orders were issued , that if any Frenchman should be seen in the streets after the sun was down , he should be taken into custody .
The Viceroy likewise commanded the Captain of the French ship named the Morning Star , to quit his present situation , and anchor his vessel under the fort of Villagahon , which order was complied with on the following day .


One of the Portuguese officers was exiled , and another imprisoned , because they had behaved with civility to Mons .
Bougainville  and it was easy to foresee , that such of the inhabitants of the place as traded with the French , would experience the consequences of the Viceroy 's indignation  every preparation was therefore made to quit a place , which the tyranny of the count de Acunha had rendered so disagreeable .
The Captain of the Spanish man of war supplied Mons .
Bougainville with timber proper for the repair of his ship , and an inhabitant of Rio Janeiro privately sold him a number of planks , which he was in great want of  and , indeed , the inhabitants in general behaved with a kindness and civility , which fully proved the sense they entertained of the impropriety of the Viceroy 's conduct .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to give an account of the riches of Rio Janeiro , and the  amount of the revenues arising to the King of Portugal , from the mines of Brasil  these mines we have already given some account of in the former part of this work , but as Mons .
Bougainville 's account is very interesting , and contains many particulars there unnoticed , we make no doubt but the reader will approve our tracing him with the pen of accuracy and fidelity .


The mines which lie nearest to the city of Rio Janeiro are not less distant than two hundred and twenty miles , and are called the General mines .
His most faithful majesty , having a fifth part of the produce of these mines , seldom receives less than one hundred and twelve arobas of gold from their annual produce , and sometimes considerably more .


There are mines at Sero-frio , Sabara , and Rio des Mortes , which are under the jurisdiction of the managers of the general mines .
Near Sero-frio is a river , the stream of which being turned out of its usual channel , diamonds , topazes , chrysolites , and other valuable stones , are found among the pebbles in the bed of the river  nor are any diamonds brought from the Brasils but what are found in this particular spot .


The stones thus found are deemed the property of the owners of the mines  but the King of Portugal has appointed a surveyor , to whom they must give in an account of what diamonds are found with the utmost exactness .
These the surveyor puts into a casket which has three  locks , and is enclosed in iron plates  the Viceroy keeping one of the keys , the Provador de Hazienda Reale the second , and the surveyor the third .
This casket , and the keys with which it is locked , are then enclosed in a second casket , on which these three gentlemen affix their seals  and this again is placed in a third , on which the Viceroy puts his seal , and thus ships the treasure for Portugal , where the coffers are opened in the presence of his most faithful majesty , who having selected such of the diamonds as he pleases , the owners of the mines are paid for them , at a rate stipulated by a previous agreement .


The number of slaves employed in searching for diamonds is about eight hundred , and for every day 's labour of each of these slaves the King of Portugal receives a Spanish dollar from the proprietors of the mines .


It is extremely dangerous for any person to secrete a diamond  yet the practice is very common , as the smuggled goods can be so easily hidden .
When a person is detected in this illicit trade , if he is rich he is sentenced to deliver up the diamonds , pay twice their value , suffer one year 's imprisonment , and then be banished to the coast of Africa for life : but if the offender be poor , he is generally doomed to suffer capitally .


In every district of the Brasils where gold is found , a house is erected , to which it must be  carried , and the King 's share paid , the rest is sent to Rio Janeiro , where it is melted into wedges , and in that state returned to the owners : these wedges being numbered , and stamped with the King 's arms , the weight is marked on each wedge : the gold is likewise assayed , and the alloy stamped on it , for the greater expedition when it comes to be coined .


About ninety miles from Rio Janeiro is a place called Praybuna , where there is an office for the registering the ingots which are the property of private people  and as all persons coming from the mines must necessarily pass this place , two military officers are stationed here , who have fifty men under their command , whose business it is strictly to examine , that no illicit trade is carried on  so that every one who passes is obliged to submit to the strictest search .
At this place , exclusive of the tax to the King , men and beasts of burden are taxed with a farther toll of a real and a half each , the half of which becomes the property of the officers and soldiers , and the other half goes to his Portuguese Majesty .


The ingots of gold which belong to private people having been registered at Praybuna , are then carried to Rio Janeiro , where the proprietors are paid their value in demi-doubloons ?
which are worth about thirty shillings each o [ ... ] English money  but there is a profit to the King for alloy , and for coining these demi-doubloons ,  of about four shillings and six-pence on each .
The mint at Rio Janeiro is a most noble building , admirably adapted for the purpose of coining money , which is performed with the most astonishing expedition  and this , indeed , is rendered necessary , because two Portuguese fleets usually arrive nearly at the same time that the gold is brought from the mines .


The fleet which arrives from Porto brings coarse cloth , several articles of food , with brandy , wines , and vinegar  and this , with the fleet which comes from Lisbon , occasions Rio Janeiro to be a place of very considerable trade  the effects on being landed , are charged with a duty of ten per cent .
to his Portuguese Majesty .


Soon after the earthquake at Lisbon , in the year 1755 , an impost of two and a half per cent .
under the denomination of a free gift to the King , was laid on all goods landed at Rio Janeiro , so that the whole duty paid is no less than twelve and a half per cent .
The latter duty is instantly paid on the goods being brought on shore , but the officers of the custom-house will take security for the payment of the former at the expiration of half a year .


There are two districts , named Pratacon and Quiaba , the mines of which produce diamonds  but no person is permitted to seek for them , that the market may not be overstocked  for it  is evident that , to make diamonds plentiful , would be to render them of little value .


His Portuguese Majesty is at an expence of about one hundred and forty-five thousand pounds sterling , annually , for repairing of the ships and public buildings , working the mines , and paying all his servants , civil and military .


The following account will shew what value , in sterling money , arises annually to his most faithful Majesty , from the royal revenues of Rio de Janeiro .


DOLLARS .
The King 's fifths are generally , one year with another , about one hundred and fifty arobas of gold , which make , in Spanish dollars , 1,125,000 The duty on diamonds amounts to 240,000 The profit arising from the coinage of money is 400,000 The duty of ten per cent .
paid at the custom house is 350,000 The free gift of two and a half per cent .
amounts to about 87,000 Various produces of the mines , with the poll tax , and monies arising from the sale of offices and employments , 225,000  DOLLARS .
A duty laid on negro slaves , produces 110,000 A tenth on all the food of the country , and the taxes on soap , salt and train-oil , bring in a revenue of 130,000 Total value in dollars 2,667,000 Hence it will appear , that the revenues arising to the King of Portugal from Rio Janeiro are something more , annually , than four hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling , reckoning the dollars at four shillings and six-pence each .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to give an account of his leaving Rio Janeiro , and his second voyage to Montevideo  of which we shall carefully select as many particulars as may afford either instruction or entertainment to the reader .


On the 14th of July 1767 , the anchors of the Boudeuse and Etoile were weighed  but as the wind abated soon afterwards , they were obliged again to bring to , before they could get out of the harbour .
They sailed , however , on the following day  and in the night of the 19th , the main-top-sail of the Boudeuse was carried away by the violence of the wind .


 On board of Mons .
Bougainville 's ship was a professor of astronomy , who had made the expedition with a view of discovering the longitude at sea  and as an eclipse of the sun was to happen on the 25th of the month , great hopes were formed , that an opportunity would thereby be obtained of making the wished-for discovery : but it happened , that these sanguine hopes were all frustrated , by the intervention of clouds , which obscured the face of the sun almost during the whole time of the eclipse .


On the morning of the 28th our adventurers had sight of the Castilles , at the distance of something more than thirty miles .
They saw the entrance of a bay , which Mons .
Bougainville conjectures to be the same on the banks of which the Spaniards have erected a fort .
The vessels sailed into the Rio de la Plata , and were within fight of the Maldonados on the 29th  early in the morning of the 31st , they had a view of the Isle of Lobos , and before night came to an anchor in the Bay of Montevideo .


The ships were no sooner anchored , than the Governor sent a gentleman on board Mons .
Bougainville 's vessel , who acquainted him , that most of the Jesuits in those parts had been lately seized , and their estates confiscated , in consequence of an order received from the Court of Spain : that these devoted victims of superior power had scarcely made the least resistance  that they bore their misfortunes with a  degree of patience and calm submission that did them honour  and that no less than forty of them had been taken away in the vessel which brought the orders for their disgrace .


As it was necessary that Mons .
Bougainville should remain in his present station till the equinox was passed , his first care was to build an hospital for the sick , and to take lodgings at Montevideo .
This being done , he repaired to Buenos Ayres , in order to hasten the provision of such necessaries as he wanted , for which he was to pay the same price as the King of Spain usually gave for the same commodities .


Mons .
Bougainville was also desirous of conversing with the Governor-general Don Francisco Buccarelli , on the behaviour of the Governor of Rio Janeiro  and he soon learnt , that Don Buccarelli , instead of making reprisals on the Viceroy of the Brasils , which he could have done , very much to the prejudice of Portugal , had , more prudently , only sent a narrative of his proceedings to the Court of Spain .


Don Buccarelli was so obligingly ready to supply Mons .
Bougainville with such articles as he stood in need of , that in less than three weeks two small vessels sailed for Montevideo , with ladings of flour and biscuit for the use of the French ships .
Mons .
Bougainville also sailed to Montevideo , leaving an inferior officer at Buenos Ayres , to see the remainder of their provisions shipped .


 They now expected to sail in a short time , when an accident happened that detained them some weeks beyond the intended period .
A Spanish register-ship being at anchor , a violent hurricane arose in the night , and driving her against the Etoile , carried away part of the head of that vessel , and broke her bowsprit on a level with the deck .


The leaks of the Etoile being encreased by this accident , it was absolutely necessary that she should undergo a thorough repair  but as there was not timber enough at Montevideo for this purpose , Mons .
Bougainville obtained Don Buccarelli 's permission , that she might sail up the river , to the Encenada de Baragan , which is a little bay formed by its mouth  and in this bay , by the 21st of October , she was put in a condition proper for sailing , and began to take in the necessary provisions .


In the road of Encenada Mons .
Bougainville found a frigate and several merchant-ships which were bound for Europe , and two Spanish vessels , which having taken in a store of ammunition and provisions , were bound to Falkland 's islands  and from thence to the South Seas , to take on board the Jesuits of Peru and Chili .
Two Xebecks likewise lay here , one of which was loaded with presents from his most Catholic Majesty , to the inhabitants of Terra del Fuego , in grateful testimony of his sense of their generous conduct towards the crew of the ship  Conception , which was wrecked on their coasts about two years before .


The inhabitants of the country on the banks of the Encenada de Baragan live in poor mean huts , which are constructed with rushes , having a covering of leather .
These are built in a very irregular manner , on a miserably barren soil , and the country around them is so poor , that the people find it very difficult to procure the necessaries of life .


From the road of Encenada de Baragan five ships sailed for Spain , having on board most of the French families which had quitted Falkland 's islands , and two hundred and fifty Jesuits .
About this time two Spanish register ships arrived , one of them had been no less than seven months in her passage from Europe , above six weeks of which were expended in the doubling of Cape Horn , where the fury of the winds was such as to carry away her rudder , and lay her under the necessity of seeking shelter in this port .
When she arrived she had buried no less than thirty-nine of her men , and almost all the rest were so enfeebled by the scurvy , that only a few of the officers , and three of the fore mast-men were able to do their duty towards navigating the vessel .
Mons .
Bougainville , with the greatest humanity , sent a number of his crew on board her , by which she was enabled to reach the harbour of Montevideo .


 Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to give an account of his sailing from Montevideo to the island of St. Elizabeth , which includes a narrative of what passed on his interview with the Patagonians , and several other interesting particulars till he reached the isle of St. Elizabeth .


The Etoile sailed from the Encenada on the 30th of October , and the Boudeuse on the day following , having on board provisions for ten months , and soon reached Montevideo , having lost three men in that short passage , by a boat , in which they were sitting running fowl under the ship at a time when she was wearing  two other men who were in the boat were with much difficulty saved , and the boat was recovered .


Early in the morning of the 14th of November , 1767 , they sailed from Montevideo , with a fine gale of wind at north , being in sight of land till the evening .
On the 16th and the five following days , the sea ran high , and the wind was contrary , so that they were obliged to reef their top-sails .
On the 22d the wind blew a perfect storm , which continued all the succeeding night in squalls , attended with rain  the Etoile made a signal of distress , but the violence of the gale would not admit of any assistance being given them .
As the waves became less mountainous , by the abating of the wind in the morning , Mons .
Bougainville hailed the Etoile , to make enquiry into what damage she had sustained in the late violent storm  when he learnt  that several of her chain plates , and her fore-top-sail-yard had been carried away , and that she had lost almost all the cattle which had been purchased at Montevideo : the Boudeuse had likewise lost most of her cattle , but had sustained no other damage .


The winds were at this time very uncertain , frequently changing during the remainder of the month , and the currents were so violent , as to drive the vessels as far as the forty-fifth degree of south latitude .
They now concluded , that they were between thirty and forty degrees from the coast of Patagonia  and , at length , when they had soundings with a line of forty fathom , they had sight of Cape Virgins  the same land which Sir John Narborough and Commodore Anson have distinguished by the name of Cape Virgin Mary .


As Mons .
Bougainville had , during a former voyage , discovered a sunken rock in forty-eight degrees and a half of south latitude , he avoided coming too near the shore till he was in forty-nine degrees  the person who had formerly first seen this rock , imagined it had been a grampus , and the ship had sailed within considerably less than a mile of it .


It was on the 2d of December that they had s [ ... ] ht of Cape Virgins , about which time they made all the sail possible , as the wind was in their favour .
They now saw a number of Al [ ... ] rosses , and petrels , the last of which Mons .
 Bougainville says are a sign of bad weather , whenever they are seen .
They also beheld penguins , seals , and whales in considerable numbers .
He says , that the skins of the whale appeared to be covered with small worms , very much like those which are observed to adhere to the bottoms of old vessels which he rotting in harbour .
Some white birds , not unlike pigeons , but of a larger size , now perched on the yards of the Boudeuse .


Soon after they had sight of Cape Virgins they made the land of Terra del Fuego , and for several successive days , they contended with tempests and contrary winds .
On the 3d of December , the wind blowing favourable for a short time , they made their best efforts to reach the entrance of the streights of Magellan  but the wind soon fell to a dead calm , and thick fogs clouded the whole coast of the country : in a few hours the breeze again sprang up , but , as by this time night came on , they were obliged to ply to the windward .


Early in t [ ... ] e morning of the 4th the wind being favour [ ... ] , they again stood in for land , when [ ... ] weather and rain preventing the [ ... ] having [ ... ] ght of the coast , they were obliged to keep [ ... ]  it cleared up , however , in a short time , when they made another attempt to enter the streight  but the wind [ ... ] , the fog growing th [ ... ] cker , and a storm [ ... ] compelled to lay to , between  the main land , and the two shores of Terra del Fuego .


On the 4th of December the fore-sail of the Boudeuse was split by the fury of the winds , and as at this time they were in no deeper water than twenty fathom , they determined to scud under their bare poles , lest they should run fowl of some breakers which lie off Cape Virgins , to the south south-east .


They now made other fruitless attempts to enter the streight , sometimes being within sight of the Cape , and at other times at a considerable distance from it .
Mons .
Bougainville says that the view of this Cape , as given in Anson 's voyage , is exact in every respect .


The night of the 5th was spent in standing off and on  and early in the morning of the sixth they were in sight of Cape Possession , and likewise of Terra del Fuego .
They now took the advantage of a westerly tide , and tried to get close to the coast of Patagonia .
They kept sounding all the night between the sixth and seventh , not sailing to a greater distance from the coast than three leagues .
What they had gained by plying to the windward , they lost by the opposition of the currents , and about noon on the 7th were back in their former station .
- What man in his senses , who reads accounts like these , would hazard the imminent dangers of such seas , for the honour of having made a  new discovery , or the pride of saying , that he had circumnavigated the globe !


This day they had sight of Cape Orange , which forms the first narrow pass in the streights .
This narrow pass Mons .
Bougainville called goulet , which is not improperly translated gut .
It is rather more than forty miles from Cape Virgins to this first gut , and the streights , for th [ ... ] s distance , are of different breadths , of seldom less than five , or more than seven leagues .
On the north coast the land is high and healthy , and has a regular appearance , as far as Cape Possession , in the bays of which there are several dangerous rocks , opposite to the two hillocks , to which Sir John Narborough gave the name of the Asses Ears .


In the afternoon , when they had reached the entrance of the gut , though the wind blew fresh , and all their sails were set , the tide ran with so great force , that they were driven backwards , instead of advancing in their voyage .


In the evening the ships were anchored in Possession Bay , and on the eighth , by the assistance of a strong breeze , they stemmed the tide  and afterwards , by making different tacks , they got through the first narrow entrance of the gut , with the wind right against them .


During the preceding night they had observed fires on the shore , and this morning they discovered a white flag , which the Patagonians had erected on a [ ... ] ing ground  on which a  white flag was likewise hoisted at the mast-head of each vessel .
The flag which these Patagonians had put up , was one given to them by the Commander of the Etoile , when that ship lay in Boucault 's Bay , in the month of June 1766 , so that it is pretty evident , that the people were the same .
Mons .
Bougainville speaks in very grateful terms of the care these Indians had taken to preserve the flag .


While the ships were passing the abovementioned gut , a number of men , clothed in the skins of beasts , were observed on Terra del Fuego , who ran along the shore with their utmost expedition , in order to keep pace with the vessels : they likewise frequently beckoned with their hands , as if they wished our voyagers to land .
The Spaniards say , that the inhabitants of that part of Terra del Fuego , are less savage in their manners than most other native Indians .
When Mons .
Bougainville sailed from Rio de la Plata , a Spanish ship was on the point of sailing thence , to convey some Priests , to instruct these people in the doctrines of Christianity .


The ships having come to an anchor in the afternoon , in Boucault 's Bay , several officers from each vessel , having fire arms with them , embarked in boats , and went ashore at the bottom of the bay .
The common sailors were ordered to remain in the boats , and to keep them afloat : the gentlemen were no sooner landed ,  than half a dozen of the natives came riding up to them , on the full speed .
When they were advanced within fifty yards of the French , they dismounted , and came forward , pronouncing the word Shawa .
Having come up quite close , they held out their arms , and laid them on those of the officers , whom they shook hands with , and embraced , repeatedly saying Shawa , which word was repeated by Mons .
Bougainville and his officers .


An Englishman , on reading the above passage , may be allowed to make a remark on the singular politeness of these savages , manifested by the circumstance of embracing  but he will not pay so vile a compliment to the delicacy of the uninstructed Patagonian , as to suppose , that he made the first advance towards a salute : on the contrary , it is but a piece of justice due to the superior good-breeding of the French , to conclude , that they taught the savages that worst rudiment of all politeness , that most filthy deviation from all decent and manly behaviour , the shocking custom of men kissing each other !
An Englishman of virtuous principles and refined ideas , would scorn to kiss his own son , whom he had not seen for a twelvemonth , if the boy but approached to his teens : no !
let the manly shake of the hand , and the generous effusion of the heart from the lips , be the only expressions of affection , duty or politeness , between man and man .
Let our embraces  be reserved for those amiable creatures , to whom God and Nature have taught us they are due .


The Patagonians appeared to be much pleased with the company of their new friends  but it was observed , that some of them had a mixture of fear imprinted on their countenances : this , however , was soon removed by the hospitality of the officers , who sent to the boats for bread and cakes , which were as readily devoured as they were chearfully given .
More of the Indians soon approached , among whom were some children .
They expressed no kind of surprise at the sight of their visitants , and seemed not to be unacquainted with the use of firearms , as appeared by their making a noise which resembled the report of a gun .
The good nature of these people was expressed in all their actions : some of the French gentlemen being engaged in collecting plants , the Patagonians no sooner saw what kinds they collected , than they immediately began to pull up and bring the same sorts .
One of them seeing an officer engaged in this employment , went to him , and pointing to his eye , which had received an injury , intimated his wish , that some herb might be shewn him , the virtues of which would cure the disorder : and this was deemed to be a conclusive proof , that they had an idea of the medicinal virtues of herbs .


 Mons .
Bougainville received from these Patagonians a number of skins of the guanacoe and other beasts , in exchange for a few trinkets , on which they seemed to set a great value .
Some of the gentlemen having red cloaths on , the natives advanced , and stroked them with their hands , seeming highly delighted with every thing of that colour  they also made signs for some tobacco , and as often as any thing was given them , they cried out shawa , in a very loud and disagreeable tone .


A small quantity of brandy being given to each of the Patagonians , they had no sooner drank it , than they struck their hands repeatedly against their throats , and blew with their mouths , so as to produce a kind of trembling sound , at the conclusion of which they had a singular quivering of the lips .


The evening now advanced , and the gentlemen prepared to return to their ships , which was no sooner observed by the Indians , than their uneasiness was expressed in their countenances , and they intimated , by signs , that they wished them to remain longer , as they expected more of their brethren .
The French , on the contrary , made signs that they would come again the next day , and bring such articles as the natives had requested of them .


Mons .
Bougainville and his party now walked towards their boats , accompanied by the Indians , one of whom sung songs till they reached  the coast , and several of them went into the water as far as where the boats lay , where they seized on all the articles they could put their hands on  but when they saw they were observed , they made no scruple to return them .


As the boats were rowing off , many more Patagonians were observed galloping down to [ ... ] countrymen  and the crews of the boats now cried out Shawa , so loud that the people on shore could not fail to hear them .


Mons .
Bougainville says , that these Indians were the same which were seen by the crew of the Etoile , in the year 1765 , for one of the seamen recollected a person among them whom he had before seen .
These people are well trade , and appear to be about the height described by other voyagers .
Our author says , that it is the thickness of their limbs , the largeness of their heads , and the extraordinary breadth of their shoulders , that make them appear to be of a gigantic race .


The colour of the Patagonians is brown , as is that of all the native Americans , in whatever climate they are born .
Their muscles are strong , and their nerves well braced  and as their food abounds in juices proper for the nourishment of the human frame , it is no wonder that they arrive at their full growth .
Their eyes are sparkling , their teeth extremely white , and their faces round , but rather flat  and many of them are very comely men .
Some of them  have whiskers , which grow long , but are very thin  and they all tie their hair , which is long and black , on the t [ ... ] p of the head  the cheeks of some of them are painted red .
Their language has an agreeable and melodious sound .
Our voyagers did not see any of the Patagonian w [ ... ] men  though it was conjectured , that the men intended to have brought them from a [ ... ] camp , which appeared to be about three miles distant .


These people wear a piece of leather round the [ ... ] and a kind of cloak made of skins , which [ ... ] to the bottom of the leg , and is girt round the body  the part which would otherwise cover the shoulders , [ ... ] permitted to fall back , so that the greater part of the body is left naked , [ ... ] the climate is so cold as , apparently , to requ [ ... ] re more covering than the whole which they wear  [ ... ] orcustom will harden the human [ ... ] the rigour of the most inclement [ ... ] .


It was in the summer when Mons .
Bougainv [ ... ] lle was on the coast of Patagonia , yet , he says , there was only a single day on which the therm [ ... ] me [ ... ] er was observed to rise to ten degrees higher than the freezing point .


The rest of the dress of the Patagonians consisted of a [ ... ] of half boots , made of the skin of the [ ... ] , and left open at the back part of the l [ ... ] g .
A few of them wore on the thigh a ring made of copper , two inches in breadth   and the necks of two very young men were adorned with beads .


Some small knives , of the manufacture of England , were seen in their possession  which our author very properly concludes were the gift of Commodore Byron  and their only arms consisted of a twisted gut , in the two ends of which were enclosed a round p [ ... ] bble  and weapons of that kind , he says , are used in all that part of the American continent .


Their horses are very poor , and of a small size  and the saddles and bridles were such as are used by the natives of Rio de la Plata .
One of these people was observed to have gilt nails on his saddle , stirrups made of wood , enclosed with copper , a bridle made of leather , twisted , and a compleat Spanish harness .


Their food consists chiefly of guanacoes and vicunnas , and they eat both the flesh and marrow of those animals .
They devour this meat raw , with great avidity , and carry it with them on their horses .
Fresh water being very scarce in this country , the horses drink the sea water , as do likewise their dogs , which are both small and ugly .


It was observed , that some of them pronounced capitan , chi [ ... ] , bueno , and other [ ... ] panish words .
Mons .
Bougainville concludes , that the Patagonians lead the same kind of life as the Tartars , as they are always on horseback , traversing immense plains , in pursuit of wild  beasts and game  and he imagines that they also , like the Tartars , plunder the caravans of travellers  but this remark seems equally cruel and unjust , from his own account of the singular friendship and kindness with which they treated himself and his fellow-voyagers .
Our author concludes this part of his narrative by saying , that he has ' `` since found a nation in the south [ ... ] acific ocean , which is taller than the Patagonians . '' '


Mons Bougainville tells us , that the soil of this country is extremely dry , and very much like that of Falkland 's islands : the coast , likewise , exhibits the same kind of sea-weeds , and shells of similar sorts are strewed upon the beach .
The country produces shrubs , but affords no woods for shelter .


On the [ ... ] th of December , 1767 , all the sails of the vessels were set , to make head against the fury of the tide  but they were obliged again to come to an anchor , after sailing only three miles .
During two whole days the weather was so tempestuous , that not a boat could put off from the ships , which was a mortifying circumstance , as great num [ ... ] rs of the Patagonians were by this time got t [ ... ] ther , on the [ ... ] ot where they had conversed with the officers , who were concerned that they were not able to keep t [ ... ] r promise with these friendly people , w [ ... ] ose little wants might have been easily suppl [ ... ] ed .
[ ... ] , by the help of glasses , that  they had built several huts on the shore , and it was observed , that some of them were constantly galloping backwards and forwards from this place to a spot , where it was supposed the main body of them lay .


Early on the morning of the 12th the Boudeuse lost an anchor , by the parting of the cable  soon after which they set all their sails , and by the assistance of the ebb-tide , and a favourable wind , they got through the second gut in the afternoon , and anchored on the north-side of the isle of Elizabeth .


As they were detained here two days , by tempestuous weather , and contrary winds , Mons .
Bougainville resolved to land on the isle of Elizabeth , where he met with a few bustards , that were at this time hatching their eggs , but these birds were so intimidated at the sight of our adventurers , that they could not approach near enough to have even a single shot at them .
The island produces no wood , but only a kind of heath , which might supply its place as fuel f [ ... ] r the fire .
The water of this place is brackish , and the soil extremely dry .
Several places were likewise observed , which had been marshes , but had become dry , and the ground on some parts of them were covered with a thin crust of salt .
It was evident that this island was occasionally visited by the Indians , as the shells of some fish they had eaten were found , near  where a dead dog was lying , and where it was plain that fires had been made .


Our adventurers were now on the point of entering that part of the streights of Magellan which abounds in woods , and the principal difficulties were already overcome .


On the afternoon of the 30th the anchors were weighed , and they sailed , with a violent wind , in a channel between the islands of St. Barthelemi and Lions , and that of Elizabeth .
They were now obliged to coast the last named island , to steer clear of a number of breakers , with which the other islands are encompassed .
Having sailed beyond Cape Noir , they observed that the country had a pleasant appearance , being almost every where covered with woods , which afforded a most delightful prospect to the eye .


In the evening the weather became suddenly calm and pleasant , so that Mons .
Bougainville pleased himself with the hope of being able to double Cape Round before the morning  but in this climate the most flattering appearances are by no means to be relied on  a truth that was fully evinced in the present instance : for soon after twelve at night the wind suddenly shifted , and blew most violently , bringing with it storms of hail , and deluges of rain , while a fog , apparently impenetrable , covered the whole coast .


 The main-sail of the Boudeuse being split by this storm , they endeavoured to make Port Famine , where they hoped to be sheltered from the tempest  but this attempt was fruitless  for the violence of the current was such , that they lost nine miles in as many hours , and were hurried with amazing rapidity into a large bay , formed by part of the coast of Terra del Fu [ ... ] go , which Mons .
Bougainville called Bay Duclos , from the name of the officer who was next in command under the Commodore of the expedition , and whose knowledge and experi [ ... ] nce are mentioned as circumstances highly advantageous to the enterprize .


This Bay is described as being very convenient for ships to anchor in , on account of the westerly winds blowing over the coast .
Two small rivers discharge their streams into the bay , the water of which is excellent at about a quarter of a mile from the sea coast , though nearer than that distance it is impregnated with [ ... ] particles .
The landing-place is a sandy beach , above which a pleasant meadow stretches itself to a considerable distance .
Behind this meadow the woods raise their lofty heads , and form a kind of amphitheatre .
Our adventurers traversed a considerable tract of the country , without meeting with any living animal , except a very few parroquets , bustards , ducks , teals , and two or three snipes .


 Several huts were seen at the mouth of a river , which had been constructed by twisting branches or trees into the form of an oven .
In these huts were found large numbers of limpets , muscles , and calcined shells  and the huts themselves appeared to have been recently made .
Our adventurers going some miles up the river , observed the tr [ ... ] ck of human creatures , and remarked , that the flood came from the east at the rising of the tide , which they had not before observed in any other part of the streights .


The seamen were now engaged in cutting wood till the 16th , when the vessels sailed with a favourable wind , and passed Point St. Anne , which covers Port Famine , a bay so called , on account of the disastrous fate of the colony formerly establish [ ... ] d on its borders by the too adventrous Spaniards .


Mons .
Bougainville observes , that the shores of this country are covered with wood , and are remarkably steep : those of Terra del Fuego , he says , are horrible to behold  and that ' `` mountains those are covered with a blueish snow as old as the creation : '' ' - These are his own words  but with all submission to the learning and penetration of our ingenious voyager , we can not conceive by what kind of intuition , he came to know that the snow had lain on these mountains more than five thousand years  or even that it had not fallen within  five days of the time he saw it .
It is no breach of Christian charity to observe , that these Frenchmen are as finished coxcombs in their writings , as they are in every part of their dress and behaviour .
It is hoped that Englishmen will be cautious how they imitate them in either particular .


There are four bays proper for the anchoring of vessels , between Cape Forward and Cape Round  and two of these bays are separated by a Cape of a most singular kind , which consists of petrified shells , laying horizontally , and rising more than fifty yards above the level of the sea .
Mons .
Bougainville took soundings at the foot of this Cape , but a line of an hundred fathom would not reach the bottom .


As the ships were now becalmed for two hours , our Commodore took this opportunity of taking the soundings near , and the bearings of Cape Forward , which he mentions as the most southerly point of land , on the continent , in the known world , and he fixes its latitude at fifty-four degrees , five minutes , and forty-five seconds , south .
Its surface consists of two hills , something more than two miles in extent , one of which is considerably higher than the other .
The tops of these hills are covered with snow , which gradually melting by the warmth of the sun , supply with perpetual moisture the roots of trees which are fixed in the crevices of the rock .


 Mons .
Bougainville and his party landed on a small rock , which barely afforded room for four persons to stand on , and here they hoisted the colours of the boat , and repeatedly shouted Vive le Roi .
Our author mentions it with an air of triumph , that these rocks now resounded for the first time , with this compliment to the grand Monarche .
A striking instance of the vanity by which the French nation is distinguished !


Having returned to the ship , and the wind coming about favourable , Mons .
Bougainville sailed in search of a harbour , which received the name of French Bay , where he resolved to take in a quantity of wood and water , as a supply during their voyage across the great South-Sea .
In consequence of this resolution all the boats were instantly hoisted out , with a view to begin this necessary business the next morning .


The night proving excessively stormy and [ ... ] , it was passed in fears and apprehensions which baffle all description .


Early in the morning a boat was sent out to sound the mouth of a river which had been previ [ ... ] usly denominated G [ ... ] es ' River , from the name of a g [ ... ] ntleman who was a partaker in the dangers and hardships of this expedition .
As it was low water when the boat reached the shore , her crew could not land without running her a-ground on a sand  and it was evident , that the larger boats could only make the shore  Figure 3 .
Monsieur Bougainville Hoisting the French Colours on a small illegible  at high water , so that their wood and water could be brought on board only once a day .
For these reasons Mons .
Bougainville determined to anchor in a small bay about three miles distant , called after his own name , where he had , in the year 1765 , taken in a loading of wood for Falkland 's islands .
Bougainville bay , to which they now sailed , is surrounded by high mountains , which secure it from the winds blowing from every point of the compass , so that the surface of the water is unruffled even by a single breeze .


Having cast their anchors in this bay , and made fast the vessels by means of hawsers tied to some trees on the coast , they landed , and found two Indian huts , constructed of the branches of trees , but they did not appear to have been lately inhabited .
In the year 1765 Mons .
Bougainville had caused a hut of bark to be erected on this spot , in which he left some trifles , by way of present to such of the natives as might happen to wander that way  on this hut he had put up a white flag  but both the presents and the flag had been taken away , and the hut levelled with the ground .


On the morning of the 18th of December a kind of camp was formed on shore , by way of guarding the effects which were landed , and protecting the men who were to be employed in taking in wood and water .
Small ponds were now dug , for the accommodation of those  destined to wash the linen , and the water casks were sent on shore to be repaired .
The crew of the Eagle having , in 1765 , cut down many more trees than were wanted for that vessel , the labour of this task was saved to our present adventurers , who were likewise happy in finding roads ready made through the woods , for the convenience of bringing down the timber to the sea-shore .
At this place the remainder of the month was spent in the necessary employment above-mentioned , and in repairing the ships , particularly the Etoile , which had so large a leak in her stem , that most of the hands on board her were fatigued beyond expression , by standing at the pumps , alternately , night and day .


The astronomer , Mons .
Verron , now landed on a little island , which was denominated the Isle of Observatory , from its being a place admirably calculated for the making astronomical observations  but his labours were fruitless , owing to the cloudiness of the weather , which is almost perpetual in this country .
At some periods , however , the sun appeared free from clouds , and melted a part of the snow which had lodged on the mountains of the main land .
Whenever this fine weather happened , the prince of Nassau , attended by Mons .
de CommerÁon , a celebrated botanist , went in search of plants and herbs , and they were very successful in their researches : but the gentlemen who endeavoured  to fish , or to hunt for animals , met with no such good fortune , for they never catched even a single fish , nor ever saw any quadruped but one fox , which was killed by the party employed in collecting the stores .


Mons .
Bougainville having formed a resolution of taking a survey of the coasts of the main land , and likewise of those of Terra del Fuego , he embarked in his boat , early in the morning of the 22d , accompanied by two gentlemen , who proposed to sail with him as far as Cape Holland .
The weather was calm and serene at their first setting out  but the wind soon varied to different points of the compass , and blew a hurricane , which obliged our adventurers to take shelter in the mouth of a small river .
Having gained the desired port , they waited in the hope that the storm would abate , till they were almost benumbed with the cold , and wet to the skin with the rain  they therefore landed , and cutting down some branches of trees , erected a kind of hut , in order to shelter them during the night . '
`` These huts ( says Mons .
Bougainville ) serve as palaces to the natives of these climates  but we had not yet learnt their custom of living in them . '' '


It continued to rain incessantly , and was at the same time so cold , that the gentlemen found their present situation untenable  they therefore sheltered themselves as well as they could under the sail of the boat , and kept up a large fire all  night , which was tempestuous in a very high degree .
In the morning they hastened to their boat , and returned to the ship , happy , by that means , to avoid the effects of the growing tempest , which soon became so violent , that it would have prevented their returning at all .
For two days after this it snowed continually , so that the mountains were covered , notwithstanding it was now midsummer , and the sun appeared almost eighteen hours in the four and twenty .


When the storm had subsided , Mons .
Bougainville formed the resolution of going on a second expedition , which he flattered himself would be attended with more success .
Accordingly , early in the morning of the 27th ( the barge of the Etoile , and the long-boat of the Boudeuse , having been armed with swivel guns and muskets ) our adventurers embarked with the prince of Nassau , and two other gentlemen , and sailed for the coast of Terra del Fuego , where they arrived in about six hours  and finding a number of huts , which the natives had left in a delightful wood on the sea-coast , they there sat down , and made a most agreeable repast .


After dinner they coasted the country for a considerable time , and then crossed an inlet , which Mons .
Bougainville conjectures to be a streight which leads to the sea , at no great distance from Cape Horn .
This conjecture is  founded partly on the width of the inlet , which is not less than six miles , and partly on the observing a prodigious number of whales in that part of the sea .


When our adventurers had almost reached the opposite side of the inlet , they saw a number of fires on the coast , and soon afterwards discovered several of the inhabitants on the point of a bay .
Towards this place they immediately steered  and they had no sooner landed , than Mons .
Bougainville recollected , that these Indians were the same people whom he had seen on his former voyage in the streights , and whom he had then distinguished by the name of Pecherais , because these savages were perpetually making use of that word , in the same manner as the Patagonians did that of Shawa .


The number of the Pecherais that had thus assembled was about forty , of both sexes , and all ages , and they had several canoes in an adjacent creek .
As the evening advanced , Mons .
Bougainville could not stay long with his old acquaintance , but left them , in order to reach an inlet , where he proposed to spend the night  but as the time would not permit the accomplishing his wish , he landed on the banks of a river , and having caused tents to be made of the sails of the boats , and a large fire to be made , the party spent the night in perfect safety , and much to their satisfaction .


 On the following day it was found that the inlet above-mentioned was an excellent port , wherein ships might be sheltered against every dangerous wind  and in which the ground is admirably calculated to afford the best and safest anchorage .
From the elegance and convenience of this bay and port it received the name of Beaubassin [ the beautiful harbour . ]
Mons .
Bougainville mentions this place as equally convenient for the careening of ships , and for the taking in wood and water .


That no necessary information respecting so commodious a harbour might be lost , the Commodore left Mons .
Bournard there , to take the most exact account of every thing that might be thought worthy of notice , and he was then to return , in the long-boat , to the ships .
In the mean time Mons .
Bougainville and a part of his company embarked in the barge , and rowing to the westward , discovered an island , on the coast of which several of the natives were employed in fishing .
Before the evening our voyagers arrived at a bay , which received the name of de la Cormorandiere  from a rock which appeared at about a mile distant ftom it .


Early in the morning of the 29th Mons .
Bougainville departed from this bay , and sailed between two islands , to which he gave the name of the two Sisters , they are situated about nine miles from Cape Forward .
Soon after this they discovered a mountain , of a conical  Figure 4 .
A Prospective View of the great Cascade in Cascade Bay .
 form , which they called the Sugar Loaf  and , in the course of the day they arrived at a commodious bay , at the bottom of it there is a most excellent port , into which falls a very singular cascade .
For these reasons the place received the name of the Bay and Port of the Cascade .
It is represented as a place highly proper for taking in wood and water , and very safe to anchor in .
The stream of a small river which seeks its way between a number of lofty hills , forms this water-fall , which descends perpendicularly down the side of the rock above a hundred yards .
Mons .
Bougainville went to the top of the cascade , and made his remarks on the appearance of the adjacent country , in some parts of which there are small plains which produce a kind of spungy moss , and in others the ground is covered with thickets of wood .
The plants and trees are of the same kind as those which the coast of Patagonia produces  and the whole face of the country has much the appearance of Falkland 's islands , except the want of trees at the latter place .
On the whole , our author says , that all that part of Terra del Fuego , from the present spot , to that which lies opposite Elizabeth island , consists only of large and mountainous islands , the summits of which are clothe dwith perpetual snow .
Mons Bougainville searched in this place to find the traces of inhabitants , but he did not succeed  and he is  of opinion , that the natives of Terra del Fuego seldom , if ever , depart from the sea shores , because on those they obtain the necessaries of life .


Our adventurers remained at Port Cascade , during the night of the 29th , which was rendered highly disagreeable by incessant rain , and intense cold  and on the morning of the following day they crossed the streight with a boisterous wind and a rough sea , which rendered the navigation dangerous to so small a vessel .
The rain kept pouring down almost the whole of this day , which was employed in viewing the coast , and making such remarks as may be useful to future navigators .
Our voyagers had now a very narrow escape with their lives , the boat having been nearly overset in crossing a bay , owing to a mistake of the steersman in the management of the helm .
At length , however , they got safe on board the Boudeuse , and as the commanding officer , during Mons .
Bougainville 's absence , had shipped every thing that was necessary , preparations were immediately made for sailing .


They departed from Bougainville Bay in the afternoon of the 31st of December , 1767 , and in the evening came to an anchor in the road of Port Galant , which is situated at the bottom of Fortescue Bay , where they were detained no less than three weeks , by such bad weather , as the inhabitants of these milder climes can not form an adequate idea of .


 On the first of January , 1768 , Mons .
Bougainville dispatched a party in a boat , to make remarks on the coast , as far as Elizabeth Bay  and to take a view of the numerous islands with which this part of the streights of Magellan abounds .
Two of these islands , to which Sir John Narborough formerly gave the names of Charles and Monmouth , were distinctly seen from the place where the ships lay at anchor  but those which he has denominated the Royal Isles , and Rupert Island , were at too great a distance to be viewed from Mons .
Bougainville 's present station .


Notwithstanding the severity of the weather , and the almost incessant rains , the crew which had been sent out landed on different places , at one of which it was evident , that some English ships had lately touched  for on several trees they saw initial letters , and even whole names , cut in the wood : they also saw many spice-laurel-trees , the bark of which had been lately taken off , with other plain indications who they were that had visited the spot , but what put the matter beyond all doubt , were the words , Chatham , March , 1766 , which were very legible on a piece of wood , of that kind which is frequently affixed to pieces of cloth in the royal marine warehouses of Great Britain .


The astronomer , Mons .
Verron , in the mean time , had his astronomical instruments conveyed to a peninsula , by which the harbour is  formed , in order to make observations , for ascertaining the bearing and distances of particular capes : but the result of his observations would afford neither instruction nor entertainment to any but the mere nautical reader  nor would they be of the least use even to him , unless he was bound on a voyage to the South Seas , through the streights of Magellan .


The weather was so exquisitely severe on the fourth and fifth of January , that no pen can describe it , nor any imagination conceive an idea of it .
A violent storm of wind was attended with incessant rain or snow , and the keenest biting coldness in the air .
Mons .
Bougainville informs us that , during this severe weather , he sent out a boat to search for a convenient anchoring-place on the coast of Terra del Fuego , and an excellent one was found to the south-west of Charles and Monmouth islands .


On the 6th the weather was more moderate than it had been for some days past .
In the morning of this day four small boats , with Indians on board them , were observed at the point of Cape Galant , one of which advanced towards Mons .
Bougainville 's ship , while the rest rowed towards the bottom of the bay .
In the boat which approached the Boudeuse were a man , his wife , and two children , the former of whom went on board , without the least apparent sign of fear , leaving the woman and children in the boat .
Soon after this man had  gone on board , two Indians from the other boats followed his example , bringing their children with them .


These people seemed not to express the least surprize either at the structure of the ship , or at any thing they saw on board her , which our author deems a proof that , ' `` in order to be capable of being surprized at the work of art , one must have some fundamental ideas of it . '' '
- There may be some truth in this observation  but we can not help resolving the apparent want of curiosity in these savages into another , and a very different cause  namely , their having seen the English , or other vessels , which had visited the streights of Magellan .


The Commodore prevailed on these people to dance and sing , and treated them with a kind of concert of music .
He likewise gave them bread , and different kinds of meat , all of which they devoured with avidity , seeming equally pleased with every thing that was given them , and with every occurrence that passed  nor could they be persuaded to quit the ship , till several pieces of salt meat had been put into their boats .


Our author calls these happy Indians ' `` troublesome and disgusting guests . '' '
- One would wonder on what authority he has adopted these epithets , or how the company of the savages , as he calls them , could be troublesome or disgusting , when they sang and danced , only on  being asked to do so  received with gratitude whatever was given them , and applied it to the purpose for which it was given .
- Mons .
Bougainville calls them ' `` unpolished men  '' ' as if the frippery complaisance of the court of Versailles could have been expected from these honest tenants of the woods  whose instructors are plain sense and nature , and whose God is the God of the Europeans .
- In a word , our author writes with an affected consciousness of superiority , and in the pert restlessness of stile , that is almost peculiar to the French novelist who would be thought a philosopher .


The people are clothed with seal-skins , which are by far too small to cover the whole of the body  and with these skins they make the sails of their boats , and the coverings of their huts .
They are likewise possessed of a few of the skins of the guanacoe , but our author does not mention to what use they apply them  though it should seem probable that they form a part of their clothing .


Mons .
Bougainville describes these Indians as thin , short , and ugly  and that a most offensive smell is the consequence of keeping them company .
The women are still more disagreeable than the men , who do not appear by any means fond of them .
It is the duty of the females to steer the boats , and to repair any damage that may happen to them  and they are often obliged to swim after them through the  sea-weeds  nor are even women who have sucking children excused this duty : the child is carried on the mother 's back , enclosed in the seal-skin that forms her dress .
When the women are on shore their business is to collect shells and wood  nor do the men even share with them in this employment .


The boats are constructed of the bark of trees , fastened together with rushes , and the seams are caulked with moss .
A fire is constantly kept in the middle of the boat , on a heap of sand , which is placed to prevent the burning of the vessel .
Their arms consist of bows and arrows formed of the branches of the berberry bush , which grows plentifully in these parts .
The arrows are pointed with sharp stones , and the string of the bow is made of the gut of some animal  but they use not these weapons against an enemy  they are destined only for the destruction of birds , or other animals proper for the support of life .


Mons .
Bougainville says , that these Indians use a kind of harpoon , for the purpose of striking fish , which is made of bones , it is about twelve inches in length , pointed at the end , and indented on one of its sides .


The principal subsistence of these people is fish  but it is supposed that they sometimes catch game , as they have dogs of the sporting kind , and springes , or nooses , adapted for the snaring of quadrupeds .
The teeth of all the  natives are very bad , which our author attributes to their eating fish when boiling hot , though they do not half boil it before it is so eaten .
They live in huts which have no partition of rooms , in the middle of which a fire is lighted , that serves the whole family .


The disposition of these people is of the amiable kind  but their extreme good-nature borders on weakness  they believe in evil genii , and have priests and physicians , whom they suppose capable of deprecating the vengeance of their aerial enemies .
Mons .
Bougainville observes , that these Pecherais have the fewest conveniences of life of any people he has ever known  yet they they do not repine at their situation , but appear to be contented with the lot which providence hath assigned them  tho ' they live in the most inclement climate hitherto discovered in the habitable globe .
Exclusive of the other peculiarities of their fate , they are fewer in number than any other known race of men  yet this little society , cut off as it is from all intercourse with the rest of mankind , is not totally free from the vices common to larger states , as a contest for dominion exists even among them , and the more powerful are perpetually labouring to distress the weaker .
Thus it is with the poor Pecherais , as with every other community in the universe , that those who can not make head against tyranny , must submit  to the arbitrary command , the sic voleo , sic jubeo of the tyrant .


The inclemency of the weather , during the 7th and 8th of the month , was such , that the crews of the ships could not venture on shore  and though it was even now the summer-time , the adjacent country was covered with snow , which also laid on the ship to the depth of several inches .


On the ninth the Indians , who had previously painted their bodies with red and white streaks , advanced towards the ships  but seeing the boats go off towards their habitations , all of them , except one , followed the ships boats , and that went on board the Etoile , where she remained but a little while , and then followed the others .


The crews of the boats having landed , went to the huts of the Indians , who seemed by no means to relish this unexpected visit  which was particularly evinced by the women having all retreated to one hut .
The men invited the French sailors into those huts where the women were not to be found  and the Frenchmen having accepted the invitation , were treated with shell-fish , which the Indians sucked before they delivered them to their visitors .
The behaviour of the natives was lively , and they entertained their guests with dancing and singing : they revelled with uncontrouled delight , when ,  alas !
their mirth was interrupted by an accident as fatal as unexpected !


A boy , the son of one of the Indians , was suddenly seized with a disorder which occasioned the most violent convulsions , and spitting of blood .
This child had been on board the Etoile , where the seamen had presented him with some pieces of glass  and as these Indians are accustomed to put things of this kind up their nostrils , and into their throats , it is supposed this youth had taken the same measure , and that the fatal effects which followed were the consequence of his having swallowed the glass .
It is here proper to remark , that the Pecherais consider the swallowing of substances which resemble glass , as a preventive remedy against certain disorders to which they are liable .


The lips , palate , and gums of the boy were cut  and as he bled freely , the Indians conceived an idea that the Frenchmen had violated the rights of hospitality , and injured him , whom , by all the laws of honour , they were bound to treat with civility .


This circumstance gave rise to a jealousy and distrust no way favourable to their European visitors  indeed it appeared , that the Indians suspected the French to have caused the child 's illness .
A linen jacket having been given to this child by the French , he was stript of it , and it was thrown at their feet  but it was instantly  seized by an Indian , who did not seem to dread the powers of enchantment .


The child being laid on his back , a conjurer knelt between his legs , and pressing the body forcibly with his hands and head , uttered a number of inarticulate vociferations .
At repeated intervals during this ceremony he arose , and opening his hands , which had been before grasped , he blew in the air with his mouth , as if desirous of driving away some evil genius .
While this business was transacting , an ancient woman bawled in the ears of the child , so as almost to deafen him with her noise  and indeed the remedy seemed to be , in the literal phrase , worse than the disease .
The conjurer having retired for some time , returned in a new dress , and , with an air of triumph , renewed his incantations , but with no better success than before .
His hair had been powdered , and his head was distinguished by two wings , similar to those with which Mercury is represented by the painters .
The life of the child now appearing to be even in more danger than before , the French Chaplain hastily baptized him , unobserved by the Indians .


What a strange medley of ignorance and superstition was all this !
- Mons .
Bougainville laughs at the folly of the Indian juggler , while he seems to speak in an applausive strain of the conduct of the French priest , which was  certainly equally ridiculous with that of the Indian !


Some officers having repaired on board the ship , and acquainted the Commodore with what was transacting , he went on shore with the Surgeon , who took some gruel and milk with him .
When they came to the spot , they found that the juggler was assisted by another person habited like himself , and that the patient had suffered much from their absurd attempts to relieve him  yet were these attempts continued , without any complaint on the part of the poor boy .


The affection of the parents , and indeed of the whole company of Indians , was manifested by floods of tears , and by many other expressions of grief  and when it was observed , that the Frenchmen seemed to share in their misfortune , they appeared to be less diffident of the conduct of the strangers  and at length they permitted the Surgeon to examine the mouth of the sick youth , which being bloody , had been repeatedly sucked by his father and another man .


After some time the father accepted the gruel , and permitted his son to drink some milk , but not till the French gentlemen had repeatedly tasted it in his presence .
The conjurers appeared to be jealous of the Surgeon , but they could not help confessing the superiority of his abilities .
It was remarked , that while one of these Indian physicians was endeavouring to  drive away the disorder , the other was busily employed in deprecating that vengeance , which they supposed the visit of the strangers had occasioned .


In the evening the child appeared to be less pained  but , from many circumstances , it was thought , that he had swallowed some pieces of glass .
Mons .
Bougainville and the Surgeon now went on board , and it is conjectured , that the boy died about two o'clock the next morning  for soon after that time loud cries were heard , and , at day-break , the Indians departed from a place which had been so peculiarly fatal to them  for the loss of even one member of so small a community , could not but be an object of great and public concern .


On the 13th and 14th the weather was so bad , that it was impossible to think of sailing , and on the 15th the vessels were detained by a strong contrary wind  but on the following day they sailed , with a favourable breeze , which , however , soon shifted , and prevented their reaching Rupert island , off which it was Mons .
Bougainville 's intention to have anchored .
After a whole day of fatigue and danger they returned to Port Galant , and anchored again near their former station .


On the seventeenth the storms were more violent than they had ever yet been  the sea ran to a mountainous height , and the wind blew in such contrary directions , that the opposing  waves destroyed each other .
The storm having in some degree subsided before noon , a loud peal of thunder was presently heard , after which the winds blew with increasing violence , and all the elements waged a still more furious war .
The anchors of the ships having dragged , the top-masts and lower-yards were struck , to avoid the dreadful consequences of the storm .
At this time , however , the shrubs and plants were in bloom , and the trees were covered with a luxuriance of verdure .


On the 21st and the two following days the weather was extremely windy , while it rained and snowed incessantly .
The night of the 21st indeed was moderately calm  but this calm served only as the prelude to a storm , which descended with aggravated fury  such a storm as the oldest sailor on board had never remembered  but its continuance was by no means proportioned to its violence .


On the 24th the weather being fine and serene , preparations were made for sailing , and on the following day the anchors were weighed , and the vessels got under way .
Having arrived off Cape Quod , our Commodore stops a moment to describe it .
Its figure , he says , is very singular , consisting of craggy rocks , the most elevated of which bear a strong resemblance to the ruins of ancient buildings .
From Bay Galant to this cape the verdant appearance of the trees takes off , in some degree , that horror ,  which would otherwise arise in the mind from the constant sight of the summits of mountains which are always frozen .
After passing Cape Quod , the face of the country is totally changed , both sides of the streight exhibiting a prospect of rocks , which are uncovered even with the slightest layer of earth .
The tops of these rocks are cloathed with eternal snow , while the vallies between them are choaked up with prodigious quantities of ice , which have the appearance of having been congealed for a long series of years .
So dreadful is the appearance of this part of the streight that Sir John Narborough gave it the name of Desolation of the South  and , in fact , it is desolate and dreary beyond all description .


When Mons .
Bougainville 's ship was opposite Cape Quod , the coast of Terra del Fuego , distant upwards of forty miles , appeared as if terminated by a projecting cape .
There are three capes on the continent , which our adventurers called Etoile Cape , Boudeuse Cape , and Split Cape * , the last of which is so denominated from its figure .
The streight , which in this part is about six miles wide , received the name of Long Reach † .


As the evening of the 26th was very fine , Mons .
Bougainville determined to continue his way under an easy sail  but about two hours  before midnight a thick fog came on , the wind arose , and the rain poured down in torrents , while it became so excessive dark , that no land could be seen .
The situation of the ships was now supposed to be opposite Cape Monday  and the night was spent in standing off and on shore , in momentary expectation of some fatal accident


The land being seen at day-break , they hoisted additional sails , and proceeded with rapidity , till they reached Cape Pillar , when they had sight of the main ocean , into which they arrived under a full sail , on the evening of the same day  having , by the advantage of thirty six hours fair wind , sailed from port Galant into the great South Sea , without once coming to an anchor .


Mons .
Bougainville was seven weeks and three days in passing the streights of Magellan , the whole length of which , from Cape Virgin Mary to Cape Pillar , he computes at about three hundred and forty miles .


Though the passing the streights is a work of some difficulty and danger , our author recommends it as more safe than the doubling of Cape Horn , if undertaken between the months of September and April  but , during the rest of the year , he advises the passing through the open sea  and he observes , that the lost time in sailing through the Magellanic Streights , is amply repaid by the conveniences of taking in  wood and water , and the chance there is of the scurvy making less havock among a crew , when they have repeated opportunities of landing .
He adds , that when he left the streights he had not a single invalid on board either of his vessels .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a recital of the several circumstances which arose , and the adventures he met with , from this period till his return to Europe  in which we shall trace him with the utmost fidelity of the historian  presuming to differ from him whenever he appears to be mistaken as a writer , or to act on wrong principles as a man .


Our Commodore now sailed nearly a westerly course , having previously agreed with the Captain of the Etoile , that he should keep company with the Boudeuse during the nights , and in the morning of each day should sail as far as he could to the southward , without losing sight of the other vessel , in order that the ships might command as extensive a prospect as possible , by which means it was hoped that some new discoveries might be made .


On the 30th of January , while the sea ran very high , one of the crew of the Boudeuse fell over-board , and was drowned , notwithstanding every endeavour to preserve his life .
- From this time till the 17th of February , Mons .
Bougainville sailed in search of what is called  Davis 's Land , which was discovered by our countryman of that name in the year 1686  and he says , that if he had followed the directions laid down in Mons .
de Bellin 's chart , he must have sailed over this land .


On the 17th sea-gulls were seen  and as these birds do not go above eighty leagues from land , it was resolved not to alter the course of the ships for three days  but within this period no land was discovered .


The westerly wind , with a slight variation to the north and south , prevailed from the 23d of February to the 3d of March , during which time they had rain and thunder every day , immediately before , or soon after the sun had reached the meridian .
This variation of the wind , from what is commonly called the Trade-wind , is mentioned by Mons .
Bougainville as an extraordinary circumstance .


Soon after the ships had got clear of the streights of Magellan , an epidemical sore throat attacked almost every man on board , which was cured by putting vinegar and red hot bullets into the water casks , so that by the end of March , the whole crew were recovered .
For several days after this period such a quantity of bonitos and other fish was catched , as afforded one meal daily to every man on board .


On the 21st a tunny fish was taken , in the belly of which were a number of small fish of  such kinds , as are known not to swim far out to sea  whence it was concluded , that land could not be at any great distance  and on the following day this conjecture appeared to be well founded , for four very small islands were then discovered , to which Mons .
Bougainville gave the name of les quatre Facardins  but as these were too much to the windward of the ships , they held on their way , steering for another island , which was almost right a-head .


As the vessels advanced towards this latter island , it was observed , that it abounded with cocoa-nut trees , the fruit of which had a very tempting appearance .
These trees grew on plats of grass , strewed with an abundance of beautiful flowers  and the rest of the island was clothed with trees of various kinds .
Immense numbers of birds were seen on the coast , which was therefore supposed to afford a plenty of fish : but the sea running high , and no harbour being discovered , in which our voyagers might hope for protection from the fury of its waves , they were prevented from landing : when they had coasted the island for about two miles , they had sight of three men , who advanced hastily towards the shore .


Mons .
Bougainville at first imagined that these people were part of the crew of some European ship , which had been wrecked on the coast  and , impressed with this idea he gave , the necessary orders for affording them the  wished for relief : but he soon discovered that his conjecture was ill-founded  for the people retired to the woods , from whence , in a short time , issued a number of them , supposed to be near twenty , with long slaves in their hands , which they held up with an air of threatening and defiance .
This being done , they retreated to the woods , in which , by the help of glasses , their habitations were plainly seen .
These islanders were of a copper complexion , and very tall .


Mons .
Bougainville makes it a matter of wonder by what means these people were conveyed to this solitary island , and how they are disposed of when their increasing numbers render their support impossible on a spot , the circumference of which , he apprehends , does not exceed nine miles : - but our philosopher seems to forget that he has but just left four other small islands  nor did he recollect , when he wrote his volume , that he was , in a subsequent page , to tell us that he had soon afterwards discovered a larger island , the inhabitants of which , for any thing he could tell , might have intercourse with those on the before-mentioned island .
He seems equally ignorant , whether the people of these islands are or are not possessed of vessels proper for conveying them from one to the other  and he has forgot likewise , which appears to be the greatest blunder of all , that there may probably be , in this neighbourhood , some large continent ,  hitherto unknown to all our European navigators .
It is possible our remarks may be as absurd as Mons .
Bougainville 's appear to be  but they seem to arise naturally from the subject .
Be this as it may  our Commodore named the above-mentioned place the Isle of Lance-bearers , from the staves , or lances , which the inhabitants brandished .


During the night between the 22d and 23d they had much rain , accompanied with violent thunder , while the wind blew almost a tempest .
At the dawn of the morning land was discovered , which appeared to be a regular level , sufficiently clothed with verdure .
Breakers being observed on the coast , the ships stood out to sea , till the weather becoming more calm , they might approach the shore with greater safety , which happening before noon , they then coasted the island , which is shaped like a horse-shoe , and its inside is filled by the sea .


Some parts of this island produce cocoa-nut and other trees , which afford a very agreeable shade , but the greater part of it is only a sand , on which grows no kind of verdure .
A number of Indians were observed in boats , some of them rowing , and others sailing , on the lake formed by the shape of the island .
These people were all naked  and in the evening large numbers of them were seen on the sea-shore , with pikes in their hands , like those with which  the inhabitants of the Isle of Lance-bearers were armed .


Night advanced before any proper place was found for the ship 's boats to land  nor were they more successful in their researches in the morning  wherefore they held on their course , Mons .
Bougainville having called the place Harp Island  the inhabitants of which had the appearance of being tall , and genteelly made .


Our flippant Frenchman professes to admire the courage of these islanders , ' `` if they live unconcerned on these little slips of sand , '' ' which are every moment liable to be sunk in the abyss of an enormous ocean .
He might as well admire the courage of the inhabitants of France , the redoubted vassals of Louis le Grand  who are not less liable to fall victims to a convulsion of nature , nor under the more immediate protection of the Almighty , than these harmless tenants of a solitary island  happily cut off , as they are , from an intercourse with the more p [ ... ] lished barbarians of Europe !


In the evening of the day on which Harp Island was discovered , they had sight of other land , at the distance of something more than twenty miles , which had the appearance of being , what it afterwards was found to be , a cluster of islands , eleven of which were seen , and received the name of the Dangerous Archipelago .
Our author conjectures , that they are more numerous , and observes , that it is dangerous  sailing among them , as they are encompassed with shoals and breakers , through which a vessel ought to steer with peculiar care .


The ships now stood to the south , and by the 28th of the month were out of sight of all land .
The cluster of islands above-mentioned were first discovered by Quirôs , in the year 1606 , and were again visited by Roggewein , in the year 1722 , who gave them the name of the Labyrinth .


Nothing material happened from this time till towards the end of March , when the weather was boisterous and stormy , to a very great degree , for several days successively  and the scurvy now began to attack several of the crew .
To combat the ill effects of this disorder , every invalid received , daily , a pint of lemonade , in which was infused a powder , which had been frequently used with success during the voyage .
About this time they were much in want of fresh water , which was procured by the distillation of sea-water , according to a process invented by Mons .
Poissonier  and the water thus procured was used in boiling meat , and making broth .
The bread was kneaded with salt-water .


A steep mountain , which appeared to be encompassed by the sea , was discovered on the second of April , and received the name of the Boudoir , or Boudeuse Peak , from that of Mons .
Bougainville 's ship .
- Bearing to the northward  of this peak , they had sight of land , which extended farther than the eye could reach .


By this time it was become highly necessary for the ships to put in at some port , where they might obtain refreshments , and take in a supply of wood .
For the greater part of this day the weather was wholly calm  but in the evening a breeze sprung up , which conveyed the ships near the newly-discovered land  but it was thought prudent to stand off and on for the night .


In the morning they had sight of more land to the northward , but were not able to distinguish whether it was another island , or a part of that which they had before seen .


In the night between the 3d and 4th of the month fires were observed on several places , from whence it was conjectured , that the country abounded with inhabitants .
Just before sunrising on the 4th , it was discovered that the two lands , which had been supposed to be separate islands , were connected by a flat country , bending like a bow , and forming a fine bay .
While the ships were standing in towards the land , a boat was seen coming from the offing , which soon afterwards crossed a head of the ship , and joined a number of other boats , which had assembled from various parts of the island .
This assemblage of boats was preceded by one which was rowed by twelve Indians , quite naked , who advanced towards the side of the ship , and held  up some boughs of the banana tree .
Considering this as a token of friendship , our adventurers , in their turn , endeavoured to express a reciprocal regard .


This being done , the natives rowed along-side the Boudeuse , and a rope being lowered into the boat , one of them affixed to his branch of the banana tree , a quantity of the fruit of that tree , and a small pig .
This present was accepted , and , in return for it , Mons .
Bougainville gave them some handkerchiefs and caps  and thus was a friendly intercourse established with these people .


In a short time upwards of a hundred boats surrounded the French ships , which were laden with bananas , cocoa-nuts , and various other kinds of fruit , highly acceptable to the French , who gave in exchange for them a number of toys , which proved equally acceptable to the Indians .
- In order to carry on this traffic , our voyagers held up such articles as they meant to give for the fruit , and when the natives were satisfied with the quantity which was offered , it was let down by the ship 's side in a net or basket , and the Indians having taken it out , returned their commodities by the same conveyance  but sometimes the basket was lowered when empty , and the natives put their effects in it before they had received the European goods , without seeming to harbour the least distrust or jealousy of those with whom they dealt   thereby giving the best proof of the integrity of their own hearts .


When the evening advanced , the ships stood out farther from the coast , and the natives rowed back to the shore .
During the night a number of fires were seen on the island , at small , and nearly equal distances from each other , which the French imagining to be illuminations in honour of themselves , a number of skyrockets were fired from both the ships , to return the compliment .


On the morning of the fifth the boats were sent in search of an anchoring-place , while the day was spent in plying to windward of the island .


The description which Mons .
Bougainville gives of the appearance of this place , as seen from the ships , is very beautiful .
The mountains , though of great height , are every where clothed with the finest verdure , even to the extreme point of their most lofty summits : one peak , in particular , runs up to a most enormous height , tapering gradually as it rises  yet is it every where clothed with the most beautiful foliage , forming the appearance of a pyramid adorned with garlands , and carved by the hand of an ingenious sculptor .
The lower lands consist of an intermixture of woods and meadows , while the coast is a level ground , sheltered by the mountains , and abounding in cocoa nut and other trees , beneath the agreeable  shade of which are situated the houses of the inhabitants .


As Mons .
Bougainville coasted the island , he was charmed with the appearance of a noble cascade , which , falling immediately from the summit of a mountain , into the sea , produced a most elegant effect .
On the shore , very near to the fall of this cascade , was a little town , and the coast appeared to be free from breakers .
It was the wish of our adventurers to have cast their anchors within view of such an enchanting prospect  but , after repeated soundings , they found that the bottom consisted only of rocks  and they were therefore under a necessity of seeking another anchoring-place .


Soon after the dawn of day the natives rowed along-side the ships , bringing with them fowls , pigeons , cloth , shells , chissels , and other things , which they bartered for ear-rings , and pieces of iron .
Both parties dealt with the same ease and mutual confidence as they had done on the preceding day  and among the number of visitors were several women , whose cloaths barely sufficed to hide those charms which could not fail of attracting the ravished eyes of the seamen .
One of the Indians slept all night on board the Etoile , and seemed not to entertain a shadow of fear .


The ships plied to windward during the night , and by the morning of the 6th they had nearly reached its most northern extremity , when they  discovered another island  but as the passage between the two islands appeared to be rendered dangerous by a number of breakers , Mons .
Bougainville came to a resolution of returning to the bay which they had seen when they first discovered land , where he hoped to find a convenient anchoring-place , and where , after different soundings , the ships were at length safely moored .


The natives now put off in their boats , and surrounded the ships in greater numbers than they had yet done , exhibiting many tokens of regard , and perpetually crying out Taio , which was afterwards found to signify Friend .
The strangers were much pleased with some nails and toys which the officers and sailors gave them .
These boats were crouded with women , whose beauty of face was at least equal to that of the ladies of Europe , and their symmetry of body much superior .
Almost all of them were naked , the old men and women having taken previous care to divest them of those coverings , which might otherwise have prevented their charms from taking the wished effect .


These lovely lasses eyed the sailors with looks the most emphatically expressive , yet with a degree of timidity , which is at once the characteristic and the ornament of the sex .
It was not , however , necessary , that these females should give any very plain indications of their meaning : - the Indian men saved them this  trouble , intimating , that the favours of the ladies might be purchased on easy terms : they even urged many of the seamen respectively to make choice of a Dulcinea , with whom he would chuse to retire to the shore  and their gestures appeared not less extravagant than those of the same people , as recited by Dr. Hawkesworth , in his account of Captain Cook 's Voyage , of which circumstance the readers of these volumes is already apprised : - but Mons .
Bougainville goes beyond the Doctor , in the colouring of this scene .
He says that , ' `` even in those countries where the ease of the golden age is still in use , women seem least to desire what they most with for . '' '


Be this as it may , the sight of these enchanting damsels operated very powerfully on the passions of the seamen  and , thus situated , it was no easy matter to keep to their duty , four hundred young fellows , who had not seen a woman for half a year before .


Mons .
Bougainville and his officers did all in their power to preserve order and decorum , and to prevent any of these tempting creatures from coming into the ship  but their efforts were unsuccessful : - one of them , notwithstanding every precaution , got on board , and took her seat on the quarter-deck , near a hatchway , which was open to give air to some of the crew who were heaving the capstern .
She had scarcely seated herself , when she let fall a cloth  that covered her , with an air of negligence , and appeared at once the Cyprian goddess , to the ravished eyes of the spectators .
Both seamen and marines now eagerly crouded to the hatchway  and the capstern was heaved with a chearfulness and expedition never known on any former occasion .


After some time the officers succeeded in bringing the crew into some kind of order  though , as Mons .
Bougainville confesses , they found it equally difficult to restrain the ardor of their own passions .
- The Commodore 's Cook , having eluded the vigilance of the officers , got from the ship , and having selected a mistress from one of the boats , went on shore with her  where he had no sooner arrived , than the natives crouded about him , and pulled off all his cloaths .
They now examined , with curious attention , every part of his body , while he stood trembling under their hands , in continual apprehension of being murdered , or otherwise abused : but his fears were ill-founded  for they had no sooner finished the examination , than they gave him back his cloaths , put into his pockets several things which they had taken out of them , and then introduced his girl to him , urging , that he would gratify those passions which had impelled him to come on shore : but alas !
their persuasions , their warmest intreaties , were thrown away  - his fears had destroyed all ideas of love , nor could even the enchanting  beauty of his mistress recal them : the natives were obliged to take him back to the ship , where he told Mons .
Bougainville , that he had nothing to fear from his anger , for he had lately suffered such exquisite misery , that all other punishment would be comparatively light .


Mons .
Bougainville and some of his officers now went on shore to take a view of the watering-place , and were no sooner landed , than the natives flocked around them in prodigious numbers , regarding them with looks of inexpressible curiosity : some of them , bolder than the rest , came and touched the French , and put aside their cloaths , to find if they were formed like themselves .
The happy islanders , who wore no kind of arms , testified great pleasure at this visit of our voyagers .


A person , who appeared to be the principal man among the Indians , took Mons .
Bougainville 's party to his house , where they found an old man , the father of the Chief , and several women .
These last paid their compliments to the strangers , by placing their hands on their breasts , and frequently repeating the word Tayo .
The old man was a truly venerable figure , whose long white beard and hair added dignity to his person , which was exceedingly graceful and well formed .
He had none of the decrepitude of age , no wrinkles on his face , and his body was nervous and fleshy .
- The behaviour of this man was wholly different from  that of all the rest of his countrymen  for he expressed no sign of admiration or curiosity , left the room without returning the compliments of his visitors , and with an air that testified his uneasiness at their arrival .
Mons .
Bougainville even imagines , that he feared that a new race of men coming to settle on the island , might disturb that happy repose in which its inhabitants had hitherto lived .


The house of the Chief was about twenty feet in width , and eighty in length , and covered with thatch , from which hung a cylinder , above a yard long , formed of the twigs of the ozier , and adorned with black feathers .
Two wooden figures were observed , which Mons .
Bougainville says were idols , and that one of them was the god of the natives  but in this he must be certainly mistaken , as it appears from the account since published , that the inhabitants of Otaheite are not idolaters : - but from almost every part of his volume it is evident , that he has made his observations very hastily , and given a decisive opinion on subjects which he did not understand , and which he took very little pains to examine .


The figure which our author took for the god , was fixed upright against one of the pillars of the house , and over against it stood the other , which he calls the goddess , leaning against , and fastened to the reeds which form the walls of the house .
These figures stood on  pedestals of hard , black wood , about two yards high , one yard in circumference , shaped like a tower , hollowed out , and carved .


The Chief having directed his guests to seat themselves on a grass-plat in the front of his house , he presented them with a collation , consisting of broiled fish , water , and fruit .
While they were regaling themselves he produced two collars , formed of oziers , and adorned with shark 's teeth , and black feathers .
These collars , which resembled the prodigious large ruffs worn by the French in the reign of Francis the First , were put on the necks of Mons .
Bougainville , and a gentleman of his party .
The Chief having likewise presented our author with some pieces of cloth , the French were about to take their leave of this hospitable Indian , when one of them found that his pocket had been picked of his pistol  on which a complaint was made to the Chief , who immediately reprimanded several of his houshold , and would have searched them all  but this the Commodore would not permit , contenting himself with intimating to the Chief , that the weapon which had been stolen would kill the thief .


Mons .
Bougainville was attended to the coast by the Chief and his whole family .
As the company passed along , they observed an Indian , remarkable for the fine proportion and symmetry of his figure , reclined at the foot of a tree , who prevailed on the French to sit down by  him , and sung them an excellent song , to the slow music of a flute , which the other Indian blew with his nose .
Our author says this song was , doubtless , of the anacreontic kind , but he assigns no reason for this opinion .
This is described as a most delightful scene , and well worthy the pencil of the limner .


The company now proceeded to their boats , in which a few of the Indians embarked , and went to spend the evening and sleep on board .
The islanders seemed to be under no kind of restraint , but to have the fullest confidence in the hospitality of the French , who treated them in a very elegant manner , and concluded the evening with a band of music , and a display of fire-works  at which , however , the Indians , seemed more terrified than delighted .


The Chief went on board Mons .
Bougainville 's ship the following day , and took with him a present of some fowls and a hog : he likewise gave a full proof of the integrity of his heart , by returning the stolen pistol  but this is no wonder  it may hold as an almost unfailing maxim , that ' `` the generous are always just , that the knavish-part of mankind are to be found among the sordid and avaricious . '' '
The generous soul disdains every act of meanness  and it is certainly an act of meanness to detain the property of another .
Doubtless , the history of mankind will afford some instances which militate very strongly against this argument   but it will usually be found , that when the man of liberal sentiments has detained what he knew to be the property of another , such detension has arisen from the extreme penury of his own circumstances .
- We have instances of robberies being committed on the highway , and the money returned , years after the perpetration of the fact .
In such a case , surely , the robber must be allowed to have possessed an honest heart , even while he was violating the laws of his country  that his principles were just and generous  and that what he conceived to be a case of extreme necessity  the support of his sinking credit , and the preserving a beloved , an amiable woman , and the dear pledges of her love , from inevitable poverty and ruin , was the occasion of his taking so unwarrantable a step .
The reader will excuse this digression , in favour to the writer , who conceived that it arose naturally from the subject .


The name of the Chief , whose conduct gave rise to the above reflections , was ERETI , who remained on board several hours , and then went on shore with Mons .
Bougainville , who by this time had made the necessary preparations for landing the sick , and filling the water-casks .


As soon as the boats had landed , the Commodore fixed on a spot on the borders of a rivulet , where he gave orders for the forming of a camp , for the protection as well of the sick  men and their attendants , as of the waterers , and others , whose business might call them on shore .


For some time Ereti beheld the marines under arms , and regarded the preparations which were making to form the camp , without any apparent signs of uneasiness , and then took his leave .
In a few hours , however , he returned , bringing with him his father , and some others of the most eminent men on that part of the island , who remonstrated with Mons .
Bougainville on the impropriety and injustice of his taking possession of their country  at the same time intimating , that his people were welcome to be on the island during the day , for any period of time he might think proper , but insisting , that the party should return on board every night .
The Commodore , on the contrary , as peremptorily insisted that he would form the encampment , and endeavoured to convince the Indians how necessary it was that he should do so , in order to procure wood and water , and to have the better opportunity of trafficking with the islanders .


The Indians now retired , and held a conference on the occasion , at the close of which Ereti came to Mons .
Bougainville , and desired to know whether the French proposed to take up their residence on the island for life  and , if not , how long they intended to stay .
- In answer to this , the Commodore put eighteen small  stones into his hands , intimating , that he should remain there only so manys days .
Hereupon a third council was held , the result of which was , that an elderly man , of great authority , was deputed to wait on the Commodore , and endeavour to prevail on him to depart in nine days  which however he positively refused to do , and thus the matter ended .


From this period the islanders became again easy and happy .
Ereti complimented Mons .
Bougainville with the use of a large building , that had been erected on the side of the rivulet , for the purpose of laying up the Indian boats , which were instantly removed , at the command of the Chief .
Under this building tents were put up for the accommodation of the sick , and other tents for various uses .
A sufficient number of muskets were carried on shore , to arm thirty marines , all the workmen , and even the invalids , in case of necessity .


Mons .
Bougainville passed the first night on shore , in company with Ereti , who added his supper to that of the Commodore , invited a few select friends to partake of the repast , and gave orders that a croud of Indians , whose curiosity had brought them to the spot , should be dispersed .
He then desired to see some fire-works , which he beheld with a mixture of pleasure and astonishment .
Late in the evening he sent for one of his wives , who slept in the tent allotted to the use of the Prince of Nassau .
 Mons .
Bougainville says , that this woman was ugly and old  but how does he know that she was not the only wife of Ereti ?
It does not follow , because a number of women were seen on the first visit at the house of this Chief , that he was married to them all .
They might be daughters , sisters , aunts , nieces , or cousins , for any thing that could be known to the contrary , by people who had not learnt three words of the language of the natives .


The camp was compleated on the following day , and the building entirely enclosed , except at one entrance , where a guard was constantly stationed .
None of the Indians were admitted into this building but Ereti , and his friends of both sexes .
A croud of people were constantly about the place , but they made way for any one who had permission to enter , on the motion of a small stick which a Frenchman held in his hand .
To this place the natives assembled from all quarters , bringing poultry , hogs , fish , fruit , and cloth  in exchange for which they received buttons , beads , tools , nails , and trinkets of various kinds , on which they appeared to set a high value .


These benevolent islanders vied with each other which should oblige their visitors most  and when the French were observed collecting shells , and gathering plants , a number of women and children instantly employed themselves  in the same manner , bringing the same plants , in great abundance , and variety of fine shells .


Mons .
Bougainville now applied to Ereti , for information where he might cut wood , and was directed to the mountains , where the hard wood grows , the low lands producing only a gum-tree , and fruit-trees of various kinds .
The Chief even marked the trees which were proper for cutting , and pointed out the side on which they should be felled .


The islanders assisted our adventurers in cutting the wood , and carrying it down to the boats , and likewise helped them to fill water , and roll the casks to the coast .
For these services they received a number of nails , proportioned to the industry they had exerted : but it was necessary for the French to be constantly on their guard , to prevent their thieving the articles which were brought on shore  nor were even their pockets safe from the depredations of these people , who , Mons .
Bougainville says , are as ingenious in the art , as the pick-pockets of Europe  which is certainly no great compliment to the people of Otaheite .


Mons .
Bougainville supposes , that these islanders do not rob each other , as none of their effects were kept under locks and keys  and he attributes their frequent attempts to rob the French to an insatiable curiosity for articles which they had never before seen .
Guards were stationed , and patroles appointed , to protect the  French property  notwithstanding which , the islanders found means to steal several things , and they even pelted the guards with stones .
These free-booters hid themselves in a marsh behind the camp , which was overgrown with reeds : but a part of this marsh was cleared , by order of the Commodore , who directed , that when any more thieves were seen , they should be fired at .
Ereti even hinted , that this measure was necessary  but , pointing to his own house , seemed very solicitous that Mons .
Bougainville would not fire that way .
Orders were now given for some of the ships boats to anchor before the camp , and point their swivel guns so as to protect it .


The article of thieving excepted , every other intercourse between the French and Indians was carried on in the most harmonious manner .
The seamen made several incursions into the island , unarmed , sometimes in small parties , and sometimes singly : when the natives invited them into their houses , gave them provisions , and presented the young damsels to their embraces .
On these occasions the hut was instantly crouded with numbers of both sexes , who surrounded the young lovers , and eyed them with looks of the most intense curiosity .
Leaves and flowers were immediately strewed on the ground , and while some played on flutes , others sang a kind of song sacred to the Cyprian goddess .


 Mons .
Bougainville 's picture of these scenes is rather over-charged  but the pen of the historian should be guided by truth . '
`` Here Venus ( says he ) is the goddess of hospitality  her worship does not admit of any mysteries , and every tribute paid to her is a feast for the whole nation . '' '


The people of Otaheite seemed astonished at the embarrassment of some of the Frenchmen on these occasions : but Mons .
Bougainville is of opinion , that there was not a man of the whole crew who had not got the better of the European delicacy , by making a public sacrifice at the altar of Venus .
If this opinion be well founded , the poor Cook , whose case has been related , must have wonderfully recovered of his fright , before the Commodore left the island .
- Surely these intrepid subjects of Louis the Fifteenth must have been blest with the most vigorous constitutions in the universe , or have been cursed with the most unblushing impudence of face !
That many of the crew should have got the better of all regard for decency , is not to be wondered at  but that there should not be one Frenchman out of four hundred who could resist the temptation of thus publickly prostituting himself , is very astonishing .
But vanity is constitutional in a Parisian , and rather than not sacrifice at her shrine , he will be content to rob himself of his own good name .


 It may fairly be concluded , that if every man gave these public proofs of his prowess , the Commodore himself made one of the number , a naked spectacle to the laughing Indians !
But perhaps Mons .
Bougainville was honoured in the embraces of one of Ereti 's wives  in which case it is presumed , that the fond couple were surrounded only by the royal family , and the lords and ladies of the Court .
Doubtless , an extraordinary band of music must have been provided on these solemn occasions , and the best nose-flute-players on the island must have been engaged as performers .
What pity it is that our gallant philosophical , nautical , warlike Amoroso , has omitted a description of one of these charming scenes !
A print of it , too , would have done honour to some ingenious engraver of Paris , and it would doubtless have promoted the sale of a work so admirably calculated for the meridian of Versailles .
The doating monarch would have subscribed liberally , while the lascivious Barré would have extolled to the very skies the writer 's happy talent at description .
Who knows too , but that the French Ambassador might have introduced the work among the circle at St. James 's  and thus have promoted the cause of libertinism so far , that not one of the nobility of the succeeding generation should be the real child of his reputed father .


 To be serious  this is strange stuff , even for a French historian to write  nor would we have copied it , but that our engagements to the public compelled us to give Mons .
Bougainville 's Voyage  and Mons .
Bougainville must be answerable for all its faults .


Happy ought Englishmen to think themselves  particularly those of the middling and lower classes , among whom marriage is still held in some sort of esteem .
Long may it be so held , for the honour of legal love , the security of property , and the sake of those tender ties , by which relations are held in the bond of friendship !


Hail wedded love , mysterious law , true source Of human offspring , sole propriety In Paradise of all things common else .
By thee adult ` rous lust was driven from men , Among the bestial herds to range  by thee Founded in reason , loyal , just , and pure , Relations dear , and all the charities Of father , son , and brother , first were known .
MILTON .
Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a description of the beauties of the interior parts of the island .
He has often walked out , with only a few attendants , and arrived at places enchanting beyond the power of pen or pencil to paint .
Trees abounding with fruit of the most  delicious kinds , were frequently found on meadows intersected by rivulets , which gave an agreeable coolness to the air .
On these enchanting spots numbers of the natives revel in the profusive gifts of nature , unincumbered with the cares of the busy world .
Our author met with many little societies , reposing at their ease , under the shade of trees , who welcomed the strangers in the most friendly manner .
Those he saw on his way made room for his passage , with a degree of civility that would have done honour to the most polished European  and in every place he found evident marks of the content and happiness of the people  while he was treated with the utmost hospitality .


Mons .
Bougainville gave Ereti some ducks and geese , and a couple of turkies , that he might raise a breed of those birds .
He likewise presented him with some garden seeds , and advised him to cultivate some ground in the European manner  and a spot being fixed on by the French , it was enclosed , and several of the crew employed in digging it .
The natives were much pleased with the implements of gardening , and happy in having wheat , barley , oats , rice , c. put into the ground  as were likewise onions , and a variety of pot-herbs .
The Commodore is of opinion , that his generosity in this particular will not be thrown away , as the people of Otaheite seem to have a taste for agriculture  and he thinks they might soon  be brought to cultivate , in a proper manner , the finest soil in the world : they have indeed a sort of kitchen gardens near their huts , which produce yams , potatoes , and other edible roots .


Soon after the camp was formed , the Commodore was visited on board the ship by Toutaa , the Chief of a district near that of Ereti , who was a very tall man , and most admirably well made , he was attended by several gentlemen , hardly one of whom was less than six feet in height .
Toutaa brought with him cloth , hogs , fowls and fruit , which he presented to Mons .
Bougainville , who complimented him with some silk stuffs , trinkets , nails , c..


Toutaa invited Mons .
Bougainville to his house , where , in the midst of a large assembly , he presented him with a fine young girl , whom the Commodore conjectures to have been one of his wives  and the musicians instantly began the bridal hymn : - but our author does not say what farther passed on the occasion .


One of the Indians happening to be killed , his countrymen complained to Mons .
Bougainville of this violation of the rights of hospitality .
The dead body being conveyed to one of the huts , some persons were sent to examine it , when it appeared , that he had fell by a gun-shot wound  on which all possible enquiry was made after the offender , but he could not be discovered  and how he came to be shot remained a mystery  for Mons .
Bougainville says , that none of the crew had  that day left the ship with fire-arms , nor had any of those on shore been permitted to leave the camp .
It was evident , however , that the natives in general conceived their countryman to have been the aggressor  for their dealings with the Europeans were not intermitted  but some few of them moved off their furniture to the mountains , and even the house of Ereti was stripped  but a few presents from the Commodore regained his friendship and esteem .


Early in the morning of the 12th the cable of the Boudeuse parting , that ship ran foul of the Etoile , but the vessels were happily got clear of each other , before any damage had been sustained .
A boat was now sent to sound for some convenient passage , as the ships were in evident danger of being driven on shore : and at this unfortunate juncture news arrived , that three of the Indians had been either murdered or wounded in their huts  and that , in consequence of this unhappy circumstance , a general terror had seized the inhabitants .
The women , children , and old men , had fled up the country , taking their effects with them , and even carrying off the bodies of the deceased .
The Commodore , on receiving this intelligence , went on shore , and selecting four marines , on whom rested the suspicion of having perpetrated this foul deed , he ordered them to be put into irons in the presence of Ereti , a circumstance that re-conciliated the affection of the Indians .


 Mons .
Bougainville , apprehensive that the natives might revenge the injury they had sustained in the persons of their countrymen , spent a considerable part of the night at the camp , and gave orders for a reinforcement of the guards .
It is true , that the situation of the French was every way so advantageous , that , in all probability , they might have been an over-match for the united forces of the natives .
The night , however , was spent in perfect repose , except some slight alarms , occasioned by thieving interlopers .


The Commodore 's concern arose more from the apprehended loss of his ships , than from any hostile efforts that might be made by the Indians .
After ten at night the wind blew violently  the sea swelled to an enormous height  the rain descended in torrents , and the whole scene was tempestuous in a high degree .


Mons .
Bougainville went on board soon after midnight , when a violent squall of wind was driving the ships towards the shore .
Providentially the storm was soon over , and a breeze from the shore prevented the vessels being stranded .


About day-break another cable , and the hawser of the Boudeuse parted , when she was almost close on the shore , on which the surges beat with unremitting fury .
At this time too , as an aggravation of their misfortunes , the buoys of the anchors were missing  but it is doubtful  whether the natives had stolen them , or whether they had sunk .


Some little time before noon another cable parted , and the Boudeuse drove towards the shore .
They now let go their sheet anchor , but it could be of no service to them , as they were so near the breakers , that the ship must have stranded before a sufficient length of cable could have been veered out , to have given the anchor time to reach the bottom .
Thus situated , within a moment of despair , a wind off shore operated in their favour  yet this wind soon changed , though not till it had enabled them to get at a distance from the shore , by the help of a hawser , from a stream-anchor of the Etoile , which ship happening to be anchored in firmer ground than the Boudeuse , was , under providence , the great means of saving that vessel and her crew from destruction .
On occasion of this singular escape , Mons .
Bougainville pays a grateful compliment to Mons .
de la Giraudais , the Commander of the Etoile , to whose friendship and abilities he deems himself greatly indebted for the preservation of the Boudeuse .


Soon after day-light it was observed , that the camp was totally destitute of its usual visitors : not an Indian was to be seen near it , nor even a single boat sailing on the river .
The natives had quitted their houses , and the whole country appeared to be depopulated .
The prince  of Nassau now went on shore with a small party , and , at about three miles from the camp , found Ereti , with a considerable number of his subjects .
When the Chief recollected the Prince , he advanced towards him with a mixed countenance , expressive of hope and terror .


Many women were now with Ereti , who dropping on their knees at the feet of the Prince kissed his hands , and , bathed in tears , exclaimed , Tayo , maté ?


You are our friends , and you kill us !
-


The Prince succeeded in his endeavours to inspire them with fresh confidence  and Mons .
Bougainville had the pleasure of observing , from on board , by the help of his glasses , that the natives hastened to the camp , carrying with them fowls , fruits , c. so that there could be no doubt but that peace was re-established .


The Commodore instantly left the ship , and taking with him a quantity of silk stuffs , and a variety of other articles , he presented them to the principal persons , intimating how unhappy he was on account of the misfortune which had happened , and assuring them , that the perpetrators of so foul a deed should not escape unpunished .
- The grateful Indians caressed the Commander  the natives in general were happy that peace was restored , and the market soon became more crouded than ever  so that , in two days only , more refreshments were brought in than had been before , and the whole place  had the appearance of a fair .
The Indians now requested to see some muskets fired  but were not a little alarmed , when they found that the animals fired at were instantly killed .


The boat which the Commodore had sent to sound having found an excellent passage to the northward , the Etoile sailed on the 14th , and being got safe without the reef , her Commander sent the boat to the Boudeuse , in which was an officer , who having surveyed the passage , and conducted the Etoile to a place of safety , returned to take the same care of Mons .
Bougainville 's ship .


The crew of the Boudeuse now laboured incessantly in compleating her stock of water , and in bringing her effects on board .
The Commodore took possession of the island , for his Sovereign , by an inscription carved on an oak plank , and burying in a bottle , near the building they had occupied , a writing , containing the names of the several officers concerned in this expedition : and this method he followed invariably , at all the places he discovered in the course of his voyage .


The Boudeuse set sail early in the morning of the 15th , and the Commodore congratulated himself on having got clear of the reefs , when the wind suddenly dying away , the tide , and a swelling sea drove the ship violently towards the rocks , on which she must have been instantly dashed in pieces , and every man on  board have perished , except the few who could swim remarkably well .
At this moment , when she was ready to strike on the rocks , providentially a western breeze sprang up , and , in about two hours , conveyed our voyagers clear of all those dangers they had dreaded .


Mons .
Bougainville joined the Etoile before the evening , and a strong gale springing up about midnight , they set all their sails , and soon got perfectly clear of the coast .


Our author now describes , in very affecting terms , what passed at his taking leave of the people of Otaheite  and we shall endeavour not to fall short of the original , in the tenderness of the description  convinced that the English language is at least as well adapted for the pathetic , as the French , or any other European tongue .


Soon after the dawn of the morning , when the Indians observed that their visitors were making preparations for their departure , Ereti came hastily on board , in the first boat that was ready .
He now clasped in his arms , embraced , and wept over those new-made acquaintance , whom he was about to part with for ever .
- This scene was scarcely ended , when a larger boat , in which were the wives of this generous Chief , came along-side the ship , laden with a variety of refreshments .


This vessel likewise brought off the Indian , who , on their first arrival , had slept on board  the Etoile .
This man was called AOTOUROU .
Ereti presented him to Mons .
Bougainville , intimating his determined resolution to sail with the strangers , and intreating permission that he might do so .
This request being complied with , Ereti presented him to the officers respectively , saying , that he trusted a well-beloved friend , to the care and protection of friends equally beloved .


Ereti having accepted some presents , returned to the boat , in which were a number of weeping beauties , made still more lovely by their tears .
- With him went Aotourou , to take a melancholy leave of a lovely damsel , the dear object of his regard .
He took three pearls from his ears , which he delivered as a love-token to the desponding beauty  embraced her affectionately , tore himself from her arms , and left it to time and tears , to restore her serenity of mind .
- Who that reads this narrative can suppose , that an Indian has less dignity of soul than an European !


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a description of the island of Otaheite , with an account of the manners and characters of its inhabitants  and in this part of his history we shall trace him with the pen of accuracy .


There is a fine bay , about ten miles in depth , between a cape , which advances to the north , and the south-east point of the island .
Towards the bottom of this bay the coast is almost level ,  and this part appears to be the best peopled , as well as the most agreeable part of the country .
In a passage between the two most northerly islands , there is good anchorage for thirty vessels .
The rest of the coast is mountainous land , and in most places is encompassed by reefs of rocks , some of which are almost covered by the sea , while others are left sufficiently destitute of water to be considered as islands .
On these the natives kindle fires every night , that the crews of their boats may fish in safety .
Between these rocks are spaces , through which a ship may enter , but will find it difficult to get anchorage .


The mountains at a distance from the coast are much higher than it is usual for hills to be in countries of no greater extent .
These , being covered with verdure and fruits of various beautiful and delicious kinds , afford the richest prospect that the imagination can form an idea of .
Springs , issuing from the mountains , form themselves into rivulets , which meandring through the country , serve at once to fertilize and adorn it .


On the level parts of the island the houses are erected , under the shade of fruit trees  not in regular towns or villages , but separately , and where the fancy of the owner shall fix the spot .
Public walks , kept in the neatest order , lead from one residence to another , throughout the  island , so that the whole appears one scene of enchanted ground .


The principal fruits of the island are plantains , cocoa-nuts , yams , curassol okras , and the bread-fruit .
Indico and sugar-canes grow wild  and two substances proper for dying , one red and the other yellow , was found among the natives  but Mons .
Bougainville could not learn from what vegetable they were produced .


While Aotourou was on board the Boudeuse , it appeared , that he was acquainted with many of the plants and fruits in the possession of the French , which he called by their Indian names .
Indeed , the same productions are common to most countries within the tropics .


The natives use the cedar-wood , which grows on the mountains , for the construction of the largest boats  and they make a sort of pikes , of a very heavy black wood .
Their smaller boats are made of the wood of the bread-fruit tree , which is extremely soft , and full of gum .


The island of Otaheite produces very rich pearls , which are worn by the women and children  but these were secreted almost as soon as the French landed , and were seen no more during their stay .
A sort of castanets , instruments used by the Indian dancers , are formed out of the shells of the pearl-oysters .


The only quadrupedes seen on the island were hogs , small but handsome dogs  and  rats  the last of which are very numerous .
Of winged animals there are parroquets of exquisite beauty , the feathers of which are red and blue , most happily blended : pidgeons , rather larger than ours , of a deep blue colour , and most delicate taste : and common domestic poultry , differing in no respect from those of Europe .
The hogs and fowls feed on plantains only , so that the purity of their food must ensure the goodness of the meat .


Mons .
Bougainville obtained , by his traffick with the natives , about 140 hogs , and more than eight hundred fowls  and he might have procured much larger numbers , if his stay had been longer .


No venomous animals were seen on this island , nor any of those noxious insects , which are common to , and are the greatest curse of , hot climates .


There can remain no doubt of the salubrity of the air of Otaheite  for though the French laboured hard all day in the heat of the sun , and were frequently in the water , and slept all night in the open air , on the bare ground , not a single person contracted any disorder  while those who were landed for the cure of the scurvy recovered very fast , and many of them acquired so much strength , that their cure was perfected on board the ships .


 Our author mentions , as an undoubted proof of the healthiness of the climate , the strength of its inhabitants , who grow to an extreme old age , without feeling any of its inconveniences , though they sleep only on a few leaves , strewed on the ground , in huts ill adapted to defend them from the inclemencies of the weather .


The chief articles of food among the natives are fish and vegetables .
Flesh is seldom eaten even by grown persons  and by the young women and children never .
Their drink is pure water  and from this temperance doubtless arises , in a great measure , that freedom from disease , which is one of their greatest blessings .
These people were averse to the taste and smell of every thing strong  particularly tobacco , spices , brandy and wine .


The natives of Otaheite are of two distinct tribes , having no personal resemblance , yet practising the same customs , associating together in the most friendly manner , and conversing in the same dialect .
The first race of these people are much taller , larger , and better proportioned than the other .
Few of these are less than six feet high , and so extremely well made , that , as our author says , ' `` in order to paint a Hercules or a Mars , one could no where find such beautiful models . '' '
Their features are perfectly like those of the inhabitants of Europe : their hair is black , and their  skins rather brown  but this is attributed to their being so much exposed to the sun and air .
Mons .
Bougainville does not say which of the European nations they resemble , and therefore it must be concluded , that he means the French  in which case an English lady would scarcely give him credit for the extravagant encomiums which he lavishes on the beauty of the Otaheiteans  on the contrary , she will be apt to conclude , that better models for a Hercules or a Mars may be found between Berwick upon Tweed , and the lands-end in Cornwall .


The other tribe of these Indians are about the middle stature , have almost the features and complexion of Mulattoes , and rough , curled hair , as strong as the bristles of a hog .
Aotourou was of this tribe , and the son of one of the Chiefs of the island .


Our author says that this Indian 's want of personal beauty , was amply recompensed by the goodness of his understanding  but this assertion has been flatly contradicted by the testimony of several English gentlemen , who saw Aotourou , during his residence at Paris , and who represent him as one of the most ignorant blockheads they had ever known .
Hence it should seem , that English and French ideas are extremely at variance , respecting Indian abilities and attainments .


Both the tribes shave the upper part of the face , permitting the beard on the chin to grow ,  and a whisker on each lip .
Some of them bind the hair on the top of the head , while others cut it short , but all of them rub the oil of the cocoa-nut into the hair and beard .
They permit all their nails to grow to a great length , except that of the middle finger of the right hand .
Among these people one cripple only was seen  and it was supposed that he got his hurt by a fall .
The Surgeon informed Mons .
Bougainville , that many of the natives were marked with the small pox : and he says , he took every precaution that the venereal disorder should not be communicated to these happy , unoffending people  but it appears from Captain Cook 's account , that some ungenerous Frenchman was base enough to plant this dreadful malady , in a country where , from Mons .
Bougainville 's own account , it is more likely to spread than in any other part of the world , on account of the extreme attachment of the inhabitants to the Cytherean sports .
- Aotourou is probably arrived at his native country before this time , and has informed the islanders that their late visitors were Frenchmen  in which case the poor Indians will have ample reason to call the disorder by its genuine name , the FRENCH disease .


The ladies and gentlemen of Otaheite stain the lower parts of their backs , and their thighs , with a deep blue  the method of doing which having been already mentioned in our account  of Captain Cook 's voyage , need not be here repeated .
Mons .
Bougainville mentions it as a singular circumstance , that the practice of painting the body has always prevailed among the people of all countries , at the time when they bordered on a state of nature : it is , indeed , a well known fact , that the ancient Britons were found stained with wood , when Julius Caesar made his first descent on this island .


The natives of Otaheite wear pearls , and flowers of different kinds , in their ears .
They likewise make a frequent practice of bathing their bodies , constantly washing themselves before they either eat or drink  so that they are to be ranked among the most cleanly people in the universe .


Our author represents these islanders as good-natured and benevolent in a high degree .
He says , that , though the several districts are governed each by its own Chief , public war , or private animosity seemed to be equally unknown on the island .
The natives seem not to entertain even the slightest doubt of the integrity of each other , and appear to enjoy , in common , whatever is necessary to the support of life .
Their houses are always open night and day , and whoever enters may freely eat of whatever he finds .
In like manner they gather fruit from every tree  and all the level country being a kind of continued orchard , seems to be but one common property .


 Yet were these people , with such exalted ideas of general benevolence , most dextrous in stealing the property of the French .
The Chiefs , however , did not encourage their inferiors in these depredations  on the contrary , they requested the officers to kill those who should be detected in an act of theft : but they would never take this disagreeable task on themselves .
- When a thief was pointed out to Ereti , he would run after till he had overtaken him , and then compelling him to restore the stolen goods , he punished the offence by a number of stripes .


Mons .
Bougainville says , he had conceived an idea , that these people had no severer punishment among them than this kind of whipping  for they seemed to commiserate the fate of some of the French seamen , whom they saw put in irons  but our author has been since informed , that they have a custom of punishing theft , by hanging the felon on a tree .


Although the inhabitants of Otaheite maintain perpetual peace among themselves  yet it seldom happens , but that they are engaged in war with the natives of the adjacent islands .


They have large vessels , called Periaguas , in which they descend on the enemies country , and even engage in sea-fights .
A pike and a bow with a sling are all their arms .


If Aotourou 's information is to be depended on , the consequences of their battles are very  fatal to the vanquished .
The men and boys who are made prisoners , are stripped of their skins , and the beards of the men are taken off , and carried away in triumph , as ensigns of the victory .
The conquerors take with them the women and girls , with whom they frequently cohabit - Aotourou declared himself the son of one of these unnatural alliances , his mother being a native of OOPOA , an island not far distant from Otaheite , with the inhabitants of which they are frequently at war .
Mons .
Bougainville ascribes the difference observed between the two races of people , to this intercourse with the captive women of the adjacent islands .


The principal people on the island have a number of servants , who submit to their orders with the most unreserved obedience  and , in each district , the will of the Chief is a law , from the authority of which there is no appeal  but the Chief himself does not come to any resolution respecting matters of great importance , till he has previously consulted with the principal inhabitants .
The reader will recollect , that the truth of this circumstance is evinced , by the repeated counsels which were held on occasion of the French having determined to take up their residence on shore .


When an inhabitant of Otaheite dies , his body is deposited on a kind of bier , placed under a shed , to which the women resort daily ,  and anoint the corpse with the oil of the cocoa-nut .
In these places they are left , till all the flesh is wasted from the bones , and then the skeleton is conveyed to the hut of his relations , where a person , who appears to have great authority , attends , and being dressed in a habit peculiar to the occasion , he performs some solemn ceremonies : but how long the skeletons are kept in the houses , our author had no opportunity of knowing .


Mons .
Bougainville endeavoured to learn of Aotourou the religious ceremonies of his countrymen  and , if they mutually understood each other , it will appear , that the people of Otaheite are superstitious in a high degree  that the supreme authority is vested in the priests  that their principal Deity is called ERI-T-ERA , that is , King of Light , or of the Sun  besides whom they acknowledge a number of inferior divinities , some of whom produce evil , and others good : that the general name of these ministering spirits is EATOUA  and that the natives suppose two of these divinities attend each affair of consequence in human life , determining its fate either advantageously or otherwise .


To one circumstance our author speaks in decisive terms .
He says , that when the moon exhibits a certain aspect , which bears the name of Malama Tamai , [ the moon in a state of war ] the natives offer up human sacrifices .


 Mons .
Bougainville mentions one circumstance , as a proof that these people originated on the continent , from whence their ancestors must have emigrated .
When any one sneezes , his companions cry out , Evaroua-t-eatoua  ' `` that is , may the good genius awaken thee  '' ' or , ' `` may not the evil genius lull thee asleep . '' '


The principal people on the island appear to have many wives  and our author thinks polygamy is common among them all .
The rich are chiefly distinguished from the poor by keeping a greater number of the fair sex  for universal love is the characteristic of the inhabitants of Otaheite .
Both the parents seem eqally fond of nursing their infants .
The men employ themselves principally in war , fishing , and agriculture , while the women have little to do , but to render themselves agreeable by their assiduity to please : they submit implicitly to the will of the men , and the woman who should prostitute herself without the permission of her husband , would atone for her infidelity with her life .
Yet is the permission of the husband to gratify her passions , in what way she please , so easily obtained , that these fair ones are not under the least temptation to disobedience : in fact , the wife generally yields her person at the solicitation of her husband  jealousy , therefore , one would imagine , must be a passion quite unknown among them .


 The single woman follows , implicitly , the dictates of her heart , and yields her person at her own discretion  and , the more numerous the favours she has granted , the better her chance of obtaining a husband .
The examples perpetually before her eyes , the hymeneal songs of the natives , their dances , and their attitudes , added to the seductive warmth of the climate , all conspire to render that circumstance no vice at Otaheite , which would be deemed so in England .
Love is at once the business and the pleasure of the natives of this island  and at his shrine , all its inhabitants bend with the most fervent devotion .
They dance to the music of a drum , and sing to the flute blown with the nose .
They likewise divert themselves , occasionally , with a kind of wrestling , which at once braces the nerves , and relaxes the mind  though in this place , of all parts of the world , the mind seems to require the least relaxation , for almost the whole business of the islanders consists in pleasure .


Our author says , that the inhabitants of Otaheite are a witty and humorous people , which he attributes to their living in ease and jollity .
- That ease may make a man happy , we will readily allow  but that it can create humour , or inspire wit , we must beg leave to deny : - perhaps the dullest fellows this day to be found on the habitable globe , are among those who are easy and independant in point of fortune , and  perhaps , too , some of the most humorous and witty may be found among those who know not where to obtain a second shilling when the present is expended .
This , at least , is the case in London : it may , possibly , fare differently with the Parisians , almost all of whom being poor and merry , may fancy themselves wits and humourists .
In a word , wit and humour are not the gifts of fortune , but of Nature .


Mons .
Bougainville charges the people of Otaheite with a fickleness of disposition , which was deemed astonishing .
Every new object struck their attention , but nothing engaged it for more than a few minutes .
To reflect was , to them , a work of labour , and they seemed to prefer bodily to mental exercises .
- This , with our ingenious author 's permission , is a proof of their good sense : every man , who can think at all , must know , that the labour of the mind exceeds that of the limbs , in proportion as the soul is superior to the body !
For this reason we pay not an artist as we pay a porter  the one will earn an hundred pounds , while the other is drudging for as many shillings : but the porter can drudge on for life , while the artist , if he acquire not sufficient to retire with decency at an early period , will pine away a wretched old age in unmerited penury !


The natives of Otaheite are ingenious , beyond description , in the construction of their fishing-tackle , the hooks of which are of mother  of pearl , and wrought as nicely as if with European tools .
With threads drawn from the American aloe they form their nets , which are made like those of France , and other nations of Europe .
Their houses , too , are exceedingly well built , and the palm-leaves , with which they are thatched , are laid on with great skill and taste .


The boats ( or periaguas ) of these people are of two kinds .
The former very large , hollowed out of huge trees , and finished with much taste , parts of other trees being added as ornaments : - the latter small , and of much ruder construction - But these kinds of boats having been repeatedly described in this and other books of voyages , it is unnecessary to say more of them .


In order to convey themselves from one island to another , they fix beams of wood from the starboard side of one vessel to the larboard of the other , leaving an intermediate space of something more than a yard  and over the stern of both the boats they erect a kind of hut , lightly built , and covered with reeds , which serves as a repository for their provisions , and a shelter against the inclemency of the weather .


Two boats thus lashed together never overset  and are therefore much in use among the people of superior rank : the sails of these vessels  are nearly square , and consist of mats , stretched out by means of pieces of cane .


The only tools in use among the natives of Otaheite are pieces of shells made sharp , for boring holes in wood , and a chissel , in the European make , the blade of which is formed of a hard black stone .


The natives manufacture that remarkable kind of cloth which forms their dress : a shrub is cultivated near all the Indian huts , from the rind of which this cloth is made , by beating it on a smooth board , and occasionally sprinkling it with water , till it is as thin as paper , and something like it , only much more pliable .
Thus they make cloth of different thickness , which they afterwards dye  but their process in the dying it Mons .
Bougainville had no opportunity of seeing .


Our author now employs two or three pages in defence of his conduct in bringing Aotourou from his native island , in answer to some illiberal reflections which had been cast on him  and then he proceeds to describe some particulars of the Indian 's behaviour during his residence .
This account should certainly have appeared as a supplement to the Volume  but we take it as it stands .


Mons .
Bougainville says he endeavoured , at a great trouble and expence , to render Aotourou 's residence at Paris both improving and entertaining to him .
The curiosity of the public  to view this stranger was insatiable  and the foolish Parisians were astonished to learn , that there was any country on the face of the earth , where neither French , English , nor Spanish was spoken .
Mons .
Bougainville happily ridicules this strange kind of ignorance  but he does not seem to wonder , that it should prevail among those who had never been without the walls of the city which gave them birth .


Our author is likewise very severe on a set of critics , who seemed to wonder that Aotourou could live among Frenchmen almost two years , and yet learn only a very few words of their language .
To account for this , Mons .
Bougainville mentions a physical obstruction in the organs of his speech  his age , which rather exceeded thirty years  the deficiency of a memory never exercised by study  and the possessing only a very limited number of ideas , relative to the trifling wants of the natives of his happy island .
Hence our author concludes , that he must first of all have created ' `` a world of previous ideas , in a mind as indolent as his body '' , ' before he could adapt them to the French words proper to express them .


Though Aotourou was thus deficient in the language of France , yet the streets of Paris were quite familiar to him .
He went out daily without attendants , and found his way readily through the whole city .
He frequently bought things , and was seldom defrauded in the purchase .
 None of the public diversions had any charms for him but the opera , to which he went regularly : for he knew the nights on which it was to be performed , and paid the same for admittance as other people : his great fondness for dancing was what rendered the opera so agreeable to him .


He was exceedingly grateful to those who conferred any obligations on him , nor did he ever forget their persons or their favours .
The dutchess of Choiseul stood foremost in the list of his friends , and he expressed more gratitude for the polite attention with which she treated him , than even for the numerous presents which he received at her hands : and as often as he heard of that lady 's being arrived from her country-seat , he would immediately go and visit her .


After a residence of eleven months at Paris , Aotourou was put on board the Brisson , at Rochelle , which ship was destined to convey him to the isle of France , whither orders were sent to the Governor and intendant , to transport him thence to his own country .
Mons .
Bougainville gave about 1500 l. sterling , towards the fitting out the Brisson for this voyage  and the Dutchess of Choiseul ordered a considerable sum to be expended in cattle , seeds , implements of husbandry , c. which were shipped for the use of the natives of Otaheite .
Mons .
Bougainville concludes this part of his narrative  with the following very humane and equally political wish . '
`` O may Aotourou soon see his countrymen again ! '' '


Our author now proceeds to inform us of several particulars , with which his conversation with this adventrous islander had made him acquainted .
If Mons .
Bougainville be not misled in his information , the state of facts will appear to be , that the inhabitants of Otaheite pay their devotions to the Deity , at the rising and setting of the sun  that their supreme God is incapable of representation  but that they have two classes of inferior deities , who are represented by figures carved in wood .
Exclusive of these regular devotions , the natives of Otaheite practice a number of superstitious ceremonies , in order to avert the influence of the evil genii .


While Aotourou was at Paris , in 1769 , a comet appeared , which furnished Mons .
Bougainville with an opportunity of knowing that these kind of stars had been frequently observed at Otaheite  but that the natives do not suppose that they are portentous of any evil consequence  on the contrary , what we call shooting stars , are , by these people , deemed evil genii .
- How far it was possible for Aotourou to explain himself to Mons .
Bougainville , on astronomical subjects , is left to the reader 's reflection .


 The more enlightened people of Otaheite have names for the sun , moon , and stars  by which , without the assistance of the needle or compass , they steer their course night and day , sailing , at some times , not less than eight hundred miles from island to island .
In the daytime they are guided by the sun , and by the stars in the night .


Mons .
Bougainville learnt from Aotourou the names of several islands , in the seas near Otaheite , the natives of some of which were in friendship , and those of others at war , with his countrymen .
Of the former are Tapouamassou , Oumaitia , Aca , Maoroua , and Aimeo  of the latter , Oopoa , Toumaraa , Otaa , Aiatea , and Papara  all which are represented as about equal in extent with Otaheite .


There is an island , called Pare , the inhabitants of which are alternately at war and in friendship with the natives of Otaheite .
In these seas are likewise two small islands , called Toupai , and Enoua-Motou , which are not inhabited , but yield abundance of fruit , fowls , and hogs , while their coasts abound with turtle , and other fish  but the people of Otaheite conceiving these islands to be the residence of evil genii , deem it a certain sign of misfortune , if either curiosity or chance should lead any boat to their coasts  and it is supposed , that those who endeavour to land there will perish in the attempt .


 The most distant of all the islands abovementioned is not more than about fifteen days sail from Otaheite , even with the boats of that island  and Mons .
Bougainville conjectures , that Aotourou had no idea of going farther when he embarked on board the Boudeuse .
- If this conjecture be well founded , there certainly was not so much magnanimity in this Indian 's behaviour as we have been hitherto taught to believe : - but there are great inconsistencies in the writings of our voyager , which the reader will pardon , in favour of his vanity .
It is our duty to correct and amend as we proceed .


Mons .
Bougainville at first imagined , that the inhabitants of Otaheite were nearly equal in point of rank , and that their happiness was to be envied , from their supposed equality : but he now , from the information of Aotourou , corrects that error , and confesses that , ' `` the distinction of ranks is very great , '' ' and ' `` the disproportion very tyrannical . '' '
- The Chiefs , and other men in power , dispose of the lives of their dependants at their pleasure  and our author thinks , that they have the power of exerting this cruel prerogative over the common people , who are not immediately dependant on them .
The vulgar are distinguished by the appellation of Tata einow , that is , vile men  and it is mentioned , as an indubitable fact , that those doomed for sacrifices are selected from the Plebeian race .
The Grandees only eat fish  and flesh , while the common people subsist entirely on pulse and fruits .
Indeed the distinction of rank appears to be very great  for persons of eminence are lighted from place to place in the night , with a wood of superior quality to that which the vulgar are allowed to burn .
The tree called the weeping willow is planted only before the houses of the Chiefs or Kings , and their public dinners are held beneath its shade .


The servants of the great men are distinguished by a kind of sash , worn round the body , which is placed across the loins , or higher up , till it comes close under the arm-pits , in proportion to the rank of the master .


The natives of Otaheite make two regular meals daily , one just after noon , and the other as soon as the sun is gone down .
The servants cook the victuals , which are served up by the wives , who eat after their husbands have done .


When the men die , the women go into mourning for them  but this compliment is not returned on the part of the men .
The children wear mourning a long time after the death of the father , and on the decease of a king , the whole nation is in sables .
The mourning consists of a head-dress of black feathers , and a veil drawn over the face .


Aotourou informed Mons .
Bougainville , that this veil was very favourable to the wishes of those women whose husbands were not so complaisant  as his countrymen in general are .
This arises from the following circumstance .
When the mourners go out , a number of slaves walk before them , beating the castanets to a solemn melancholy tune , which is considered as a notice for all persons to keep at a distance from the afflicted : thus , the veil over the face , and the sound of an instrument from which every one flies , can not but be auspicious to the wishes of the enraptured lovers .


When any person is dangerously ill , all his relations repair to his house , and remain there till he is either dead or out of danger , each , in his turn , attending the sick man .
Their method of bleeding is very singular .
An inferior priest , called Taoua , is the physician , who strikes the cranium with a piece of sharp wood , which opens the sagittal vein  and when he deems the patient to have bled sufficiently , he ties on a bandage , which closes the orifice  the day following he washes the wound , and no ill consequence ensues .


Mons .
Bougainville says , that the preceding account contains every thing he could learn respecting the customs of Otaheite , either on the island , or from the information of Aotourou .
Our author remarks , that some words spoken by the natives of Otaheite , are to be found in a vocabulary at the end of La Maire 's voyage , under the title of the ' `` Vocabulary of Cocos island '' , ' which being mentioned as lying  nearly in the same latitude with Otaheite , is conjectured to be one of those islands , the names of which were recited by Aotourou .


The language of the people of Otaheite is described by Mons .
Bougainville as extremely harmonious , and easy of pronunciation , consisting chiefly of vowels , and having no aspirates .
He says also that it has no nasal , mute , or half syllables  nor ' `` that quantity of consonants and articulations , which render some languages so difficult . '' '
Hence , he concludes , arose the difficulty of teaching Aotourou the French tongue  but he thinks it would have been a work of much less labour to have taught him the Italian or Spanish .


How far our author is right in his conjectures , it would be no easy task to determine  for the direct contrary of what he says of the language of these islanders has been observed by the English navigators .
As we have already given some vocabularies , we shall , at the conclusion of this narrative , give that of Mons .
Bougainville , that the reader may determine whether the English or the French voyagers have the best pretensions to credibility .


Mons .
Bougainville informs us , that a gentleman of Paris , distinguished by his skill in teaching the art of speech to persons born deaf and dumb , repeatedly examined Aotourou , and found that he could not naturally pronounce  any of the French nasal vowels , and but very few of the consonants .


Our author is of opinion , that the language of Otaheite is sufficiently copious , and he grounds this opinion on the following circumstances .
Whenever , during the voyage , Aotourou was struck with any new object , he immediately expressed his sentiments in a kind of extempore blank verse  and he also repeated daily a long prayer , which he called ' `` the prayer of the Kings , '' ' not a dozen words of which Mons .
Bougainville understood , or heard him repeat on any other occasion .


Aotourou informed the Commodore , that an English ship had arrived at Otaheite about eight months before the French touched at that island .
This ( says our author ) was the vessel commanded by Captain Wallace  and he ascribes the knowledge of iron , which was observed among the natives , to this visit of the English , especially as they call it Aouri , which is not very unlike our word iron .
Our Frenchman likewise gives a very ungenteel hint , that the poor Indians were indebted to the English for the venereal disease  but the contrary of this is known to be the fact .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to give an account of his departure from Otaheite , and his discovery of other islands in the southern pacific ocean .
On the morning of the 16th of April , 1768 , he discovered what he thought to  be three other islands  but it was afterwards found to be only one , the high lands of which had , at a distance , given it the appearance of separate islands .
At a considerable distance beyond this island , they saw another , which Aotourou told them was called Oumaitia  that the natives of it were in alliance with the people of Otaheite  that there was a girl on the island to whom he had a strong attachment  and that if the Commodore would touch there , he would meet with the same kind of necessaries , and the same hospitable treatment , as he had experienced among his countrymen .


Our circumnavigator , however , deaf to all these persuasive arguments , held on his way , and lost sight of the island the same day .
The succeeding night proving remarkably fair , and the stars appearing with unclouded lustre , Aotourou pointed out a constellation in the shoulder of Orion , and expressed a wish , that the ship 's course might be directed by it , in consequence of which they would , in two days time , arrive at a fine island where he had a numerous acquaintance  and it was conjectured , from his hints , that he had also a child there .
As Mons .
Bougainville persisted in his resolution not to alter the ship 's course , Aotourou became very uneasy , and endeavoured to persuade him to steer for the desired port , by assuring him , that the island abounded in hogs , fowls , fruits , and , what he seemed to  think would be the most prevailing argument , fine women , who were abundantly liberal of their favours .


Mortified in a high degree that his reasons did not operate with the Commodore , he ran to the steerage , and seizing the wheel of the helm , tried to steer for his favourite isle , nor was it without great difficulty on the part of the helm 's - man , and equal vexation on that of the poor Indian , that he was prevented from carrying his design into execution .


Early on the following morning he climbed to the mast-head , where he remained several hours , anxiously looking out for the spot which had so much attracted his regard .


On the preceding night he pointed out a great number of stars , and informed Mons .
Bougainville of their names in the language of Otaheite  and it was afterwards certainly known , that this islander was not unacquainted with the phases of the moon , and that he was learned in those prognosticks , which evince an approaching change of the weather .
It likewise appeared , that his countrymen were not uninformed in this kind of knowledge , so useful to people whose wants or curiosity frequently carry them to sea , where they have no compass to direct their course , except their own judgment , and the sight of the coelestial constellations .


 Mons .
Bougainville confesses , that the natives of Otaheite are fully convinced that the sun and moon are peopled  and he asks , ' `` What Fontenelle taught them the plurality of worlds ? '' '
- We will answer him .
- The omnipotent Creator of all worlds , who fills all space  whose power gave birth , and whose presence gives life to nature , and who has poured his bounties , with unsparing hand , on every part of his creation .


Our historian having acknowledged , that these islanders are possessed of such great and superior talents , has certainly no right to call , or to deem , them savages .
Is a man a savage because he happens to be born in a different part of the world from us  because he is unacquainted with the languages of Europe , and untaught in customs , which he could never , from the locality of his situation , have an opportunity of learning ?
The historians , and particularly the navigators of this quarter of the globe , are very censurably fond of distinguishing , by the title of savages , all those who are happy enough to be born in milder climates , and to live and die , uninstructed in those arts of refinement , and unskilled in that baseness of insincerity , which are at once the characteristick , the boast , and the disgrace of the Christian world .


The weather continued fine till the end of April , at which time the principal pilot on board  the Boudeuse died of an apoplectic fit .
In the beginning of the month of May , three islands were discovered at the distance of ten or twelve leagues to the north-west  but these were unknown to Aotourou , who imagined that it was Mons .
Bougainville 's country .
The moon shone bright in the night , during which they kept sight of the islands , and in the morning steered for the largest , the eastern shore of which they coasted , and found it about nine miles in length .


The coasts of this island are remarkably steep , and , in fact , the whole of it is little else than an enormous hill , cloathed with trees .
Several fires were seen on shore , a small number of houses covered with reeds , under the shade of cocoa-nut trees , and more than twenty of the natives running hastily along the coast .


The two smaller islands were each about a mile and a half in length , and separated from the larger one by an arm of the sea  in shape and appearance they are very much like the former .


The Commodore had given directions to steer between the islands , when a boat , with five Indians in her , was observed coming off towards the ship .
She advanced very near , but , though every sign of friendly invitation was made , not one of the natives would venture on board .
They had no kind of cloathing but a bandage round the waist  and as they  could not be prevailed on to come up the ship 's side , Aotorou stripped himself , leaving on nothing more than what they wore , and addressed them in the language of Otaheite  but they understood not a word of what he said .


As they held up some cocoa-nuts , and other vegetables , and seemed to wish to barter them for some trinkets which were shewn them , Mons .
Bougainville ordered out one of the ship 's boats , with a view to visit the strangers  but they no sooner learnt his intention , than they rowed off with all possible expedition , and he did not think proper to follow them .


In a little time many other boats advanced towards the ships , some of them rowed , and others sailing .
These , less diffident than the former , came close under the ship 's side , but none of the islanders would venture on board .
They exchanged pieces of an exquisitely fine shell , yams , cocoa-nuts , and a water hen of most beautiful plumage , for small pieces of red stuff  but they did not seem fond of earrings , knives , nails , nor iron of any kind  which had been so eagerly coveted by the inhabitants of Otaheite .
One of these Indians brought a cock with him , but he would not part with it on any terms .
They had also some pieces of cloth , of the same kind as that manufactured at Otaheite , but not of so fine a fabrick , and died black , brown and red , but none of the colours were good of their kinds .
 They were likewise possessed of a kind of wood hardened by fire , lances , mats , and fish-hooks made of bones .


Mons .
Bougainville conjectures , from the features of these islanders , that they are not of so amiable a disposition as the natives of Otaheite  and he represents them as such dextrous thieves , that it was almost impossible to guard against their depredations .


These people are of the middle size , and exceedingly alert  they are of a deep brown complexion , but one was seen among them who was much fairer than any of the others  they had no beards , so that it was supposed they were plucked out by the roots , and their hair , which was universally black , stood almost erect on their heads  their thighs and breasts were painted with a deep blue .


Their boats are built in a most ingenious taste , and furnished with out-riggers .
The head and stern of the vessel are equally flat with its sides , and over each is a small deck , in the center of which is a row of wooden pegs , the tops of which are enclosed in a shell of the purest white : the sail is formed of matting , and its shape triangular , being extended by means of sticks .


In these boats the islanders followed the French vessels to a considerable distance out to sea , while several others , from the smaller islands , joined the naval procession , and produced  an effect that was highly agreeable .
In one of these last mentioned boats was an old woman , remarkably distinguished by the singular ugliness of her features .


As the weather now fell calm , the Commodore gave up , from an apprehension of danger , hit project of sailing between the islands , though the breadth of the channel was more than four miles .
They now sailed , therefore , in the open sea , and on the evening of the same day , the man at the mast-head had sight of other land , even while they were yet in view , by the aid of a bright moon , of the islands they had lately left .


On the morning of the 5th it appeared , that the newly discovered land was a most beautiful island , consisting of alternate mountains and vallies , clothed with the richest verdure , and finely shadowed by the spreading branches of the cocoa-nut , and a variety of other trees .
Near the westermost point of this island is a ledge of rocks , and the sea breaks with violence on many parts of the coast , so that it would be difficult to land , except in very few places .


Many boats put off from the island , and sailed round the ships , though they were then going at the rate of at least seven knots an hour .
These boats , however , one only excepted , would not venture near the ships  but that one went along-side , and her crew made  signs for the French to land , which they would have done , but the breakers rendered it impossible .
At this time the man at the mast-head observed a number of the Indian boats sailing to the southward .


On the following day another island was seen to the westward of the ship 's course , in the neighbourhood of which were two smaller islands  but none of these could be distinctly beheld , on account of some thick fogs , which intercepted the view .


The last mentioned islands are situated nearly where Tasman , the Dutch navigator , has placed a number of islands which he discovered , and to which he gave the names of Heemskirk , Prince William , Pylstaart , Amsterdam and Rotterdam .
The longitude of these islands corresponds likewise , very nearly , with those which navigators have called Solomon 's Isles  so that it is most probable they are the same .


Mons .
Bougainville conjectures , that the number of boats which were observed sailing to the southward , is a vindication that there are other islands at no great distance  and , indeed , this opinion seems to be well-grounded .
o all these lands the Commodore gave the general name of the Archipelago of the Navigators .


The writer of this work must be indulged for giving a hint , which springs from the noblest of motives , the love of his country .
It is  surely well worthy the consideration of the British ministry , whether it might not be proper to send a fleet to discover and settle some of these islands .
- Who knows what future benefit might , from such a circumstance , accrue to the first maritime and commercial state in the universe ?
- The American colonies form the brightest gem in the British crown .
The colonies in the southern pacific ocean might , not improbably , constitute a diadem of still superior lustre !


On the morning of the 11th another island was discovered , which received the name of the Forlorn Hope  but for what reason it is impossible to guess .
At a distance it had the appearance of two islands , but this deception was occasioned by its shape , for it consisted of two hills , joined by a low land , which could not be seen far out at sea .


At this period , and for some days before and afterwards , the weather was extremely unfavourable , the winds being adverse , and the rains and calms alternate .
Mons .
Bougainville ( on this circumstance ) observes , that in the ocean which has obtained the name of PACIFIC , the approach to land is generally announced by violent tempests , which become still more violent , in proportion as the moon decreases .
The vicinity of islands is generally foreboded by thick clouds at the horizon , and squally weather  and the precautions necessary  to be taken to prevent a vessel 's running fowl of shoals , may be more easily conceived than described .
In the present instance it was impossible to proceed with the necessary degree of caution  for the crew were in want of provisions , and water , in particular , grew very scarce  so that they were obliged to take advantage of every breeze of wind , both by night and day , and run all hazards , for fear of starving .


Thus situated , it may be presumed , that they thought themselves sufficiently unhappy  but their distresses were aggravated by the greater number of the crew of each ship being attacked by the scurvy , which inflamed their mouths to such a degree , that they could scarcely have swallowed those refreshments of which they stood much in need .
Salt beef , pork , and dried pulse , constituted the whole fare of those who remained in health  for the sick , however , there were yet some few articles of fresh provisions remaining .


At this unfortunate juncture the disease , consequent on an illicit commerce between the sexes , made its appearance , attended by all its most disagreeable symptoms .
Aotourou was so extremely ill of it , that though seeming to despise its progress and its effects , he was obliged to submit himself to the care of the Surgeons .
Mons .
Bougainville 's words , on this occasion , are very remarkable . '
`` In his ( Aotourou 's )  country , this disease is but little minded .
Columbus brought it from America  here it is in an isle in the midst of the greatest ocean .
Have the English brought it thither ?
Or ought the physician to win , who laid a wager , that if four healthy stout men were shut up with one healthy woman , the venereal complaint would be the consequence of their commerce ? '' '


Ungenerous Frenchman !
Why this unjustifiable attack on the English ?
At the time Mons .
Bougainville wrote the narrative of his voyage , he knew that some of his crew were infected with the malady in question , when they landed at Otaheite  for , in a former part of his volume he has said , that he did all in his power to prevent their communicating it to the poor islanders .
What becomes , too , of his wonder , how a disorder should find its way to a little island in the pacific ocean , when he knew that his own ship had carried it thither !
- Whether Columbus brought this pestilence from America or not , is , perhaps a question not easily determined  nor , at this period , is it at all material : but one fact is well known  that the French have plentifully distributed the contagion through Europe , and it is not improbable , that they have likewise carried it to every other quarter of the globe .


This subject is rather of the indelicate kind  but we are necessarily led into it  and may be  indulged in one remark , that seems to arise naturally from the preceding circumstances , and will , we trust , militate on the side of virtue .
- Providence , we conceive , wisely intended one man for the associate of one woman , who should be the companion of his life , the friend of his bosom , the partaker of his joys , the sharer of his griefs , whose love for him should excite all his tenderness , and repay , with interest , those toils and cares it gave rise to .
Thus paired , thus mutually giving and receiving happiness , the married state is indeed a heaven on earth .
Wedded love , the chaste , the holy , the conjugal tie , will ensure as much happiness as is to be found in this sublunary world  and trust , O reader , in the goodness of God for the future .
To sum up this remark , marriages are made in heaven  choose , ye ladies , with prudence choose , the heart paired with your own  select ye , generous youths , the amiable fair , whose eyes beam the gentle influence of love , and whose heart feels the solid force of virtue  then be true to each other , and bid defiance to contagion : so shall your days be happy , and your children bless the parents to whom they owe the first of human blessings , health of body , and of mind .


The ships now steered a westerly course , and early on the morning of the 22d two islands were discovered , one of which received the name of Aurora , from the early hour on which  it was first seen , and the other that of Whitsuntide Isle , from the day which gave birth to its being so named .


The track of the vessels was now so directed , as that they might have passed between the two islands , but an unexpected calm prevented this manoeuvre .
Proceeding to the northward of the first discovered island , a rising land , in a conical form , was observed to bear north by west , which received the name of the Peak of the Etoile .


In the afternoon , mountainous lands , at thirty miles distance , were seen , appearing , as it were , over and beyond the island of Aurora .


On the twenty-third it was discovered , that the land last seen was a separate island  the appearance of which was lofty , its descent steep , and the whole cloathed with [ ... ] es .
A number of boats were seen coasting the shore , but none of them approached the ships  smoke was seen issuing from among the woods , but no habitation was observed .


In the morning the Commodore dispatched three boats , well manned and armed , to take in wood , and to learn the necessary particulars respecting the country , while the ships guns were brought to bear on the island , in order to protect the boats crews from any insult that might be offered them by the natives .


Mons .
Bougainville himself went on shore in the afternoon , where he found the good-natured  Indians assisting the French in carrying to the boats a quantity of wood which had been cut .


The information obtained from the officer commanding the boat 's crew was , that on his first landing , the natives assembled on the shore , armed with bows and arrows , intimating , by signs , that the strangers must retreat .
The French officer , however , gave directions for landing , and while his people advanced , the islanders retreated , but with their bows bent , and in an attitude of self-defence .
At length , the crew were ordered to halt , while the Prince of Nassau approached the Indians , who no longer retreated when they saw only one person advancing .
The Prince having given them some remnants of red cloth , their esteem appeared o be at once conciliated .


The commanding officer now stationed himself at the entrance of a wood , and sent out a party in search of refreshments , while another was deputed to cut fire-wood .
The natives now came forward , with an appearance of friendship , and distributed some fruit among the seamen , to whom they likewise gave some arrows , but refused to accept any thing in exchange .
Their numbers were considerable , and those who were not armed with bows and arrows had provided themselves with stones , as instruments of defence .


 These people intimated , that they were at war with the natives of a different district on the island , and even while they were hinting this circumstance , an armed party of Indians approached from the westward , while the former appeared determined not to retreat from their enemies  but the valour of the latter was rendered unnecessary to be exerted by the want of present courage in the former .


Matters were in this situation when Mons .
Bougainville landed on the island , where he remained till his boats were laden with the articles he wanted .


This being done , he took possession of the island , by the act of burying at the foot of a tree an inscription , carved on an oak-plank  and then he retreated to the ship .


It was imagined , that this early retreat of the French prevented an attack , which the islanders had meditated , as they seemed to be making preparations for what they had not yet in their power to carry into execution  but no sooner had the boats put off , than the islanders hastened to the beach , and complimented them with a shower of arrows , and a volley of stones  some of them even plunged into the waves , aiming their fury at the supposed invaders , and hurling their vengeance on the insolent strangers .
When , at length , one of the seamen had been wounded by a stone , a discharge of muskets drove the poor islanders to their native woods ,  evidently wounded , from their cries and exclamations .


Mons .
Bougainville gives the following description of the natives of this island , which he called the Isle of Lepers , from observing , that many of the inhabitants were afflicted with the leprosy .
Some of them are mulattto 's , and others perfect negroes  their hair is woolly , and generally black , but in some instances of a very light brown , approaching to a yellow .
Few women were seen among them , but those few were equally disagreeable with the men , who are represented as low in stature , ill-favoured , and disproportionably made .


We will not deny the veracity of our historian  the works of Nature and of Providence are astonishing .
The God of creation is equally wise and wonderful in all his works  but we must own , that it appears to be a phenomenon , the existence of which surpasses the credulity of an English reader , that black men should have ( to use Mons .
Bougainville 's own words ) hair ' `` of a yellowish colour . '' '
Of all historians , the circumnavigators are fond of dealing in the marvellous .
Our Commodore , presuming that he had visited an island unapproached by any other European Commander , has told us just what he pleased of the natives of that island , and it is not in our power to contradict him .
It would have given weight to the testimony  of our flippant French historian , if he had brought to Paris one of these curious Lusus Naturae , these yellow-pated negroes .


The ladies of this singular country carry their children in a bag of cloth , slung at their backs .
On these cloths there are elegant drawings in a fine dye of crimson .
The noses of the men are pierced and hung with ornaments  and it is presumed , that they pluck their beards , as none of them were observed to have any .
They wear a bracelet on the arm , which had the appearance of ivory , and pieces of tortoishells round their necks .


Clubs , stones , bows and arrows form the armour of these people  the arrows are made of reeds pointed with bone .
On the points of these bones are inverted darts , which prevent the arrow being drawn without tearing the flesh of the wounded person .
The boats of these islanders bore a strong resemblance to those of the Indians of the isle of Navigators  but these vessels did not approach the ships so near , as to furnish the French with an opportunity of giving a particular description of their construction .


Near the beach on which Mons .
Bougainville landed , is a lofty hill , extremely steep , yet cloathed with a super-abundance of verdure .
The vegetable productions of the Isle of Lepers , are far inferior to those of Otaheite , owing , as is supposed , to the lightness of the soil , and its want of depth .


 Figs , of a species not before known , were found in this country  and several paths were seen cut through the woods , and inclosed by pallisadoes about a yard in height .
It was conjectured , that these enclosures marked the boundaries of the landed property of different persons .
Half a dozen hovels only were seen , into which no person could enter but on his hands and knees  yet the inhabitants were very numerous , and it is supposed they must be very miserable , from the perpetual wars among the natives of different districts on the island .


Mons .
Bougainville says , that the sound of a drum , harsh and dissonant to the ear , was frequently heard in the wood near the top of the above-mentioned hill  and this he imagines to have been a signal for the Indians to rally their forces  for no sooner had the discharge of the fire-arms dispersed the multitude , than this drum was immediately heard  and when the islanders in enmity with the others appeared , the drum was beat with suspended violence .


Aotourou formed a very contemptible opinion of the inhabitants of the Isle of Lepers , whose persons appeared indescribably odious in his eyes  and of whose language he had not the slightest idea .


On the 23d more land was discovered , which , on the 25th , was observed to enclose almost all the horizon , so that the ships were surrounded in one extensive gulph , while the coast of the  newly-discovered country contained many other gulphs , or large inlets , across which several boats were observed rowing , from one shore to the other .


The night of the 25th was spent in tacking , and in the morning it was observed , that the currents had carried the ships several miles more to the south than their reckoning .
The number of isles now seen was so great , that they could not be counted , nor could the end of these extensive countries be discerned .


Steering north-west by west , the land had a very beautiful aspect , being diversified with fine trees , between spots of land that had the appearance of being cultivated .
Some parts of the mountains being barren , and spotted in different places with a red earth , Mons .
Bougainville conjectures from that circumstance , that they contained some mineral substances .


A great inlet to the westward having been seen on the preceding day , the ships now arrived in it , and saw a number of negro Indians on the south coast of it , while others approached the vessels in their boats , but when they came to about the distance of a musket shot , they would advance no nearer , nor could any sign of invitation from the French induce them to alter their resolution .


The land on the north shore is of a moderate height , and cloathed with trees .
On this shore many negroes were seen , and several boats put  off towards the ships  but these , like the former , refused to come to board .


At the distance of about eight miles from this spot , two islands were seen , which formed the entrance of a fine bay , which the boats were sent to examine , and after they had been gone a few hours , the sound of muskets were heard , which made the Commodore very uneasy .
On their return in the evening it appeared , that one of them , in disobedience to the orders of the Commander , had left her consort , and going near in shore , the Indians discharged two arrows at the crew , which was returned by the musquetry , and some larger guns .
A projecting point of land prevented the boat being seen from the ships  but the incessant firing induced the Commodore to imagine , that she was engaged with a very large number of the enemies boats , two of which she had certainly encountered .


Preparations were making for dispatching the long-boat to her assistance , when she was descried , coming round the above-mentioned point of land .


The lamentable cries of the poor Indians were now heard in the woods , to which they had fled , from the rage of their enemies , and their drums were incessantly beating .
- We must now transcribe one passage from Mons .
Bougainville , because it is the most humane , and consequently the noblest , in his whole narrative :  ' `` I immediately made signal to the boat to come on board , and I took my measures to prevent our being dishonoured for the future , by such an abuse of the superiority of our power . '' '


The country last mentioned consisted of a number of small islands , off which there is tolerable good anchorage , but at such a distance from the coast , that a ship could not cover any boats which should land , which , as the islands are cloathed with thick woods , would be the more necessary .


These Indians went naked , and , except a bandage round the waist , wore the same kind of ornaments as those on the island of Lepers , whom they resembled in all respects , except not being quite so black  and the productions of the island were likewise the same .
- The Commodore very properly declined any attempt to trade with these people , whom he could not suppose would barter their effects with those , from whom they had received such essential injuries .


On the morning of the 27th they again sailed , and , in a few hours , had sight of a fine plantation of trees , between which there were regular walks , resembling those of an European garden .
Many of the natives were seen near this spot , and as an inlet was observed at no small distance , the Commodore ordered the  boats to be hoisted out  but they found that it was impracticable to land .


The ships now quitted the great cluster of islands they had lately visited , which received the general name of Archipelago of the great Cyclades , which , it is conjectured , occupies no less than three degrees of latitude , and five of longitude .
Mons .
Bougainville says , that these islands are not the same that Quiros called Tierra Austral del Espiritu Santo  but that Roggewein saw the northern extremity of them , which he denominated Groningen , and Thienhoven .


Our author now recites a very singular fact .
On board the store-ship was a person reported to be a woman , which was almost confirmed by her want of beard , her voice , and her shape .
The Commodore going on board the Etoile , enquired into the fact  when the party confessed her sex , while floods of tears streamed down her face .


Her story is extraordinary .
- Born in Burgundy , and left an Orphan , she was ruined by the fatal issue of a law-suit : on which she resolved to drop the habit of her sex , and served a gentleman at Paris  but hearing of Mons .
Bougainville 's intended expedition round the world , she repaired to Rochefort , where , just before the ships embarked , she entered into the service of Mons .
de Commercon , who went out with a view of encreasing his botanical knowledge .
 She followed her master , with astonishing courage and resolution , through deep snows , to the hoary tops of the mountains in the streight of Magellan , carrying loads of herbs , plants , arms and provisions , with unspeakable courage , and unwearied toil .


While our adventurers were at Otaheite , the men of that island flocked round our heroine , and exclaiming , ' `` this is a woman ! '' '
would certainly have treated her as such , but that an officer rescued her from their hands , and ordered her to be delivered , unviolated on board the ship .


Mons .
Bougainville observes , that this is the first woman that ever circumnavigated the globe , and remarks on the singularity of her situation , if the ships should have been wrecked on some desert isle in the great ocean .
The name of this extraordinary woman is Baré  and she is as celebrated for her chastity as her courage .


On the night between the fourth and fifth of June some breakers were seen at half a league 's distance , by the light of the moon .
In the morning it appeared to be a low flat sandy isle , abounding in birds , which received the name of the Shoal of Diana .


About this period several species of fruit , and some pieces of wood , floated by the ship  and a kind of flying fish was seen , larger than the  common sort , the body of which was black , and the wings red .


A sand bank was discovered on the 6th , on which the sea broke violently , and the tops of rocks were seen at intermediate spaces . '
`` This last discovery ( says our author ) was the voice of God , and we were obedient to it . '' '
- They therefore spent the night in making short tacks in that part of the sea with which they were previously acquainted .


At this time the salt provisions on board were become so putrid , that it was almost impossible for men , even on the point of starving , to swallow them  and therefore the rats were industriously sought after , and eaten in preference to it .
The remaining peas would serve only forty days , and the bread two months  so that it became highly necessary to think of steering to the northward .


On the 10th , before day-break , an agreeable fragrancy impregnated the air , announcing that land was near  and it was accordingly discovered before sun-rising .
This is described as a most delicious country , divided , near the sea coast , into groves and plains , behind which the land rises , in the form of an amphitheatre , till the tops of the mountains are lost in the clouds .
The most lofty of three chain of mountains was seen above seventy miles in-land .
The whole country appeared to be rich and fertile , but the deplorable situation to which the  ship 's companies were reduced , would not admit of their staying to take a more accurate survey of it .


On the 10th a prodigious swell from the south-east drove the ships violently towards land , and they were soon within about two miles of it  and the night was passed in this dangerous situation , taking advantage of every slight breeze to clear the shore .
A number of boats were now seen coasting the island , on many parts of which fires were observed .
A turtle was found here in the belly of a shark .


For several successive days there was so thick a fog , that the Boudeuse was obliged to fire frequent guns to keep company with the Etoile , on board of which were a part of their provisions .


Several shell fish , called cornets , leaped into the ship in the night , and as it is known of these fish , that they are accustomed to keep at the bottom of the sea , it is evident , that the ships must have been in very shallow water .


On the 16th the weather became fine , and on the following day several islands were discovered , one of which was called Ushant , from its similitude to the island of that name .


By this time our voyagers were reduced to very great extremities .
The allowance of bread and pease was considerably reduced  and a fear of the consequences that might arise , obliged the Commodore to forbid the eating of  leather .
There was yet on board a she-goat , which had been brought from Falkland 's Islands  she yielded milk daily  but this was insufficient to save her life : the starving crew demanded the victim , and the butcher , who had hitherto been her feeder , wept as he plunged the murderous knife in the breast of his favourite .
Soon after this a dog , which had been put on board at the streights of Magellan , fell a sacrifice to the dire demands of hunger .


On the 18th not less than nine or ten islands were discovered , and on the 20th a still farther number .
Our navigators now struggled at once with a variety of inconveniences , occasioned by foul ships , damaged rigging , crazy masts , and tempestuous weather .


On the 25th high land was discovered , which appeared to terminate in a cape , which they doubled with a degree of transport that may be more easily conceived than described , as it was the point they had wished for a sight of , from a certainty that it would enable them to quit for ever the archipelago of islands , amidst which they had been so long in hourly danger of shipwreck or starving .
This cape was called Cape Deliverance , and the name of the Gulph of the Louisiade , was given to a bay , of which the Cape forms the eastermost point .


North of Cape Deliverance about sixty leagues land was discovered , which proved to be two small islands  and , two days afterwards ,  an officer was sent to examine several creeks , in the hope of finding anchorage , while the ships sailed slowly after the boats , ready to join them on the first signal .


The natives now advanced towards the ship in several boats , carrying from two or three , to upwards of twenty men each .


These boats had no outriggers , and their crews were as black as the negroes on the coast of Guinea .
Some of them had reddish hair , and that of all of them was long and curled .
They wore white ornaments on their foreheads and necks , and were armed with lances and bows  they kept an almost continual shouting , and seemed rather inclined for war than peace .


When the boats returned on board , the officer reported , that the sea broke on all parts of the coast , that he had found only one small river , that the land is every where covered with wood , and that the mountains run down close to the sea-shore .


The natives dwell on the mountains , but they have a few huts on the banks of some of the small creeks .
- Some of them followed one of the ship 's boats , and seemed almost resolved on an attack  and one of the Indians repeatedly put himself in an attitude to have thrown his lance  but he desisted from his purpose , and no mischief was done .


Mons .
Bougainville says , that he was now advanced too far to return  but that he hoped  to find a passage , though the weather was so foggy that he could not discern any object at the distance of more than two leagues .


In the morning of the 1st of July , the ships were just in the station they had quitted the preceding night , having been impelled forward , and driven back , by the tides .


Nothing remarkable happened but the discovery of a Race , in the middle of a passage , to which was given the name of Dennis 's Race , from that of the master of the Boudeuse .


A race is a part of any channel or streight , where there are opposing tides , or a rapid and dangerous current  and such are even sometimes met with in the open seas .


Boats were now sent to find anchorage in a fine bay  and the account of their expedition is as follows .
- That a number of Indian boats , in which were a hundred and fifty of the natives , armed with shields , lances , and bows , came from the banks of a rivulet on which their habitations were situated , and rowed hastily towards the French boats , which they surrounded , and , with hideous outcries , began the attack with their bows and lances .
The French discharged their muskets  but the natives covering themselves with their shields , the fight continued , till a second firing terrified them so , that they made a hasty retreat , some of them swimming on shore .


 Two of their boats were taken , on the stern of which was the figure of a man 's head with a long beard , the eyes being mother-of-pearl , the ears tortoiseshell , and the lips were dyed a bright red .
Exclusive of their weapons and utensils , there were found in their boats cocoa-nuts , and several fruits , the species of which were not known , the jaw of a man , half broiled , and various other things .


The natives of this coast are negroes , whose hair curls naturally , and they have a method of colouring it yellow , red , and white .
Their cloathing consists only of a piece of matting round the waist .
This river received the name of Warrior 's River , and the whole spot , that of the Isle and Bay of Choiseul .


Two days afterwards a cape was discovered , which was called Cape L'Averdi , on which were mountains of an astonishing height .
On the 4th other mountainous land was discovered , from which came off five or six Indians , and , after lying on their oars some time , they accepted some trifles which were thrown to them .
They now exhibited some cocoa-nuts , saying , bouca , bouca , onelle !
and seemed greatly pleased when the French repeated them .
They then intimated , that they would fetch some cocoa-nuts , but they had scarcely left the ship 's side , when one of them discharged an arrow , by which , however , no person was wounded .


 The people were altogether naked , had long ears , bored , and curled short hair , which some of them had dyed red , and they had also white spots on their bodies .
Their teeth were red , probably from the chewing of betel .


This island , which was named Bouka , appeared to be cultivated , and , from the number of huts that were seen , it probably abounds with inhabitants .
- The cocoa-nut , and other trees , dispersed over a beautiful plain , was a sufficient temptation for landing  but the rapidity of the current prevented the possibility of it .


Two more islands were seen on the 5th , and , as the wood and water were expended , and disease reigning aboard , the Commodore resolved to land here , and , on the following afternoon , the ships came to an anchor .
The casks were sent on shore , and tents erected for the sick , on a commodious spot , where there were four rivulets near together , and where wood for the carpenters and joiners use , as well as for burning , was very plenty  there were no inhabitants near the place , so that the sick had an opportunity of ranging the woods , fearless of any attack from the natives , and every thing seemed to conspire to render this spot the most eligible imaginable  but there was one great inconvenience , no fruit could be found .


Two huts were discovered on the bank of a rivulet , not far from the encampment , and a  boat , near which were seen the remains of fires , some calcined shells , and the skeletons of some animals heads , which were taken for those of the wild boar .
Some fresh bananas were found , which proves , that the natives had but lately left the place .


This island produces a large , blue crested pigeon , which has so plaintive a note , that the seamen mistook it for the cries of men towards the mountains .


Mons .
Bougainville now relates an extraordinary incident .
A seaman being looking for shells , found a plate of lead buried in the sand , on which the following letters were very visible .
` HOR'D HERE ICK MAJESTY 's ' The mark of the nails with which the lead had been fastened appeared  and it is plain , that the natives must have torn off the plate and broken it .


This circumstance gave rise to a diligent search , and , at about six miles from the watering-place , the very spot was found where the English had formed their encampment .
Several trees were seen which had been felled , and others which were sawn in pieces .
A very large and conspicuous tree was found , on which the inscription had been nailed  it stood in the midst of a spacious place , and it appeared , that the plate had been pulled down but a very short time .
There were other trees , to which  the ends of ropes were fastened .
One of the trees which had been cut down had put forth fresh twigs , apparently of the growth of four months .
Mons .
Bougainville mentions it as a very singular circumstance , that , amidst so many islands , he should happen to land on that so lately visited by a rival nation !


Diligent search was now made for food and refreshments , but almost in vain  for nothing could be found but a few cabbage-trees , and thatch-palms .
No fish could be catched , and , though a few wild boars were seen , not one of them was taken .
A small number of pigeons were indeed shot , the feathers of which were of green and gold .


It will be needless to mention the other products of this island , as the reader has already had an account of them in the narrative of the English voyages .


No time was now lost in the necessary repairs of the ships  and an equal division was made of the provisions , which now began to run extremely short .
A third part of the late allowance of pease was taken off .
From the Commodore to the lowest person on board , all fared alike : their situation , like death , banished all distinction .


On the 13th there was an eclipse of the sun , which was clearly seen , and the proper astronomical and nautical remarks made on it .
The name of Port Praslin was given to this harbour ,  an inscription having been first buried under the spot where the eclipse had been observed .


The Etoile being a light vessel , and there being no stones to ballast her , after the provisions had been taken out , this important business was necessarily performed with wood  a fatiguing and unwholesome task , in so damp a country .


An insect of a most wonderful texture was found on this island , the body and wings of which appeared so much like the leaf of a tree , as scarcely to be distinguished from it , even on a nice inspection .
When the wings are extended , each forms the half of a leaf , and when they are closed it is entire .
The upper side of the body is of a brighter hue than the under parts  and it has six legs , the upper joints of which resemble parts of leaves .
This curiosity was preserved in spirits , and is in the cabinet of the French King .


A sailor who was hauling the fishing-net , in search of a scarce fish called the hammer-oyster , having been bit by a snake , whose bite is poisonous , was cured in a few hours by a profuse perspiration , produced by taking flower-de-luce water and treacle .


Aotourou having remarked the progress of the cure , intimated , that at Otaheite there were sea-snakes , whose bite is mortal in every instance .


 On the 22d repeated shocks of an earthquake were felt for about two minutes .
The sea rose and fell several times , so that the concussions were felt on board the ships .


Notwithstanding the extreme bad weather which prevailed , the crews , divided into separate parties , went to the woods every day , in hopes to shoot some turtle-doves , and gather cabbage-trees and thatch-palms  but it generally happened , that they returned without any success , and wet to the skin .
At length , however , they found some mangle apples , and a kind of pruens  but too late to be of much service , as they were now on the point of departure .
A kind of ivy was successfully applied in the cure of the scurvy .


An immense cascade was seen , falling from numerous rocks into a hundred basons of water , and at once shaded and adorned by stately trees , some of which grow even in the reservoirs , is recommended by Mons .
Bougainville as a subject fit to exercise the fancy of the boldest painter .
- Why did not his limner make a drawing of it ?


The situation of the ships companies now became so dreadful , that no more time could be lost .
- In the afternoon of the 24th a favourable breeze enabled the ships to get out to sea .


Mons .
Bougainville remarks , that this country must be NEW BRITAIN , and that the great bay must be the same which Dampier calls St.  George 's Bay  but that he had the happiness to land on a part of it where his wants could be supplied by the inhabitants .


A succession of islands having been seen in the offing , Mons .
Bougainville named them after the officers .
- The field-tents were now cut up , to make trowsers for the seamen , who had been repeatedly clothed during the voyage , to enable them to sustain the inclemencies of so many different climates .
But the last change of cloathing was now delivered out , and at this period an ounce of bread was deducted from their scanty allowance .
Their salt provisions were now so bad , as to be nauseous in a high degree  yet their starving situation impelled them to feed on them  but even at this melancholy period , no one yielded himself a prey to melancholy .
The sailors , influenced by the example of the officers , employed every evening in dancing , dispelling , by their mirth , some of the pangs of hunger .
- Happy Frenchmen !
who could be thus mirthful , in the jaws of apparent destruction !


New Britain continued in sight till the beginning of August , when the ships being nearer the land than they had been before , several Indian boats came off , the crews of which were negroes , with woolly heads , which they had covered with white powder .
They are tall and active , and wore no other cloaths than leaves round the middle .
They held out something  that had the appearance of bread , and invited the French to land  but they refused to enter the ships , though an attempt was made to conciliate their friendship , by presents of some pieces of stuff .
They accepted what was given , and threw a stone from a sling in return  instantly retreating , with loud vociferations .


On the following day a larger number assembled along side the Boudeuse  a person , who had the appearance of authority , carried a red staff , knobbed at each end , in his hand .
On approaching the ship , he held his hands over his head for a considerable time .
The hair of these negroes was painted red  some of them were adorned with feathers , ear-rings made of the seed of some herb , or circular plates depending from their necks  others had the nose pierced , and rings ran through it  but the general ornament was a bracelet made of the half of a shell .
The French were anxious to conciliate the esteem of these people , but in vain  they eagerly grasped at whatever was given them , but would make no present in return .
The roots of a few yams were all that could be obtained from them .
Two of their boats being observed approaching in the night , a rocket was fired , on which they instantly rowed off .


On the 31st a number of Indian boats attacked the Etoile with a volley of stones and arrows  but a single discharge of the musquetry  got rid for ever of these troublesome companions .


On the 4th of August two islands were seen , which are conjectured to be the same which Dampier distinguishes by the name of Matthias and Stormy , or Squally , Island .
On the 5th a third island was seen , and then the northern point of New Britain , which lies only forty one minutes south of the land .


On the 7th a flat island was seen , covered with trees , abounding with cocoa nuts , and certainly well inhabited , as appeared from the great number of houses that were seen on the shore .
Fishing-boats in multitudes surrounded the island  but the fishermen took no notice of the ships .
This received the name of the Isle of Anchorets .
On the following day a prodigious number of small islands was seen , when Mons .
Bougainville having escaped the most imminent dangers , in the endeavour to double this chain of islands , at length happily effected his point , in consequence of a breeze which still freshened with the rising sun .


He now continued to range the coast till he came within sight of two lofty peaks , to which he gave the name of the two Cyclops .
On the 15th two high mountains were discovered on the continent , and two small islands near them .


On the 23d two other islands being discovered , an attempt was made to land , in the hope of obtaining refreshments  but this was found  impracticable , but by the boats , the Commanding officer of which reported , that the islands were totally uninhabited , and that no fruits grew which were fit to be eaten .


This day the ships crews were twice alarmed  the first time with a report from aloft , that a range of breakers were seen a-head  but this proved to be only the rippling of a strong tide  the second alarm was from the fore-castle , where it was declared , that the bottom of the sea was visible under the ship 's way .
This shoal was perceived by the crew of the Etoile , but was easily escaped by both the ships .
Monsieur Denys , first Master of the Boudeuse , died this day of the scurvy , to the infinite regret of the whole ship 's company .
At this time upwards of forty persons were ill of the same disorder , the progress of which was stopped by the plentiful use of wine and lemonade .


It was now thought necessary to stear a southerly course , in order to get clear of the islands by which they were surrounded .
None of these islands appeared to be inhabited , though all of them were cloathed with verdure .
During the following night they sailed out of this labyrinth , through a channel about three leagues in breadth .
Early in the morning they doubled the southernmost of a number of small islands on each side of this channel , which was denominated the French Passage .
On the 26th , in the morning , they passed the meridian for the fifth time , and  early the next day had sight of a small island to the south-east  they likewise saw a steep hill , remarkably high , to which they gave the name of Big Thomas  near which are three small islands .


They had sight of several islands on the 27th and 28th , when Mons .
Bougainville gave orders for a boat belonging to the Etoile to steer to the south-westernmost of these isles in search of anchorage , and to enquire if they produced any thing worthy of notice .
The boat having landed on two islands , which neither produced any fruits , nor appeared to be cultivated , and indicated no signs of being inhabited , the ship was on the point of returning , when an Indian rowed up to the ship 's boat , without expressing the least sign of fear or astonishment .
The Frenchmen intimated , that they wanted food and liquor  on which he presented them with a kind of meal , and some water  in return for which they gave him a looking-glass , a handkerchief , and some other trifles , which he received with indifference , and laughed at the donors .
It was conjectured , that this negroe had deserted from one of the adjacent islands which have been settled by the Dutch .
The number of them were formerly seven , but they are now reduced to five by earthquakes .
The crew of the Boudeuse took a turtle on this spot of not less than two hundred weight .


 Early in the morning of the 31st our voyagers had sight of the island of Ceram , which runs in a parallel east and west , abounds in lofty mountains , and is partly cleared , and partly in its original state .
A great number of fires were seen on this island , which seem to intimate that it is well peopled .
Early in the morning , on the first of September , our adventurers found themselves at the entrance of a bay , on the banks of which they beheld a number of fires  they soon observed two boats under sail , constructed on the plan of those of Malay .
A Dutch pendant was now hoisted , and a gun fired  but the Commodore confesses his error in this procedure , as the people at Ceram are at variance with the Dutch , whom they have almost totally routed from their island .
Mons .
Bougainville having been thus unsuccessful , through mistake , returned from the bay , and employed the rest of the day in plying between the islands Bonao , Kelang , and Manepo .


Some time before midnight , a number of fires attracted their attention to the island of Boero , where there is a Dutch factory , well provided with the necessary refreshments .


The above-mentioned Dutch factory is at the entrance of the Gulph of Cajeli , which the French had sight of at day-break .
Their joy on this occasion is not to be expressed  for at this time not half of the seamen were able to perform any duty  and the scurvy had raged  so violently , that no man on board was perfectly clear of it .
What few provisions were on board were absolutely rotten , and stunk intolerably .


Thus circumstanced , their change of situation must have been rapturous indeed !
From midnight the fragrant breeze had wasted the aromatic flavour of the plants , which abound in the Moluccas . '
`` The aspect ( says our author ) of a pretty large town , situated in the bottom of a gulph , of ships at anchor there , and cattle rambling through the meadows , caused transports which I have doubtless felt , but which I can not here describe . '' '
Our Commodore hoisted Dutch colours , and fired a gun  but though several boats were sailing in the bay , none of them came along-side .
In a few hours a periagua , rowed by Indians , advanced towards the ship , and the commanding officer enquired in Dutch who they were  but refused to go on board .
Mons .
Bougainville , however , proceeded under all his sails , and in the afternoon came to an anchor opposite the factory .


Two Dutch soldiers , one of whom spoke French , now came on board the Boudeuse , demanding the reason of the Commodore 's entering that port , when he must know that the ships of the Dutch East India Company had an exclusive right to that privilege .
He was answered , in brief , that necessity was the motive   that hunger must preclude the force of treaties , and that they would depart as soon as their wants were supplied .


The soldiers soon returned with the copy of an order from the Governor of Amboyna , who presides over the Resident at Boero , forbidding him to admit foreign ships into that port .
The Resident , therefore , entreated Mons .
Bougainville to declare , in writing , the cause of his putting in there  that he might transmit such declaration to the Governor of Amboyna , in justification of his own conduct .


This request being complied with , all difficulties were at an end  the Resident having performed his duty as a servant of the Company , was anxious to discharge the superior duties of humanity .
The Commodore and his Officers visited him on shore , were received in the most friendly manner , and accepted his invitation to supper .


The Resident and his company beheld with equal pleasure and surprize the effects that hunger had on the appetites of the guests  nor were they willing to eat themselves , least they should deprive their now too happy visitants of their full share of their repast .
Mons .
Bougainville confesses , that he was supremely happy , because he had previously sent on board what would be an equal feast to both the ships companies .
A contract was now made , that , while the ships should remain in that harbour ,  venison should be daily supplied to the crews , that eighteen oxen , a number of sheep and poultry , and a quantity of rice ( to supply the place of bread ) should he put on board .
The Resident was likewise obliging enough to furnish the sick with a quantity of pulse from the Company 's garden  but much could not be obtained , as it is not generally cultivated on the island .


The sick were now brought on shore , and the majority of the seamen were likewise indulged in walking about for their health and pleasure .
The Commodore hired the slaves belonging to the Company to fill the water casks , and to carry the several necessaries on board .


Mons .
Bougainville and his officers were gratified with the pleasure of stag hunting , and he mentions the deer of this country as most exquisite food .
The Dutch originally transported them hither .
This island is described as a delightful composition of woods , hills , plains , and well-watered vallies .


The town of Cajeli , and about fourteen Indian dwellings , formed the Dutch settlement .
A stone fort , which the Dutch had originally erected , was accidentally blown up in the year 1689  since which time it has no enclosure but that of palisadoes , with a battery of six small cannons .
About fifty white people are all that reside on the island , of whom a Serjeant and twenty-five men , commanded by the Resident ,  form a part .
The negroes who reside in the interior parts of the country subsist by the cultivation of rice .


The Moors and the Alfourians are the genuine natives of this country  the former are protected by the Dutch factory , who endeavour to inspire them with the dread of all foreigners .
These people are principally kept in awe by the influence of their own Chiefs , for whom the Dutch Resident professes a sincere regard .
Dutch policy , in this , as in all their other settlements , is the same  by fomenting a jealousy among the Chiefs of their respective dependants , a plot is no sooner formed by one Chief , than it is revealed by another .
The natives of Boero are not treated as slaves by the Dutch  their slaves being procured from the islands of Ceram , or Celebes .


Unlimited freedom and independence appear to reign among the Alfourians , who , residing on the mountains in the interior parts of the island subsist on the produce of their hunting , with fruits and sago .
It is presumed they are not Mahometans , because they eat swines flesh .
The principal people among the Alfourians pay occasional visits to the Dutch Resident  ' `` they would do as well ( says our author ) to stay at home . '' '


The chief products of this island are various kinds of wood , particularly black and white ebony  and there is a fine plantation of pepper .
 The fruits are pine-apples , citrons , lemons , bitter oranges , shaddocks , bananas and cocoa-nuts .
Very good barley is likewise a produce of this country .


Parrots , and a variety of other birds , many of them extremely beautiful , abound in the woods .
There is likewise the wild cat , whose bag under the belly serves for the conveyance of its young .
Bats , and serpents of an enormous size , the latter of which are said to have a swallow capacious enough for the reception of a whole sheep .
There is a snake too , which , posting itself on the trees , darts into the eye of the passenger who happens to look up , and the bite of this animal is certain death .


Crocodiles of an astonishing size reside on the banks of the rivers , devouring such beasts as fall in their way  and men are only protected from their fury by carrying torches in their hands .
Mons .
Bougainville asserts , that these crocodiles , which roam for prey in the night , have been even known to seize people in their boats .


The name of the Resident at Buero is Ouman  he is by birth a Batavian , and is married to a native of Amboyna .
He lives in great elegance and splendour , and is attended by no less than a hundred slaves .
Mons .
Bougainville speaks of his politeness and hospitality in very high terms .
After having twice regaled the French Officers in the ceremonious way , he  bid adieu to all set forms , but his house was constantly open to them , as their own  they always found good viands and liquors , and our author thinks this was no inconsiderable degree of civility to persons who had so lately been on the point of starving .


The Resident 's house is constructed in the Chinese taste , in the middle of a garden , which is intersected by a river : the house itself is a handsome building , and it is elegantly furnished .
Its approach is through an avenue of trees , which are planted down to the sea-side .
The wife and daughter were habited in the Chinese manner , and were no way deficient in the essential requisites of good breeding .
Their chief employment consists in making nosegays , and selecting flowers proper for distillation .


The astonishment of Aotourou , at this first fight of an European settlement , may be more easily conceived than described .
He regarded every object with an intenseness of curiosity scarcely to be satisfied  but he was particularly charmed with the hospitality of the Dutch .
He supposed every thing freely given , as he did not see any thing returned by way of barter .
Mons .
Bougainville says , that he hehaved sensibly with respect to the Dutch , to whom he intimated the consequence he was of in his own country , and that his present voyage was merely pleasurable with friends whom he esteemed .
His constant practice was to imitate the manners  of the French , both in their visits , and in their rural amusements .
The knees of this Indian being distorted , he attributed , to that circumstance , his not being taken with the Commodore on his first visit to the Resident , and actually desired some of the seamen to press their weight on his knees , to make them strait .
- This , surely , is no great proof of that good sense which Mons .
Bougainville has frequently hinted that Aotourou was possessed of !
- This islander would frequently enquire if Paris was as grand a place as Boero .


Though the French were only six days on shore , the healthful air of the place had so far recovered the sick , that , by the help of the refreshments now ready to be put on board , it was very possible to perfect the cure at sea .


The sick people were conveyed to the ships in the morning of the 7th , and before evening every one was on board , in expectation of the land-breeze , by which , after much difficulty in weighing the anchor , they were enabled to sail about an hour before midnight , and got clear of the gulph of Cajeli before morning .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a recital of the incidents which occurred during his passage from Boero to Batavia , in which we shall trace him with all necessary exactness .


Having coasted the island of Boero , the isles of Manipa and Kilang were seen on the morning of the 8th , and on the 9th they had sight  of the island of Xullabessic , where the Dutch have a factory , named Cleverblad , that is , the Clover-leaf .
There is a garrison , consisting of twenty-five men , under the discipline of a Serjeant , and commanded by a person who holds no higher rank than book-keeper to the Dutch East India Company .


On the 10th the Commodore buried his taylor , who fell a sacrifice to the scurvy , encreased , when on the point of cure , by an excessive drinking of brandy .


On the morning of the 11th they had sight of the island of Wawoni , and in a few hours saw that of Button , the streights of which they entered on the following day , and observed a vessel of a square form , ranging the shore , and towing a periagua .
The French ships were no sooner observed by this vessel , than she furled her sail , and concealed herself behind a small island .
A French seaman , whom Mons .
Bougainville had engaged at Boero , said , that the vessel in question was manned by a set of Indian pirates , who made a practice of taking prisoners , in order to sell them .


In the afternoon the ships sailed by a beautiful port on the coast of Celebes , the view of which land is delightfully variegated by mountains , hills , and vallies , and clothed with an exuberance of verdure .
In a few hours afterwards the island of Pangasani was in sight , to the northward of which appeared the highest  mountains of Celebes .
Pangasani is a flat island , abounding in trees , and our author conjectures , that it produces spices  it is , however , certain , that it is well inhabited , from the number of fires that were seen on it during the night .


On the morning of the 13th the ships were surrounded with Indian boats , bringing parroquets , cockatoes , fowls , eggs , and bananas , which the natives sold for Dutch money , or exchanged for knives .
These people were inhabitants of a considerable district on the mountains of Button , opposite the place where the ships lay at anchor .
On this spot the land is cleared and cultivated , the property of different persons , being divided by ditches .
Some of the fields are enclosed by hedges , and there are houses in these fields  besides which there are several villages .


The produce of the country consists in potatoes , yams , rice , maize , c. and the bananas are deemed as good as in any part of the world .
Pine-apples , mangle apples , cocoa-nuts , and citrons , are very plentiful .
The natives are of a brown complexion , ordinary features , and of low stature .
They profess the Mahometan faith , and speak the language common in the Molucca isles .
They are very honest , though expert traders .
- They offered Mons .
Bougainville some pieces of coarse cotton cloth  but he does not say whether he dealt  with them or not  he asked them for some nutmegs , which they said they procured from the island of Ceram , and in the neighbourhood of Banda  and his remark is , that the Dutch can not supply them from those places .


Our author describes the coast of Pangasani as rising in the form of an amphitheatre , from the level of the coast , which he imagines is frequently overflowed , because the dwellings of the natives were observed to be situated on the slope of the hills .
The people of Button consider the inhabitants of Pangasani as pirates , and each party is provided against the attacks of the other by a dagger , which is always worn , stuck in the girdle .


The ships sailed on the morning of the 14th , but coming to an anchor in a few hours afterwards , a number of periaguas surrounded the Boudeuse , one of which hoisting Dutch colours , the rest retreated , that she might come along-side .
It appeared , that in this boat was one of the Chiefs of the country , to whom alone the Dutch permit the distinction of carrying their colours .


Our Commodore sailed again on the 15th , and in the afternoon of that day dispatched his barge after a boat which was seen in a large bay , with a view to procure a pilot  and the boat readily came , having an Indian on board , who , for thirteen shillings , readily engaged in the pilotage : but his intended services were rendered  unnecessary , by the sun happening to shine with great lustre on a spot which directed their passing out of the channel .


As opposing winds and tides now obliged the ships to come to an anchor , the periaguas came off in great numbers , bringing pieces of cotton , articles of curiosity , and variety of refreshments .
At the approach of evening the ships got clear of the narrow pass , and anchored in Boston Bay .


Mons .
Bougainville gives an animated description of the passage he had just cleared .
The coast of Button abounds in enclosures proper for the catching fish , while the rising grounds are bespread with habitations .
The opposite shore is perpendicular  and after passing the galley , both sides are steep , hanging in some places over the channel . '
`` One would think ( says our author ) that the god of the sea had opened a passage here for the swelled waters , by a stroke of his trident . '' '
- Might he not as well have said , that the great God of Nature is equally wise and wonderful in all his works ?
- The coast of Pangasani has two or three houses on it , though it is little else than a solid rock , yet well cloathed with trees .


The Indian pilot above-mentioned gave the best instructions in his power , respecting the mode of passing this gut  but he appeared totally unskilled in the European art of navigation .
Another Indian , supposed to be the  pilot 's father , went on board the Boudeuse in the morning , and remained till the evening .
They both drank plentifully of brandy , but would eat only bananas and chew betel , absolutely refusing to taste of the ship 's provisions .


On the morning of the 17th , while the ships were under sail , the Indians came off in great numbers , bringing fruit , poultry , and eggs , which they sold so reasonably , that even the common seamen could possess themselves of those refreshments , in very great abundance , so that both the ships had the appearance of large poulterers shops , and capital fruiterers warehouses on a market day .


This morning five of the Orencaies , or Chiefs of Button , came off in a boat of the European form , with Dutch colours hoisted at its poop .
These people were dressed in jackets and long breeches , with turbans , and each of them had a silver-headed cane , with the Company 's marks on it .
They gave Mons .
Bougainville a Roe-buck , and received in return , each a quantity of silk stuffs .
They paid many compliments to the French nation , freely drinking the health of his most Christian Majesty , and the king of Button , so freely , indeed , that they were , at length , obliged to be helped down the ship 's side into their boats .


The Commodore enquired of the Orencaies , whether any spices grew on the island of Button  to which they replied in the negative , and were  easily credited , on account of the weakness of the Dutch settlement , which is nothing more than a sew huts , built of the Bamboo cane , and enclosed with pallisadoes .
The whole guard , on the part of the company , consists only of a Serjeant and three men .
The coast opposite Button is enclosed , cultivated , and well-peopled  nor is the island itself less populous , or less fruitful .


In the morning the Indian pilot visited the Commodore , and informed him , that the southeast wind would blow freshest exactly at noon .
This proved to be strictly true , and was a circumstance so well known to the natives , that all the boats which had surrounded the ship retired before the sun had gained his meridian altitude .


Mons .
Bougainville , taking advantage of the pilot 's advice , got out to sea with a fair wind , steering for the island of Saleyor , which he discovered on the 18th .
- On this island the Dutch have a small settlement , the principal Resident at which is the book-keeper .
This day at noon three islands were discovered , which were called North Island , South Island , and Isle of Passage  which last was so denominated from the ships passing near it , for the advantage of a safe navigation .


By day-light on the 19th they were within about a league of the coast of Celebes , which , in this part is described as one of the finest  countries in the world .
Immense herds of cattle graze on the plains , which are adorned with groves , while the coast is one continued plantation of the cocoa-nut tree .
The plains are in most places cultivated and covered with houses , while the mountains behind them add dignity and ornament to the whole picture .


On this day Mons .
Bougainville chased a Malayan boat , in the hope of obtaining a pilot acquainted with the coast  but she fled at his approach , nor even brought to , after he had fired several guns at her .
He conjectures , that the Boudeuse was mistaken for a Dutch ship , and observes , that the generality of people on this coast are pirates , who are always made slaves of when they are taken by the Dutch .


The ships having , during the evening , steered between an island named Tanakeka , and three smaller isles , orders were given at midnight to carry all the sail possible , in order to come within sight of the isles of Alambai .


At midnight , between the 21st and 22d , a boat was observed advancing towards the ships  but , though guns were repeatedly fired she bore off , in the apprehension , as conjectured , that they were Dutch vessels .
- Mons .
Bougainville 's observation is , that ' `` these people are more afraid of the Dutch , than of the firing of guns . '' '
- And , indeed , this observation seems to be verified by another boat  being equally studious to avoid them , a few hours afterwards .


In the afternoon of the 22d the north coast of Madura was seen from the mast-head , and a number of fishing boats were observed , some at anchor , and some employed in their business .
- On the following morning four ships were seen , two of which hoisted Dutch colours , and one of them was spoke with by the Boudeuse , which proved to be a snow from Malacca , bound for Japara .


Mons .
Bougainville now coasted the land of Java , the shore of which is level , but the interior country abounds in lofty mountains .


On the morning of the 26th the coast of Java appeared with the rising sun .
In the afternoon the Commodore spoke with a Dutchman , who commanded a boat bound for the isles of Amboina and Ternate , who said that , according to his reckoning , he was then twenty-six leagues from Batavia .


Having come to an anchor for the night , the ships sailed early in the morning of the 27th , and , on the following night , came to an anchor , in the fear of having even past the port of Batavia  but having sight of the church of that town in the morning , they sailed into , and soon anchored in the road , happy to have , after so many toils , difficulties and dangers , reached a spot which they conceived would soon  put a period to all their misfortunes , by ensuring them a safe arrival in Europe .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to recite such incidents as happened during the time he was at Batavia , and gives some particulars respecting the Molucca islands .


We searce know how to treat this subject with the delicacy with which it ought to be touched , as the readers of these volumes are already apprized of almost every interesting particular respecting Batavia  but we shall , with the utmost diligence , select such circumstances as our French historian has recorded , which have been either unknown to , or not treated of by the English navigators .


Mons .
Bougainville , for reasons which would operate on every prudent Commander , resolved to make his stay at Batavia as short as possible  but the want of biscuit , a sufficient quantity of which was not baked , compelled him to stay longer than he had intended .


A Dutch officer came on board with a written paper , of which our Frenchman understood not a word : but the Cockswain having enquired who their visitants were , demanded a certificate , written and signed by the commanding officer .
Mons .
Bougainville , who had sent an officer on shore to wait on the Governor , declined to give any answer till his return .
This Officer came back late in the evening with an account , that his Excellency was at his  country-house , but that he had been with the Shebander , who promised to introduce the Commodore to the Dutch General , on the following day .


The heat of this climate requires , that visits should be made early in the morning : Mons .
Bougainville therefore set out soon after day-break , and , after waiting on the Shebander , was by him conducted to the Governor General , who was then at one of his country residences about nine miles from the town .


The behaviour of this Chief of an important district was equally sincere and obliging : he approved of the conduct of the Resident at Boero , in his treatment of the French during the hour of their distress .
He gave permission for the sick to be lodged in the hospital , and issued the proper orders for their being received .
The furnishing of the necessary supplies was left to the Shebander , and when all matters of business were ended , the Governor asked the Commodore if he would salute the citadel .
To this it was answered in the affirmative , on the condition that the salute should be properly returned .
These preliminaries being adjusted , Mons .
Bougainville went on board his ship , saluted with fifteen guns , and was complimented with the same number .


Considering the matter seriously , is not all this most egregious nonsense ?
- A Frenchman agrees to waste a cetain quantity of his Master 's  powder , provided a Dutchman will blow into the air , an equal quantity of the powder of their High Mightinesses , the States General !


The sick people were now sent to the hospital , twenty-eight in number , most of whom were troubled with the bloody flux , and the rest with the scurvy .


The officers having taken lodgings in the town , fixed a day for paying a visit of ceremony to the Governor , at his country-seat , called Jacatra  after which they visited , in form , an officer called Schout-by-Nacht , or Rear Admiral , who is a member of the Regency , and has a vote in every matter respecting maritime affairs .
This gentleman lives with a degree of splendor that would not disgrace a Prince .


Mons .
Bougainville mentions the theatre of Batavia , as an elegant building  but of the performances he was not qualified to judge , from a total ignorance of the language .
His curiosity impelled him to take a view of the Chinese comedies , but of these , also , he could form no judgment but from sight .
Exclusive of the exhibitions on the regular theatres , he says , that a kind of pantomine is daily performed , on scaffolds erected in the Chinese quarter of the city .
It is a singularity of the Chinese comedy , that the characters of men are represented by women  nor is it unfrequent  to see the actors entertain the spectators with a boxing-match .


Our ingenious voyager represents the neighbourhood of Batavia as elegant beyond description .
- The neatness is all Dutch  the magnificence truly Parisian .
- A clergyman of Batavia , Mr. Mohr , distinguished for his immense riches , and his extensive knowledge , has erected , in the garden of one of his country-houses , one of the most superb observatories in the world , and has furnished it with great variety of instruments of the construction of European artists .
Our author observes , that he ' `` is doubtless the richest of all the children of Urania . '' '


The water of Batavia is of so bad a quality , that the people of fortune import Seltzer water from Holland , for their common drinking , at a most enormous expence .
The houses of this city are built only one story high , on account of the frequent earthquakes , which would be of pernicious consequence to buildings of a lofty construction .


The riches of the Batavians are marked by the magnificent taste in which their houses are furnished  yet is the city said to be much inferior to what it was some years ago  and it is certain , that the rent of houses is not half as much as it was : yet will this place always be rich , through the refined policy of the Dutch , which makes it difficult for any man , after he  has amassed a fortune , to transmit it to Europe : for any money intended to be sent to Holland , must pass through the hands of the Company , who charge eight per cent .
for the care of sending it to Europe  exclusive of which , the current-money of Batavia would sustain a loss of no less than twenty-eight per cent .
even if it could be smuggled out of the country .


The distinction of rank is observed in the strictest degree at Batavia .
What the French call the Etiquette is never dispensed with .
The gradation of rank is as follows , viz .
the high Regency , the Court of Justice , the Ecclesiastics , the Company 's servants , the sea officers , and those of the military .


There is no appeal from the decisions of the Court of Justice .
This court , about twenty years since , sentenced to death the Governor of Ceylon , who had been convicted of most infamous oppressions in his government  and he was executed opposite the citadel at Batavia .


If any of the respective sovereigns of the island of Java offend against the established Dutch policy , they are put to death in the most inhuman manner .
On these melancholy occasions , the unhappy sufferers are dressed in white drawers , and are never beheaded , from a conviction prevalent among them , that appearing in any other dress , or visiting the other world without their heads , would be productive of the most fatal consequences : nor do the  Dutch dare to controvert these opinions , as the immediate consequence of such a procedure on their part would be a revolt of that of the Javanese .


The Dutch Company have an exclusive right to a large part of the island of Java .
- The island of Madura did formerly belong to them , but the Chief of it revolted from their authority , and the son of this revolting king is at present the Governor of that very island , of which his father had been the Sovereign .


The Dutch , equally deep in every stroke of their politics , have seized the province of Balimburan , in consequence of the Sovereign of that district having revolted from their authority .
It is asserted , that the English erected him a fort , and supplied him with arms and ammunition to combat that slavery , which he thought the more an indignity , because it was impelled by the mercantile world .
After a war of two years , and after repeated battles , in the last of which the Javanese Prince and his family were made prisoners , the Dutch became final conquerors , and the routed Sovereign being lodged in the citadel of Batavia , soon fell a sacrifice to the grief that preyed on his mind .
When Mons .
Bougainville arrived at Batavia , it was in agitation to send the son and the other branches of this unhappy family to the Cape of Good Hope , in order that they might spend the remains of a wretched existence on the island of Roben .
The several  Chiefs of the different districts of the island of Java are surrounded with Dutch guards , so that they are Kings only in name .
From these , however , the Dutch receive arrac , rice , sugar , coffee and tin  in return for which they supply opium , the sale of which is very profitable , from the great quantities consumed by the Javanese .


Our Commodore now proceeds to a description of the commerce of Batavia , and a recital of many particulars respecting the Molucca islands  but these particulars , or others so exceedingly resembling them , being recorded in many volumes of voyages , we shall pass them over in search of something really new , and respecting which our author appears to have been well informed .


Before the crews of the Boudeuse and Etoile had been ten days at Batavia , the diseases common to that climate began to attack them with all their fury .
From a vigorous state of health the people were , in a few days , reduced to the brink of the grave  nor could the Commodore 's utmost diligence enable him to transact his affairs with a proper degree of dispatch , as the illness of the Shebander himself prevented the acceleration of his business .


Every officer on board the Boudeuse began to feel the fatal effects of the climate  and , at length , Aotourou felt the direful influence of this pestiferous clime  and it is supposed , that  nothing but the readiness with which he took the prescriptions offered him , could have saved him from the most fatal consequences of the contagion .
For a long time after he left Batavia , he distinguished it by the name of Enoua Matè , the land which kills .


Mons .
Bougainville now proceeds to a description of his leaving Batavia , his touching at the isle of France , and his return to his native country , of which we shall have occasion to say but little , as the run from Batavia to Europe is universally well known , and has been previously described in the course of these volumes .


The ships sailed on the 16th of October , 1768 , and cleared the streights of Sunda on the 19th in the afternoon .
By this time the crew were all perfectly recovered of the scurvy , but a few of them remained ill of the bloody-flux .
On the 20th the ships were in sight of the isle of France , and on the 8th of November , the Boudeuse anchored in the port of that island  the Etoile , which had been unavoidably left behind , anchoring in the same port on the following day .


At this place the ships were repaired , and the Commodore left behind him on the island several persons , who desired to add to the numbers already in that colony .


The Commodore expresses his happiness that he was enabled , after so tedious a voyage , to  enrich this colony with inhabitants and necessaries  but he laments in the most pathetic terms the death of the Chevalier du Bouchage , an Ensign on board the King 's ship , whose abilities as an officer could be surpassed only by his virtues and accomplishments as a man .


Our author speaks , in the most lavish terms , of the forges for making iron , which are established on this island , and he even prefers them to those of Europe  how far he is justified in this preference , must be left to future navigators , or future artificers to determine .


Mons .
Bougainville sailed from this place the 12th of December , 1768 , leaving the Etoile behind him , to undergo some necessary repairs  and this ship did not arrive in France till a month after the Boudeuse .
Without encountering any singular accident , our adventurers had sight of the Cape of Good Hope on the 18th of January , and came to an anchor in Table Bay on the following morning .


Our author very judiciously omits a description of the Cape , which has been so often and so accurately described by our circumnavigators , and other voyagers : one circumstance , however , he fails not to mention , that they killed a quadrupede , named the Giraffe , which was seventeen feet in height , and that they took the young one alive , which measured seven feet . '
`` None of these ( says our author ) had been seen after that which was  brought to Rome in the time of Caesar , and shewn there in the amphitheatre . '' '


Mons .
Bougainville sailed from the Cape on the 17th , and came to an anchor off the island of St. Helena on the 4th of February , where he remained till the 6th , and then got under sail in pursuance of his voyage to France .


On the 25th of this month the Commodore joined the Swallow , commanded by Captain Carteret : what passed in consequence of this junction the readers of these volumes are already acquainted with .


Nothing material happened from this time till they had sight of the isle of Ushant , when a violent squall of wind had nearly blasted all the blooming hopes of so fine a voyage .
On the 15th the Commodore bore away for St. Maloes , which he entered on the following day , after an absence of two years and four months from his native country  during all which time he had buried only seven of his crew , a circumstance that will be deemed truly astonishing , when we reflect on the variety of dangers they had encountered  the amazing changes of climate they had experienced  the hair breadth perils they had escaped , and the estimated proportion of time that any man may be supposed to live , at any given age , when in full health , and breathing his native air .
To what then shall we ascribe the unexampled success of Mons .
Bougainville 's circumnavigation , but to the benevolent  interposition of that particular providence , the existence of which hath been lately so boldly , and with such apparent weight of argument , denied .


Thus have we traced , with the pen of fidelity , this ingenious historian , from the milder climate of France to the frozen regions of the Magellanic streights  and from those streights through the intense burnings of the torrid zone , back again to the benevolent influence of the European sun  and abating that vanity peculiar to the French , and that nationality , which , if criminal , is a crime arising from a noble and praise-worthy cause , we must confess , that his narrative is as much more philosophical and ingenious , as it is more pert and flippant than the narratives of our English adventurers !
Mons .
Bougainville has introduced , in the body of his volume , a narrative of the establishment of the Spaniards in Rio de la Plata  and also an account of the missions in Paraguay , and the expulsion of the Jesuits from that province : but as these recitals seemed to have no immediate connection with the Commodore 's circumnavigation , we have not interrupted the narrative , thinking they would come in with more propriety immediately after the close of the voyage .


The river de la Plata takes a southerly course to the 34th degree latitude , where it is united with the river Uraguai , making one  stream , which runs still southerly to the ocean .
The Jesuits have advanced a false principle of geography , and other authors have fell into their errors , by supposing the river de la Plata to spring from the lake of Xaragés .
This lake , which has been the subject of much enquiry , is now supposed to have no existence .


By order of the courts of Spain and Portugal , the Marquis of Valdelirais and Don George Menezés , undertook to determine the limits of possession of these two powers  and accordingly several Spanish and Portuguese officers , traversed this large district of America between the years 1751 and 1755 .
The Spaniards embarked on the river Paraguai , and the Portuguese proceeded from a settlement belonging to the Crown of Portugal , called Maragosso , situated on the interior boundaries of the Brazils , at about 12 degrees south latitude , and proceeded up the river Caourou , which , according to the maps of the Jesuits , is described as falling into the lake Xaragés .
But how great was their surprize and disappointment at meeting in the 14th degree of south latitude , in the river Paraguai , without finding any thing to justify the supposition of the existence of the lake !
Hence it was concluded , that the periodical inundations of the river over a considerable tract of the adjacent country , having been received in the low grounds , formed a  body of water , which , by former navigators , was taken for the ideal lake .


The source of the Paraguai , or Rio de la Plata , is among the mountains , between the two oceans , and between five and six degrees south latitude , and it empties itself into the river of Amazons .
The Uraguai arises in the Captainship of St. Vincent 's , in the Brazils  and the Parana in the mountains to the east northeast of Rio Janeiro , whence it flows to the westward , and then changes its course to the south .


It appears , from the account of the Abbé Prevost , that Diaz de Solis first discovered the Parana in 1515 , and called it after himself , but that in 1526 Sebastian Cabot named it la Plata , or of silver , on account of the many pieces of silver which he observed in the possession of the natives of the adjacent country .
The fort of Espirutu Santo was erected by Cabot , who had scarcely time to see it completed before it was levelled with the earth .


In 1535 , Don Pedro de Mendoza , great Cupbearer to the Emperor , sailed for the river de la Plata , and founded Buenos Ayres  but this undertaking proved extremely unsuccessful  and after Mendoza 's death , the inhabitants of Buenos Ayres , unable to defend themselves against the depredations of the Indians , and living in perpetual dread of famine , fled for sanctuary to Assumption , now the capital of Paraguai , which was built by the followers of  Mendoza , soon became well inhabited , and , of course , considerably enlarged .
Don Pedro Artiz de Zarara , Governor of Paraguai , rebuilt Buenos Ayres , upon an improved plan , in the year 1580 , and it soon became the principal resort of ships navigating the South Seas  soon after which it was an episcopal see , and the place of residence of the chief magistrate .
The situation of Buenos Ayres is computed to be in 34 deg .
55 min .
south latitude , and 61 deg .
5 min .
west longitude from Paris .
The inhabitants , including negroes , do not exceed twenty thousand , notwithstanding which , the town covers a very large space of ground , owing to the generality of the habitations having no more than a ground floor , with spacious courtyards and extensive gardens .
The public market is held in a grand square , the angles of which are formed by the Governor 's palace , the town hall , the cathedral and the episcopal palace .
There is no harbour at Buenos Ayres , so that ships of any considerable burden are obliged to sail to Encenada de Baragon , about ten leagues east south-east of the town , or else receive and deliver their freights by means of small boats .


Adjoining to the Jesuit 's convent , there is a building , called the house for the exercises of women , where married and unmarried people , without the consent of their husbands or friends , sequester themselves for the space of twelve  days , during which time various religious exercises are practiced , almost without intermission .
There are holy ceremonies appointed for the slaves  and such of the negroes , as pay four reals per annum to the Dominicans , are admitted members of some religious community , are intitled to certain holidays , to hear mass , and a decent interment at the expence of the friars .


This community of negroes acknowledge St. Benedict of Palermo , and the Virgin for their patrons  and on the days dedicated to these saints they select two persons to represent the kings of Spain and Portugal , who are followed by all the negroes of the order , parading through the streets from the rising to the sitting of the sun , singing , dancing , representing battles , and repeating religious incantations .


The grounds near Buenos Ayres are extremely fruitful , producing all the real necessaries of life  but it is entirely uncultivated at only three leagues distance  and in crossing the plains scarce a hovel is to be met with  so that passengers are frequently under the necessity of sleeping in their carriages , and those who go on horseback are often , for many successive nights , exposed to the inclemency of the weather .
Horses and black cattle abound in these plains , and the latter are frequently killed by travellers , who take away sufficient for a few meals , and leave the rest for the birds and  beasts of prey .
The only furious animals known here are wild dogs and tygers : the former , which are said to have been originally brought from Europe , are both fierce and numerous  and perhaps owing to their food , and the climate seem , as it were , greatly to have altered their species  the latter are of the usual kind , but are not very frequently met with .


In the neighbourhood of Buenos Ayres wood is so extremely scarce , that very little is to be found that will even serve for fuel , and what is used in erecting and repairing houses , or in refitting vessels , is transported from Paraguai .


The Indians inhabiting this part of America are of a copper complexion , seldom exceeding five feet in stature , and of a very forbidding aspect .
Their Chief is distinguished by a thong of leather tied round his forehead , to which are fastened several plates of copper .
The arms they use are bows and arrows , nooses and balls .
These balls are about the circumference of a two pound cannon ball , and being received in leathern cups at the end of cords of about six or seven feet long , they throw them when on horseback , with such amazing force and dexterity , as to be almost at a certainty of killing an animal at the distance of three hundred yards .


Some years ago a number of delinquents , escaping the punishment they were sentenced to , retreated to the north of the Maldonadoes ,  where being joined by some deserters and Indian women , they have formed a community of desperadoes .
They frequently plunder the Spanish settlements , and carry their spoils to the boundaries of the Brazils , where they receive , in exchange for them , fire-arms and clothes , from the Paulists , another desperate race of robbers , supposed to be between six and seven hundred in number , who removed from Brazil farther to the north-west about the sixteenth century  since which time they have continually traversed the adjacent country in parties  and such travellers as are so unfortunate as to meet with them , generally fall victims to their cruelty and rapine .


The governments of Tucuman and Paraguai , with the missions of the Jesuits , are dependent upon the Governor-general of la Plata , who , in all matters relating to the silver mines of Potosi , is under the jurisdiction of the Viceroy of Peru .
A mint having been lately established at Potosi , the silver will not in future be brought from thence in the ore , but refined on the spot .


Two hundred carts , attended by three hundred men , go annually from Buenos Ayres to fetch salt from the lakes adjacent to the sea in forty-three degrees latitude  and the necessity of obtaining salt is the only motive that induces the Spaniards to travel so far south of Buenos Ayres , where the country exhibits a melancholy  prospect of dreary and uncultivated wilds .


The principal commerce of Buenos Ayres is with Peru and Chili , to which province they send cotton , mules , some skins , and about four hundred thousand Spanish pounds weight of the Paraguai herb , or South Sea tea every year  great part of this last article is consumed by the labourers in the Peruvian mines  it being esteemed a most excellent preventative against the effects of the noxious vapours arising from those inexhaustible funds of treasure .


Notwithstanding there is but little trade at Buenoes Ayres , it is a place of such great riches , that the register ships frequently carry away a million of dollars each  and if they were inclined to extend their skin and fur trade , those articles alone would , undoubtedly , acquire them immense wealth .


Montevideo was built between forty and fifty years since , upon a peninsula , to the north of the river , and about ninety miles above its mouth .
The town has a bay , affording safe anchorage , but in boisterous weather some skill must be exerted , to keep clear of a chain of hidden rocks off the east point of the bay , which are called Punta de las Carretas .
The town of Montevideo affords every refreshment  and the air being particularly salubrious , renders it still more inviting to the sons of Neptune , who here find a happy renewal of that health and  vigour , which , from various causes , must inevitably be impaired by a long residence on the stormy element .


The Jesuits took up their residence at Paraguay in the year 1580 , and in the time of Philip the Third founded their celebrated missions , called indifferently by the Europeans Paraguai or Uraguai .
These missions are thirty-seven in number  twenty-nine being on one side of the river Uraguai , and eight on the opposite shore .


The Jesuits undertook to convert the natives of this tract of America to the Roman Catholic religion , and in order to encourage them to pursue this very difficult task with a proper degree of spirit , they were rendered independent of the Governor 's authority , and allowed an annual stipend of sixty thousand piastres for their necessary expences .
And in order to indemnify the Crown for this expence , a tax of one piastre per head was levied upon all the Indians between the age of eighteen and sixty .


Notwithstanding the many and great obstacles which would have dispirited less determined men , the Jesuits , by a steady perseverance , the most ardent zeal , and a strict attention to the genius and disposition of these savages , at length , civilized their manners , implanted in their minds the principles of the Christian religion ,  and made them happy within themselves and useful to the community .


In the year 1757 the Spanish monarch having given up the colonies on the left shore of the river to the Portuguese , in exchange for Santo Sacramento , with a view to suppress the smuggling trade , the Indians of the ceded colonies , disgusted at being driven from their cultivated lands , took up arms against the Spaniards .
Don Joseph Andonaighi , Governor-general of the province de la Plata , and Don Joachim de Viana , Governor of Montevideo , marched against , and entirely defeated them .
Soon after this battle the insurrections being quelled , Viana left Buenos Ayres , and was accompanied as far as the Maldonados by seven Indian families , where they settled , leading a life of exemplary prudence and industry .
The situation of these reclaimed people gives an idea of what the poets call the golden age : they knew no distinction of rank , were neither incumbered with riches , nor oppressed with poverty  and as all their wants were supplied from the warehouses appointed to receive the produce of the common labour , they had no incitement to use sinister and clandestine means to obtain private property .


The country in which the missions are situated , reaches about four hundred and fifty miles east and west , and about six hundred miles north and south  and the number of the inhabitants  is computed to be three hundred thousand .
There are immense forests of all kinds of wood , and extensive meadows , watered by innumerable small rivers and brooks , which produce pasture sufficient for upwards of two millions of cattle .


The country was divided into districts , over each of which two Jesuits were appointed to preside  one of whom acted as Rector , and the other as his Curate .
The Indians lived in the most abject state of submission to their Rectors , who severely chastised them for misdemeanours , and annually appointed a number of inferior officers , called Corregidors , to take cognizance of petty offences .


Near the church are two large buildings  one of which was inhabited by a great number of girls , who were instructed in various occupations .
The other building was occupied by young negroe men , who were brought up to various handicraft professions  and one department of this building was appointed to the teaching of music , sculpture , architecture , c..
The Rector 's house stood between these buildings , and had communications with each , which he visited every day to see the provisions justly distributed , and the proper decorum in other respects strictly observed .


The entire expulsion of the Jesuits from the Spanish dominions having been resolved upon , Don Francis Buccarelli was appointed to carry  this design into execution  and he accordingly sailed for Buenos Ayres , arrived there in the beginning of 1767 , and immediately sent the dispatches with which he was charged , to the Governors of Peru and Chili , and the commanders of Cordoua , Mendoza , Corrientes , Santa-Fe , Salta , Montevideo , and Paraguay .
These dispatches were accompanied by letters , strictly enjoining the persons , to whom the dispatches from the Court were directed , not to open them till an appointed day .
As it was a matter of doubt , whether the Indians would tamely submit to see Jesuits arrested in the colonies , all the preparations for carrying the King 's orders into execution were conducted with the most profound secrecy .
The time for accomplishing this grand design at length arrived , and the different Governors being previously instructed to open their letters , and to proceed according to their contents , with all imaginable dispatch .


The general execution began about two o'clock in the morning , when the Jesuits , with equal horror and astonishment , found their habitations invested by the Spanish troops .


They evinced a high degree of philosophical resignation and humility in quietly submitting to their fate , which they confessed was not so severe as their crimes deserved .


On the thirteenth of September a Cacique belonging to each colony , and all the corregidors ,  arrived at Buenos Ayres .
These people were politically detached from their companions by the following stratagem , with a design of securing them as hostages , in case any resistance had been made .
The Governor-general sent for them , under pretence of communicating the substance of the King 's letters  and these deluded people were not informed of the events that had happened , till they received the account from the mouth of the Governor , who gave them a general audience , immediately upon their arrival  when the Governor informed them , that he came to free them from the slavery they had long groaned under , and directing them to one of the houses formerly occupied by the Jesuits , they were there properly provided for at the King 's expence .
The Jesuits had established other missions than those abovementioned to the south of Uraguay , and were making great progress southward of Chili , towards the island of Chiloé  but the unexpected turn of affairs in Europe utterly destroyed the work , the completion of which had been an object of great attention for a long series of years .
VOCABULARY of the Language of TAITI ISLAND .


Abobo , To-morrow .
Aibou , Come .
Ainé , Girl ( fille ) Aiouta , There is some .
Aouererê , Black .
Aouero , Egg .
Aouri , Iron , gold , silver , every metal , or instrument of metal .
Aoutti , Flying fish .
Aouira , Lightning .
Apalari , To break or destroy .
Ari , Cocoa-nut .
Ateatea , White .
Ea , Root .
Eai , Fire .
Eame , Drink made of cocoa-nuts .
Eani , All manner of fighting .
Eivi , Little .
Eite , To understand .
Elao , A fly .
Emaa , A sling .
Emeitai , To give .
Emoe , To sleep .
Enapo , Yesterday .
Enoanoa , To smell well .
Enoo-te-papa , Sit down .
Enoua-Taiti , The country of Taiti .
Enoua-Paris , The country of Paris .
Eo , To sweat .
 Eoe-tea , An arrow .
Eoe-pai , A paddle or oar .
Eonou .
Turtle .
Eouai , Rain .
Eouri , A dancer .
Eouriaye , A dancing-girl .
Epouré , To pray .
Era , The sun .
Eraï , Heaven .
Ero , Ant .
Eri , King .
Erie , Royal .
Etai , Sea , Eteina , Elder brother or sister .
Etouana , Younger brother or sister .
Etio , Oyster .
Etoi , A butcher .
3 .
THE BOOKSELLER 'S ADVERTISEMENT .
TO THE READER .


 HAVING in the former part of this Collection given an authentic account of the proceedings and discoveries of the English navigators who have lately surrounded the globe  and also a copious detail of the voyage of a cotemporary navigator of another nation , who , jealous of the English designs , was commissioned to follow the same track .
That the present undertaking may not want novelty to recommend it , I have procured , at a considerable expence , the journal of a new voyage to the northern part of the globe  a voyage which his Majesty , in a particular manner , has thought fit to patronize , and which was equipped with such care and circumspection , that nothing was found wanting during the course of it .


This voyage I have added by way of Supplement , without any additional expence to the subscribers  and have prefixed to it a brief recapitulation of the many attempts that have been made for the discovery of a north-east passage to China and Japan , and also have subjoined a like summary of the enterprizes set on foot by government , or undertaken by private adventurers , for discovering a communication with the great pacific ocean by a passage from the north-west .


 These accounts are full of astonishing events , and wonderful descriptions of uncommon phenomena .
In them we read of rivers and lakes of ice , bursting with imprisoned vapours  and of rocks , forests , beams of houses and buildings , splitting with a noise not less terrible than the loudest thunder .
- Of brandy , Brine , and even spirits of wine , exposed to the open air , only for a few hours , freezing into a solid mass .
- Of mountains of ice frozen in the sea one hundred fathom deep .
- Of snow hills that never thaw .
- And of winds that blister the flesh , and shrivel the skin like red-hot iron .


In this Supplement the distresses , dangers , providential deliverances , and unspeakable sufferings of those who have wintered in the dark and dreary regions of the north , are recounted with clearness and brevity  and , in the small compass of a few sheets , the contents of many volumes are comprized .


4 .
SUPPLEMENT , CONTAINING THE JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE UNDERTAKEN BY ORDER OF HIS PRESENT MAJESTY , For making DISCOVERIES towards the NORTH POLE , BY THE HON. COMMODORE PHIPPS , AND CAPTAIN LUTWIDGE , IN HIS MAJESTY 's SLOOPS RACEHORSE AND CARCASE .
To which is prefixed , An Account of the several VOYAGES undertaken for the Discovery of a North-East Passage to China and Japan .


 4.1 .


 Figure 5 .
A Map of the illegibleICY SEA illegible which the several Communications with the Land Waters and other new Discoveries are exhibited .
4.2 .
THE INTRODUCTION .


 IT is fortunate for commerce , and the intercourse of nations , that there is implanted in man 's nature a desire of novelty , which no present gratification can satisfy  that when he has visited one region of the earth , he is still , like Alexander , sighing for another to explore  and that , after having escaped one danger in his progress , he is no less eager to encounter others , that may chance to obstruct him in the course of his pursuits .


If the history of former hardships could have deterred men from engaging in new adventures , the Voyage , the particulars of which we are now about to relate , would probably never have been undertaken .
The dreary regions that surround the poles are so little accustomed to feel the kindly influences of the enlivening sun , and are so destitute of the ordinary productions of the earth in happier climates , that little less than one whole quarter of the globe is , by its sterility , rendered uninhabitable by human beings , and but thinly occupied by a very inconsiderable number of the race of quadrupedes .
The many and almost insuperable difficulties that must therefore be expected in traversing these forlorn desarts , where no relief is to be  expected , but from the favourable interposition of that power , whose merciful providence extends to the remotest corners of the earth , are , upon reflection , enough to cool the ardour of the most enterprising , and to stagger the resolution of the most intrepid .


In the contention between powers , equally formed by nature to meet an opposition , it may be glorious to overcome  but to encounter raging seas , tremendous rocks , and bulwarks of solid ice , and desperately to persist in attempts to prevail against such formidable enemies  as the conflict is hopeless , so the event is certain .
The hardiest and most skilful navigator , after exposing himself and his companions to the most perilous dangers , and suffering in proportion to his hardiness the most complicated distresses , must at last submit to return home without success , or perish by his perseverance .


This observation will be sufficiently justified , by a brief recapitulation of the Voyages that have been undertaken , with a view to the discovery of a North-east Passage to China and Japan .


The first who attempted this discovery was Sir Hugh Willoughby , with three ships , so early as the year 1553 , the aera of perilous enterprizes .
This gentleman sailed to the latitude of 75 degrees north , within sight , as it is imagined , of New Greenland , now called Spitsbergen  but by a storm was driven back ,  and obliged to winter in the river Arzena , in Lapland , where he was frozen to death with all his company .
He left upon his table a concise account of all his discoveries , in which he mentions , having sailed within sight of a country in a very high latitude , about which geographers are divided  some affirming , as has been said , that it could be no other than New Greenland , afterwards discovered , and named by the Dutch Spitsbergen  others , that what he saw was only a fog-bank  and of this latter opinion is Capt. Wood , an able navigator , of whom we shall have occasion to speak hereafter .


To Sir Hugh Willoughby succeeded Capt. Burroughs , afterwards Comptroller of the Navy to Queen Elizabeth .
This gentleman attempted the passage with better fortune , and returned full of hope , but without success .
He passed the North cape in 1556 , advanced as far north as the 78th degree , discovered the Wygate , or strait that divides Nova Zembla from the country of the Sammoyds , now subject to Russia : and having passed the easternmost point of that strait , arrived at an open sea , from whence he returned , having , as he imagined , discovered the passage so painfully sought , and so ardently desired .
Some affirm , his discoveries extended beyond the 80th degree of latitude , to a country altogether desolate , where the mountains were blue and the valleys snow .


 Be that as it may , the favourable report of Capt. Burroughs encouraged Queen Elizabeth to fit out two stout vessels to perfect the discovery .
The command of these ships was given to the Captains Jackman and Pett , who , in 1580 , sailed through the same strait , that had been discovered by Burroughs , and entered the eastern sea  where the ice poured in so fast upon them , and the weather became so tempestuous , that after enduring incredible hardships , and sustaining the most dreadful shocks of ice and seas , terrible even in the relation , they were driven back and separated  and neither Pett nor his ship or crew were ever heard of afterwards .


After this disaster and disappointment , the desire of visiting the frozen seas to the northeast began to abate among the English , but was assumed by the Dutch with an obstinate perseverance , peculiar to that phlegmatic nation .
The first Dutchman we read of who made the attempt was John Cornelius , of whose voyage , in 1595 , we have but a very imperfect account  he was followed however in 1606 by William Barrans , or , as some write , Barents , an able and experienced seaman and mathematician , who being supplied with every necessary for so hazardous a voyage , by the generosity and patronage of Prince Maurice , proceeded in the same course which had been pointed out to him by the English navigators  but having passed  the Wygate , found the like incumbrances , and the like tempests which the English had experienced  and not being able to bear up against them , returned thoroughly convinced , that the wished-for passage was not to be attained in that direction .
However , he traversed the coast of Nova Zembla , gave names to several promontories and head-lands , and planned to himself a new course to steer , by which he hoped to accomplish what he had failed in discovering , by following the steps of those who had gone before him .


In 1607 , animated rather than discouraged by disappointment , he entered upon his second voyage , with the spirit of a man fully prepossessed with success .
He had heard , that some of the whalers , who had now begun to frequent the North Seas , had , either by design or accident , advanced much farther to the northward than those who had been purposely fitted out upon discoveries  he therefore determined to steer to the northward of Nova Zembla , till he should arrive at the height of the pole , under which he was persuaded he should find an open sea  and , by changing his course to the southward , avoid those obstructions which had retarded his passage to the north-east .


In this hope he continued till he arrived on the coast of Nova Zembla , where , before he had reached the 77th degree , he was so rudely attacked by the mountains of ice , that every  where assailed him , that not being able to withstand their fury , he was driven against the rocks , and his ship dashed to pieces .
Barents and the greatest part of his crew got safe to land , but it was to experience greater misery than those underwent who perished in the attempt .
They were obliged to winter in a country , where no living creature besides themselves appeared to have existence  and where , notwithstanding their utmost efforts to preserve their bodies from the cold , the flesh perished upon the bones of some of them , and others died of the most excruciating pains .


In this extremity , and notwithstanding the anguish they endured , those who survived had still the fortitude and ingenuity to frame a pinnace from the wreck of their broken ship , in which , at the approach of summer , they made sail for Lapland  but before they arrived at Colu , their Captain died , and with him the hopes of perfecting his discovery .


It was now the active season for naval enterprizes .
Private adventurers began to fit out ships for the North Seas .
Innumerable sea animals had been observed to bask upon the ice  the tusks of whose jaws were found to excel , in whiteness , the finest ivory , and their carcases to yield plenty of excellent oil .
In the infancy of the whale fishery , these were pursued with the same eagerness , with which both the English and Dutch endeavour at this day to make the whales  their prey , and perhaps with no less profit .
In following these , many islands were discovered to which they resorted , and , in course of time , the seas that were so formidable to the first discoverers , became frequented at the proper seasons by the ships of every nation .


Foreign navigators , however , were more sanguine in their notions of a north-west passage , than of the existence of a passage to the north-east  and it was not till many unsuccessful trials had been made to discover the former , that the latter was again attempted .
The celebrated Hudson , who discovered the straits that leads to the great western bay , which still bears his name  after he had exerted his skill in vain to find a passage westward , was persuaded at last to undertake a voyage in search of a passage to the north-east .
This he performed in 1610 , but being discouraged by the miscarriages of others , and the fatal issue that had attended their obstinate perseverance , on viewing the face of the country , examining the currents , and traversing an immense continent of ice , that stretched along the ocean , in a direction from east south-east to west north-west , he concluded , that no passage could be practicable in that direction , and therefore returned without making any other material discovery .


From this time till the year 1676 , the prosecution of this discovery was totally neglected by the English  and though the Dutch whalers  amused the world with wonderful relations of their near approach to the pole , yet little credit was given to their reports till the arrival of one John Wood , who had accompanied Sir John Narborough in his voyage to the South Sea , with a view to establish a new trade with the Chilians , and natives of that vast tract of country , reaching from the Straits of Magellan to the confines of Peru .


This able and enterprizing navigator , being himself an excellent mathematician and geographer , and reading in the Philosophical Transactions a paper , by which the existence of a north-east passage to the eastern or Indian ocean was plausibly asserted , and this exactly coinciding with his own notions of the construction of the globe , he was induced , by this and other reasons , to apply to King Charles the Second for a commission to prosecute the discovery  the accomplishment whereof , it was said , would add to the glory of his Majesty 's reign , and immensely to the wealth and prosperity of his kingdoms .


Many about the Court of that needy Prince , hoping to share in the profits of the voyage , were earnest in prevailing with his Majesty to forward the design , who being himself fond of novelty , ordered the Speedwell Frigate to be fitted out at his own charge , manned , victualled , and provided with every necessary  while the Duke , his brother , and seven other courtiers ,  joined in the purchase of a Pink of one hundred and twenty tons , to accompany her , which [ ... ] hey likewise manned and victualled , and furnished with merchandizes , such as were thought marketable on the coasts of Tartary or Japan  the countries they most probably would first fall in with after their passage through the North Sea .


These ships being in readiness , and commissions made out for their Commanders , Captain Wood was appointed to direct the expedition , on board the Speedwell , and Captain Flawes to bear him company on board the Prosperous .


On the 28th of May 1676 , they sailed from the Buoy of the Nore , with the wind at south-west  and on the 4th of June cast anchor off Lerwick , in Brassey Sound , where they continued six days , to take in water and recruit their stores .


On Saturday the 10th they weighed anchor and continued their voyage  and on the 15th they entered the Polar circle , where the sun at that season of the year never sets .
At noon the Speedwell broke her main-top-sail-yard in the slings , the first disaster that had happened , which , however , was easily repaired .
The weather now began to grow hazey , a circumstance that frequently happens in the Polar regions , and darkens the air with the obscurity of night .


From this time till June 22 , when they fell in with the ice in latitude 75 degrees 59 minutes  north , nothing material occurred .
On that day , at noon , they observed a continent of ice stretching to an imperceptible distance , in a direction from east-south-east and west-north-west .
They bore away along the ice till the 28th , when they found it join to the land of Nova Zembla .


On the 29th they stood a [ ... ] ay to the south , to get clear of the ice  but unfortunately found themselves embayed in it .
At 11 at night the Prosperous bore down upon the Speedwell , crying out , ice upon the weather-bow , on which the Speedwell clapt the helm hard a weather , and veered out the main-sail to ware the ship  but before she could be brought too on the other tack , she struck on a ledge of rocks , and stuck fast .
They fired guns of distress , but were not heard , and the fog being so thick , that land could not be discerned , though close to the stern of their ship  no relief was now to be expected , but from Providence and their own endeavours .
In such a situation , no description can equal the relation of the Captain himself , who , in the language of the times , has given the following full and pathetic account .


`` Here , says he , we lay beating upon the rock in a most frightful manner , for the space of three or four hours , using all possible means to save the ship , but in vain  for it blew so hard , that it was wholly out of our power to  carry out an anchor capable to do us any service .
At length we saw land close under our stern , to the great amazement of us all , which before we could not see for the foggy weather  so I commanded the men to get out the boats before our mast came by the board , which was done .
I sent the boatswain towards the shore in the pinnace , to see if there was any possibility of landing , which I much feared , because the sea ran so high .
In half an hour he returned with this answer , that it was impossible to land a man , the snow being in high cliffs , the shore was inaccessible .
This was bad tidings  so then it was high time to think on the safety of our souls , and we went all together to prayers , to beseech God to have mercy on us , for now nothing but individual ruin appeared before our eyes .
After prayers , the weather cleared up a little , and looking over the stern , I saw a small beach directly with the stern of the ship , where I thought there might be some chance of getting on shore .
I therefore sent off the pinnace a second time , with some men in her to be first landed , but she durst not venture to attempt the beach .
I then ordered out the long-boat with twenty men to land , who attempted it , and got safe on shore .
They in the pinnace seeing that , followed , and landed their men likewise , and both vessels returned to the ship without any accident .
The men on  shore desired some fire-arms and ammunition , for there were many bears in sight .
I therefore ordered two barrels of powder , some small arms , some provisions , with my own papers and money , to be put on board the pinnace  but as she put off from the ship 's side , a sea overset her , so that all was lost , with the life of one man , and several others taken up for dead .
The pinnace likewise was dashed to pieces , to our great sorrow , as by that disaster , one means of escaping from this dismal country , in case the Prosperous deserted us was cut off .
The long-loat being on board , and the sea running high , the boatswain and some others would compel me and the Lieutenant to leave the ship , saying it was impossible for her to live long in that sea , and that they had rather be drowned than I  but desiring me when I came on shore , if it were possible , to send the boat again for them .
Before we got half way to shore the ship overset , so making all possible haste to land the men we had on board , I went off to the ship again , to save those poor men who had been so kind to me before .
With great hazard I got to the quarter of the ship , and they came down the ladder into the boat , only one man was left behind for dead , who had before been cast away in the pinnace  so I returned to the shore , though very wet and cold .
We then hauled up the boat , and went up the land about a flight shot , where our men were  making a fire and a tent with canvass and oars , which we had saved for that purpose , in which we all lay that night wet and weary .
The next morning the man we left on board having recovered , got upon the mizzen-mast , and prayed to be taken on shore , but it blew so hard , and the sea ran so high , that tho ' he was a very pretty sailor , none would venture to bring him off .


The weather continuing blowing with extreme fogs , and with frost and snow , and all the ill-compacted weather that could be imagined put together , we built more tents to preserve ourselves  and the ship breaking in pieces , came all on shore to the same place where we landed , which served us for shelter and firing .
Besides , there came to us some hogsheads of flour , and brandy in good store , which was no little comfort in our great extremity .
We now lay between hope and despair , praying for fair weather , that Captain Flawes might find us , which it was impossible for him ever to do while the weather continued foggy  but fearing at the same time that he might be cast away as well as we .


But supposing we never were to see him again , I was resolved to try the utmost to save as many as I could in the long-boat .
In order thereunto we raised her two feet , and laid a deck upon her to keep the sea out as much as possible  and with this boat , and thirty men , for she would carry no more , I intended to row  and sail to Russia , but the crew not being satisfied who should be the men , began to be very unruly in their mind and behaviour , every one having as much reason to save himself as another , some holding consultation to save the boat , and all to run the like fortune  but here brandy was our best friend , for it kept the men always fox'd , so that in all their designs I could prevent them .
Some were in the mind to go by land , but that I knew was impossible to any man  neither had we provisions nor ammunition to defend us from the wild beasts  so the passage by land being impracticable , and no passage by sea to be attempted till forty men were destroyed , I will leave it to the consideration of any , whether we were not in a most deplorable condition , without the interposition of divine providence .


The weather continued still very bad , with fogs , snow , rain , and frost , till the 9th day of our being on shore , which was the 8th day of July , when in the morning it cleared up , and to our great joy one of our people cried out a sail , which proved Captain Flawes  so we set fire to our town , that he might see where we were , which he presently discovered , so came up , and sent his boat to us  but before I went off , I wrote a brief relation of the intention of the voyage , with the accident that had befallen us , and put it into a glass bottle , and left it in the fortification I had there built  so by twelve  o'clock we all got safe on board , but left all on shore that we had saved from the ship  for we much feared it would prove foggy again , and that we should be driven once more on this miserable country  a country , for the most part , covered perpetually with snow , and what is bare being like bogs , on whose surface grows a kind of moss , bearing a blue and yellow flour , the whole product of the earth in this desolate region .
Under the surface , about two feet deep , we came to a firm body of ice , a thing never heard of before  and against the ice-cliffs , which are as high as either of the forelands in Kent , the sea has washed underneath , and the arch overhanging , most fearful to behold , supports mountains of snow , which , I believe , hath lain there ever since the creation . ''


Thus far in Captain Wood 's own words .
He adds , that by the tides setting directly in upon the shore , it may be affirmed with certainty , that there is no passage to the northward .
One thing remarkable in his relation , and which seems to contradict the report of former navigators , is , that the sea is there salter than he had yet tasted it elsewhere , and the clearest in the world , for that he could see the shells at the bottom , though the sea was four hundred and eighty feet deep .


Being all embarked on board the Prosperous , on the 9th of July they changed their course , and steered for England  and , on the 23d of  August , they arrived safe in the Thames , without any remarkable accident intervening .


After the miscarriage of this voyage , on which the highest expectations had been formed , the most experienced navigators in England seemed to agree , that a passage by the north , or north-east , had no existence .
They were the more confirmed in this error , for an error it is , by the reasons assigned by Capt. Wood , for changing his opinion on this matter  for , before he went upon the discovery , he was fully persuaded himself , and likewise persuaded many others , that nothing was more certain .
When , however , he first saw the ice , he imagined it was only that which joined to Greenland , and that no solid body of ice extended farther from land than twenty leagues  in this persuasion he altered his course , and coasted along in the direction in which the ice lay , expecting , at every cape or head-land of ice , after running a certain distance , to find an opening into the Polar ocean  but after running two or three glasses to the northward in one bay , he found himself entangled in another  and thus it continued till his ship was wrecked .
By this experiment , he found the opinion of Barents confuted , namely , ' `` that by stearing the middle course between Spitsbergen and Nova Zembla , an open sea might be attained , in which a ship might safely sail as far as the pole . '' '
From his own experience ,  he therefore pronounced , that all the Dutch relations were forgeries which asserted , that any man had ever bee [ ... ] under the pole  verily believing , that if there be no land to the northward of 80 degrees , that the sea is there frozen , and always continues so  and grounding his opinion upon this remark , that if the body of ice which he saw were to be conveyed ten degrees more to the southward , many centuries of years would elapse before it would be melted .


To this positive assertion , however , may be opposed , the testimony of many credible persons , some of whom have themselves sailed beyond the 80th degree of north latitude , and others , upon evidence , whose veracity there is no reasonable cause to bring in question .


Among the latter , the testimony of Mr. Joseph Moxon , member of the Royal Society of London , must have considerable weight .
In a paper which this gentleman caused to be printed in the Philosophical Transactions , is this remarkable relation .


' `` Being about twenty years ago in Amsterdam , I went into a public house to drink a cup of beer for my thirst  and sitting by the public fire , among several people , there happened a seaman to come in , who seeing a friend of his there , who he knew went the Greenland voyage , wondered to see him , because it was not yet time for the Greenland  fleet to come home , and asked him , what accident had brought him home so soon ?
His friend ( who was the steersman ) answered , that their ships went not out to fish , but only to take in the lading of the fleet , to bring it to an early market .
But , said he , before the fleet had caught fish enough to lade us , we , by order of the Greenland Company , sailed unto the north pole , and came back again .
Whereupon , says Moxon , I entered into discourse with him , and seemed to question the truth of what he said  but he did assure me it was true , and that the ship was then in Amsterdam , and many of the seamen belonging to her ready to justify the truth of it  and told me , moreover , that they had sailed two degrees beyond the pole .
I asked him , if they found no land or islands about the pole ?
He answered , no  there was a free and open sea .
I asked him , if they did not meet with a great deal of ice ?
He told me , no  they saw no ice about the pole .
I asked him , what weather they had there ?
He told me , fine warm weather , such as was at Amsterdam in the summer-time , and as hot .
I should have asked him more questions , but that he was engaged in discourse with his friend , and I could not , in modesty , interrupt them longer .
But I believe the steersman spoke truth  for he seemed a plain , honest ,  and unaffectatious person , and one who could have no design upon me . '' '


To authenticate this relation it has been observed , that under the poles , the sun in June being 23 degrees high , and having little or no depression towards the horizon , always , as it were , swimming about in the same elevation , might invigorate that part of the hemisphere with more heat than he does our climate  when he is , in the winter , no more than 15 degrees at the highest , and but eight hours above the horizon  in which space the earth has time to cool , and to lose , in the night , the influences of heat which it receives in the day .


Another report upon like evidence was made to King Charles the Second , by Capt. Goulden , who being a Greenland whaler himself , spoke with two Hollanders in the North Seas , that had sailed within one degree of the pole , where they met with no ice , but a hollow grown sea , like that in the Bay of Biscay .


A still more credible testimony is , that about the year 1670 , application being made to the States General for a charter to incorporate a company of merchants to trade to Japan and China , by a new passage to the north east  the then East India Company opposed it , and that so effectually , that their High Mightinesses refused to grant what the merchants requested .


At that time it was talked of in Holland , as a matter of no difficulty to sail to Japan by the  way of Greenland  and it was publickly asserted and believed , that several Dutch ships had actually done it .
The merchants being required to verify this fact , desired that the journals of the Greenland squadron of 1655 might be produced  in seven of which there was notice taken of a ship which that year had sailed as high as the latitude of 89  and three journals of that ship being produced , they all agreed , as to one observation taken by the master , August 1 , 1655 , in 88 degrees 56 minutes north .


But a proof incontestible , is the testimony of Captain Hudson , who sailed in 1607 to the latitude of 81 degrees 30 minutes north , where he arrived on the 16th of July , the weather being then pretty warm .


Add to all these , that the Dutch , who were employed in 1670 , in endeavouring to find a north-east passage , advanced within a very few degrees of that open sea , which is now commonly navigated by the Russians , and which would infallibly have brought them to the coasts of China and Japan , had they persevered in the course they were pursuing .


It does not appear , however , from any authentic accounts that we can collect , that any voyage , professedly for the discovery of a north-east passage , has been undertaken by either public or private adventurers in England , since that of Capt. Wood in the year 1670 , till the  present year : and it is more than probable , that if the Russian discoveries on the north of Asia had never taken place , the thoughts of finding a practicable passage from Europe in that direction , would have lain dormant for ever .


But the vast and enterprizing genius of Peter the Great , in forcing his subjects out of that obscurity in which they had long been involved , has opened to the maritime powers new sources of commerce , and furnished fresh motives for new enterprizes .
From a people unacquainted with a vessel bigger than a bark , and who knew no navigation but that of their own rivers , that wonderful Prince not only taught them the use of ships , but instructed them in the true principles of building and equipping them .
Nay , he did more  for after making himself known and admired throughout Europe , he conceived the design of opening a communication with the remotest parts of the globe , and discovering to the world new countries which no European nation had ever yet explored .


With this design , he planned one of the boldest enterprizes that ever entered into the heart of man  and though he did not survive to see it executed , the glory of the atchievement is wholly his .


The country of Kamschatka was as much unknown to his predecessors , as it was to the rest of the civilized nations of the earth  yet  he formed the design of making that savage country the centre of the most glorious atchievements .


It was in the last year of this great Monarch 's life , that he commissioned Capt. Behring to traverse the wild , and then almost desolate , country of Siberia , and to continue his route to Kamtschatka , where he was to build one or more vessels , in order to discover whether the country towards the north , of which at that time they had no distinct knowledge , was a part of America , or not  and if it was , his instructions authorized him to endeavour , by every possible means , to seek and cultivate the acquaintance of some European people , and to learn from them the state of the country at which he should arrive .
If he failed in this , he was to make such discoveries as circumstances should present , and commit to writing the result of his observations for the use of his Imperial master .


To enter minutely into the particulars of Capt. Behring 's journey and voyage , would carry us beyond the limits prescribed for this Introduction : let it suffice to say , that after surmounting incredible difficulties , and suffering hardships which none but a Russian could have survived , he executed his commission successfully , and returned to Petersburg in safety , after an absence of five years , in which time , besides his voyage by sea , he had travelled , in going  and returning , eighteen thousand miles by land .


It is from the second enterprizes of this astonishing man , and from the subsequent voyages of the Russians , that we are able to ascertain the existence of a north-east passage  and it is from thence , and from the late voyage of Capt. Phipps , that , we think , we may fairly infer the practicability of it .


It was some time about the year 1740 , that Capt. Behring embarked on his second voyage from Kamtschatka , of which all that we know is , that he sailed southward to the isles of Japan , and from thence eastward about 80 leagues .
At that distance from Japan he discovered land , which he coasted north-west , still approaching to the north-east cape of Asia , which he doubled , and named Cape Shelvghenski , not daring to land till he arrived at the mouth of a great river , where , sending his boats with most of his crew on shore , they never more returned , being either killed or detained by the inhabitants , which made his discovery incompleat  for not having men sufficient left to navigate the ship , she went on shore on an uninhabited island , where the Captain unfortunately died .


From this voyage , however , we learn that the sea , from the north-east cape of Kamtschatka , is open to the isles of Japan , and from a subsequent account of Russian voyages , published  in the Philosophical Transactions , from a paper communicated by the celebrated Euler , it appears , that they passed along in small vessels , coasting between Nova Zembla and the continent , at divers times in the middle of summer , when those seas were open .
The first expedition was from the river Oby , latitude 66 degrees north , longitude 65 degrees east from London , and at the approach of winter , the vessels sheltered themselves by going up the Janiska , the mouth of which is marked in our maps in latitude 70 degrees north , and in longitude 82 degrees east  from whence the next summer they proceeded to the mouth of the Lena in latitude 72 degrees north , and in longitude 115 degrees , into which they again retired for the winter season .
The third expedition was from the mouth of this river , to the farthest north cape of Asia , in 72 degrees of north latitude , and in 172 degrees of east longitude from London .
Thus the Russians having passed between the continent and Nova Zembla , and sailed as far as the easternmost north cape , and the English and Dutch having repeatedly sailed through the straits that divide Nova Zembla from the continent , nothing can be a plainer demonstration of the reality of a north-east passage , than the sum of the voyages here enumerated , when added together .
The English and Dutch sail to Wygatz , or the strait of Nova Zembla  the Russians sail from  Wygatz to the north cape of Asia  and Behring from the north cape to Japan .
This is an incontrovertible demonstration  yet it is obvious , that this course can never be practicable to ships employed in trade .
The Russians , by taking the advantage of an open sea and mild weather , in three years time accomplished but part of a voyage , which , by the Cape of Good Hope , may be made in less than one .
Who therefore would run the hazard of so desperate a passage , for the sake of reaping imaginary advantages by an intercourse with savages , who , for aught we know , have nothing to exchange for European commodities , but the skins of bears , or the bones of monsters .


But tho ' the passage to the northern countries of the east was known to be impracticable to European navigators in this direction , it was worthy the greatness of a maritime people , to endeavour to determine the possibility of attaining the same end by another course .


The miscarriage and death of Barentz , and the shipwreck of Capt. Wood , had left the question undetermined , whether the regions adjoining to the pole are land or water , frozen or open sea .
The advantages from this discovery , besides the glory resulting from it , had the decision terminated in favour of navigation , would have been immensely great .
To have opened a new chanel of commerce at a time when our trade is languishing , would have revived the  drooping hopes of our manufacturers , and retained at home the numerous emigrants , who , for want of employment in their own country , are seeking new habitations , and new means of living in remote settlements , of the certainty of which they have no experience .


It must be acknowledged to the lasting honour of the noble Lord who presides at the head of the admiralty board , and who patronized the undertaking , that the means to render it successful , was in every respect proportioned to the importance of the discovery .


The vessels that were made choice of were the properest that could be devised .
Bomb ketches are in the first instance stoutly built , and not being over large , are best adapted for navigating seas that are known to abound with shoals and covered rocks : these vessels , besides their natural strength , were sheathed with plank of seasoned oak three inches thick , to fortify them against the shocks and pressure of the ice , that , in their progress , they must infallibly encounter .
They were , besides , furnished with a double set of ice poles , anchors , cables , sails and rigging , to provide against the terrible effects of the severe and tempestuous weather , that frequently happens in high latitudes , even in the middle of the most temperate seasons .


Nor was his Lordship less careful to provide for the comfortable subsistance of the men , than for the preservation of their lives , by his  wise directions in equipping their ships .
His first care was , to issue orders for killing and curing a sufficient quantity of beef and pork in the best manner possible , that their provisions might be good and fresh  and his next , to cause one hundred buts of porter to be brewed with the best malt and hops , that they might have proper drink to fortify them against the rigour of the climate they were about to pass .
Their pease , oatmeal , rice and molossus , were all provided with equal care , and when all things were in readiness , the beer was stowed in the holds , and the vacancies filled up with coals , which served as ballast , that firing might not be wanting to warm and dry them when cold , or wet with labour , or with watching .
Add to this , that a double quantity of spirits were put on board , with a large proportion of wine , vinegar , mustard , c. c. and what , we believe , was never before thought of in the fitting out of any King 's ships , a considerable quantity of tea and sugar for the sick , in case any should be seized with that dreadful disorder , which rendered ship provisions loathsome to Capt. James 's men , who were constrained to winter in Charlton Island in 1632 .
These men fell sick and had sore mouths , and could neither eat beef , pork , fish , nor potage  the Surgeon was every morning and evening obliged to pick their teeth , and cut away the pieces of rotten flesh from their gums , yet they could eat  nothing but bread pounded in a mortar , and fried in oil , on which they subsisted for several months .
In case of accidents of this kind , and that tea should fail to answer the purposes of nourishment , a quantity of portable soup was likewise provided .
And to compleat the whole , a stock of warm cloathing was laid in , consisting of six fearnought jackets for each man , two milled caps , two pair of fearnought trowsers , four pair of milled stockings , and an excellent pair of boots , with a dozen pair of milled mitts , two cotton shirts , and two handkerchiefs .


Thus equipped and provided , the command of the Race Horse was given to the Hon. Constantine Phipps , as Commodore , and that of the Carcarse to Capt. Skiffington Lutwych  the first mounting eight six pounders and fourteen swivels , burthen three hundred and fifty tons  the latter four six pounders and fourteen swivels , burthen three hundred tons .


Thus being premised , let us now proceed to the Journal of the Voyage .


4.3 .
JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE TO DISCOVER THE NORTH EAST PASSAGE  UNDER THE COMMAND OF THE HON. COMMODORE PHIPPS , AND CAPT. SKIFFINGTON LUTWYCH , IN HIS MAJESTY 'S SHIPS RACE HORSE AND CARCASE BOMBS .


 ALL things being now in readiness , the officers on board , and the men paid their bounty-money of three pounds per man , according to his Majesty 's royal proclamation , for the encouragement of those who should voluntarily enter to undertake the voyage .
On the 3d of June 1773 , the Commodore made the signal to weigh  but previous to their departure , the Carcase having been judged too deep to navigate those heavy seas through which she was to pass , the Captain obtained leave from the board of Admiralty to re-land ten of her compliment of men , and to put ashore six of the eight six-pounders with which she was equipped , with a quantity of provisions , proportioned  to the number of men that it had been thought proper to discharge .


On Friday the 4th being off Sheerness , the wind west by north , and a fresh breeze , they took their departure , and continued their voyage without any material occurrence happening till Tuesday the 15th , when the Commodore made the signal to lie to .
They were then off Brassey Island , and many fishing-boats from Shetland being in sight , the men were invited on board , and some fish purchased of them at a cheap rate .


On the 17th they took a new departure from Shetland , but the day following the fog thickened so much , that it almost approached to total darkness .
During the continuance of the fog , the Commodore kept firing guns and beating drums , to prevent the Carcase from losing company .
As it was impossible that one could see the other at a ship 's length , it was found the more necessary to repeat and return the firing , lest they should run foul of each other before they could be apprized of their danger .
About five in the morning the mist cleared up , and about nine the Commodore being in sight , made the signal to the Carcase to steer north-east .
They were then in latitude 60 degrees 52 minutes north by observation  the north end of Shetland Island bearing north by west one half west , seven or eight leagues .


On the 17th they observed a sail to the north-east , which the Commodore brought to , and  spoke with .
The breeze fresh , the weather hazy , and the wind variable , the Carcase carried away her main-top-mast studding sail yard  which , however , was very soon supplied .
Latitude this day by observation 62 degrees 53 minutes north .


Friday the 18th , being in the latitude of 65 degrees 9 minutes north , the cloathing allowed by the Government , of which notice has already been taken in the Introduction , was delivered out , and officers as well as men received their full proportion .
This day the weather continued as before .


Saturday the 19th the weather varied to every point of the compass , the Commodore brought to , and spoke with the Carcase .
Made sail about three in the morning , and at nine a large swell .
Tacked and stood to the eastward .
Latitude 66 degrees 1 minute north  longitude from London 33 minutes west .


Sunday the 20th they pursued their course to the eastward , with the wind north-west , but variable  high breezes and clear air .
They were now within the Polar circle , and at midnight had an observation of the sun , and found their latitude 66 degrees 52 minutes north .
Sounded on board the Commodore with a lead of one hundred weight , and a line of seven hundred and eighty fathom , to which was fastened a thermometer of Lord George Cavendish 's construction .
They found no bottom ,  but the water was eleven degrees colder at that depth than on the surface .
The Carcase sounded with four hundred and fifty fathoms only .


Monday 21 , light breezes and cloudy weather .
They observed a whale on the north-east quarter , the first they had yet seen in the north seas .
The weather now began to set in severe  the nights cold and the days cloudy .
The Commodore observing a whaling snow with Hamborough colours flying , fired a shot , and brought her to .
She happened to be homeward bound with seals , and Mr. Wyndham , a gentleman of fortune , who had embarked on board the Commodore , with a view to prosecute the voyage , finding nothing but foul weather and heavy seas , to gratify his curiosity , and being withal unable to endure the sea sickness , took passage on board the Hamburgher , in order to return home  and having taken leave of his friends , by wishing them a happy voyage , the Snow 's boat took him on board about seven in the morning , and at eight the Commodore and Carcase pursued their voyage .


Tuesday 22 , the articles of war were read on board the Carcase .
The weather began to be piercing cold  they had reached the 70th degree of north latitude , in a course nearly north , being only 14 minutes to the eastward of London  and from their leaving Shetland to this day , they had seen nothing remarkable  nor had any accident befallen either of the  Figure 6 .
SPITSBERGEN or NEW GREENLAND  ships worth relating , except that of now and then snapping a rope , or breaking a yard  incidents easily repaired .
This day it poured with rain  the air was thick , and the rain froze as it fell .
Saw a large ship to the north-west , standing southward , but wanting no information that she could give , they pursued their voyage without speaking to her .
Wednesday 23 , the rain continued  the weather hazy  heard three guns fire at a distance , but saw no ship or other object .
The whales are here in no great plenty , and few ships appear in the open sea in pursuit of them .
They generally at this season frequent the bays and creeks near the shore , and only break away when they are pursued or wounded .


On Thursday the 24th , the Commodore changed his course to east north-east  and on the 25th they were in latitude 74 degrees 7 minutes north , and in 8 degrees 32 minutes east longitude from London .
Served out to the ship 's company plenty of mustard , pepper , vinegar , c..
The weather extremely cold and variable .
At eight in the evening thick fog  at two in the morning fresh breezes  at eight clear weather  at eleven squally  and at noon calm , with sleet and snow .


On Saturday the 26th , at midnight , they had an observation , and found themselves in latitude 74 degrees 17 minutes north  fresh gales ,  sometimes rain , sleet , and snow  at seven in the morning clear weather and an open sea .


Sunday 27 , light airs from the southward , and cloudy weather  much warmer than the preceding day .
It is remarkable , that the vicissitudes of heat and cold are more frequent here than in the more southerly latitudes .
It often changes from temperate to extreme cold  and that suddenly .


It should seem likewise , that the ice frequently changes its place in this latitude  or that it is more solid near land than in the open sea  for , on the 23d of June 1676 , Capt. Wood , being more to the eastward , fell in with ice right a-head , not more than a league distant .
He steered along it , thinking it had openings , but found them to be bays .
He sounded , and found ground at one hundred and fifty-eight fathom , soft green oar .
In some places he found pieces of ice driving off a mile from the main body in strange shapes , resembling ships , trees , buildings , beasts , fishes , and even men .
The main body of ice being low and craggy , he could see hills of a blue colour at a distance , and valleys that were white as snow .
In some places he observed drift wood among the ice .
Some of the ice he melted , and found it fresh and good .
This navigator never could advance farther to the north  but in seeking to penetrate the ice was ship-wrecked , as has been already related in the Introduction .
He therefore judged  the ice impenetrable , and that land or ice surrounded the pole .
Our navigators found also much wood in this latitude floating about the ships , and saw great flocks of birds .


Monday 28 , the weather altered  the wind west .
Fresh breezes , with rain and sleet .
Latter part thick fog .


Tuesday 29 , being in latitude 78 degrees north , and in longitude 6 degrees 29 minutes east from London , came in sight of land , when the ships brought to , and the Captains held a consultation concerning their future course .
The appearance of the land lay from east-south-east to north-east  and this day they spoke with the Marquis of Rockingham , Greenlandman , who , by their reckoning , were then in latitude 79 degrees 40 minutes north , though by that of the Commodore , their latitude was only 78 degrees 3 minutes .
This difference , it it probable , arises from not making the proper allowance for refraction in this high latitude .
The Greenlandman presented each of the Commanders with a deer and a half , which they found well-flavoured venison , though not over fat .
He likewise informed , that he had just come from the ice , and that the day before , three whalers had been crushed to pieces by its closing upon them suddenly .


Wednesday 30 , pursued their course .
Cloudy weather .
Half past four in the morning sounded , one hundred and twelve fathoms soft  blue mud .
At this time Black Point , so called from its dark appearance , bore north-east by east three quarters east , at the distance of seven or eight leagues .
At half past seven , in the morning , saw two sail in the north-west quarter .
At half past twelve tacked and stood to the east .
Sounded , and found ground at one hundred and fifteen fathom .


Thursday July 1 , light breezes and clear weather at midnight : the sun as bright as at noon day .
Black Point east one half south , distant seven leagues .
At three in the morning made Charles 's Island , and at nine saw a sail to the westward whaleing  they were then in latitude 78 degrees 18 minutes north , by observation .
Sounded , and found the same depth as before .


Friday 2 , light airs and moderate weather .
Lay to and took the altitude of a mountain , which they named Mount Parnassus  found it from the level of the sea to be three thousand nine hundred and sixty feet high , covered with snow , and at a distance resembling an ancient building , with something like a turret a-top .
The foot of this mountain , with the hills adjoining , have sometimes a very fiery appearance , and the ice and snow on their sides resembling trees and shrubs , glissen with a brilliancy that exceed the splendor of the brightest gems .
When this happens , a violent storm generally  succeeds .
Here they shot some sea fowl , but of an oily taste .


Saturday 3 , proved a perfect calm .
They spoke with a Hollander , who foretold , that a degree or two farther north was the utmost extent of their progress this season .
Having doubled Cape Cold , they anchored in fifteen fathom water , about three miles from the land , and sent the boats ashore for water , which they found in abundance , pouring down in little streams from the rocks .
At five in the afternoon , by the mean of four azimuths , the variation was found to be 18 degrees 36 minutes west .
Sounded , and found only sixty-five fathoms , soft brown mud .
Mount Parnassus east-north-east three or four leagues .
- Among other reasons which Capt. Wood gave for wishing to be employed on the discovery of the north-east passage , one was , that he might have an opportunity of approaching the pole , in order to settle an hypothesis , which he had long framed , whereby the inclination of the magnetical needle under the horizon , in all latitudes and in all longitudes , with the variation of the compass , might be exactly determined .
This navigator imagined two magnetical poles to exist : and that , by approaching the one , he should be able to determine the action of the other .
It does not appear , that he ever explained his hypothesis  and there never has been but one man , whose name was Williams , since his  time , who pretended to know any thing of the matter .


Saturday 4 , light breezes and hazey weather .
Sounded , and only twenty fathoms deep  rocky ground .
Hacluit 's Headland , or the northermost point of Spitsbergen , bearing north by east seven leagues .
Many whalers in sight .
Latitude by observation 79 degrees 34 minutes north , longitude from London 8 degrees 10 minutes east .
Thermometer forty-seven .


Monday 5 , at two in the afternoon sounded , and only fifteen fathom water  rocky ground .
Thick fog .
The Race Horse fired guns as signals to keep company , which were answered by the Carcase .
A dreadful crackling was heard at a distance , which proved the dashing and grinding of the loose pieces of ice against each other , which is heard at many leagues distance .
Hacluit 's Headland south-east by south , distance six or seven leagues .


Tuesday 6 , proved very foggy  the breezes slight , and islands of ice beginning to appear .
At three in the afternoon the Commodore hauled up from a large body of packed ice , and the fog thickening , both ships kept firing volleys of small arms , to prevent their losing company .
At half past ten in the evening , the extremes of the ice stretching from north-west to east-north-east , the Commodore bore away  and at half past twelve lost sight of it .
At half past one in the morning heard a violent  surf to the south-east .
At two tacked and stood to the westward .
At half past five the fog gathering , they began firing volleys of small arms .
At six saw the ice stretching from east by south , to north by east  and at seven was within sight of land .
At ten Cloven Cliff stood east-south-east , distant about five or six leagues .


Wednesday the 7th , the weather cloudy .
They found themselves beset among the loose ice , which increasing continually , gave them incredible trouble .
Observing that it thickened to the eastward , they hauled up , and stood to the westward  but in tacking , they were in danger of running foul .
It was with difficulty they could keep any course , for the driffs of ice came so thick , as to whirl the ships about , as if in a whirl-pool .


Thursday 8 , the weather still remaining cloudy , and the wind variable , both ships still were entangled in the ice  and the Carcase being driven to leeward , hoisted out her long-boat to tow up with the Commodore .
But the ice closing very fast , it was impossible for the boats to live .
Orders were then given to tack and stand to the southward  but the ships not being able to make head against the accumulation of ice that continually gathered round them , were under a necessity of applying to their ice-anchors and poles , in order to warp through it .
At half past eight in the evening , the ice beginning  to open , they again hoisted out their boats , and with difficulty towed the ships round a cape of ice projecting from the main body , and at last got clear .
At ten the boats were hoisted on board .
In extricating themselves from this dangerous situation , the Race Horse had her best bower-anchor snapt in the shank , close to the stock , and the Carcase lost her starboard bumpkin and head-rails .


It frequently happens , that ships beset among the ice in the manner above related , perish by being dashed to pieces against the solid fields of ice , or crushed by the broken pieces crowding upon one another , and rising so fast about the ship , as to exceed the height of her sides , and then there is no escaping .
They were told by some experienced seamen , that the ice rises out of the sea as high sometimes as mountains  and that several of these mountains , by striking together and coalescing , form these islands of ice that are frequently seen in the lower latitudes , driving up and down the sea as the wind and tides direct them .


The greatest danger to be apprehended , is , however , from the loose ice  for the whalers often moor their ships to the solid fields of ice , that at certain seasons seem to rest upon the earth , and appear fixed to it , and there find the best fishing .
In such situations it often happens , that little or no loose ice is to be seen  yet presently upon a change of wind , or  Figure 7 .
A View of the Whale Fishery .
 the blowing of a storm , it shall pour in upon them so suddenly , that they sometimes perish in it .
It is not possible to account for the astonishing quantity that will gather in this manner in less than an hour 's time .
Though it seems to be agreed , that many of the largest fields of ice are frozen to the depth of the sea in which they are found , and that they are bedded on the solid earth , yet it is equally certain , that they are often rent asunder by the raging billows  and that in breaking , they produce the most terrifying noise in nature  nay , it is asserted , that the clashing of the pieces of loose ice against each other , on any extraordinary agitation of the waves , is attended with a roaring so loud , that a man who is near it can hardly hear the sound of his own voice .


Friday the 9th , they hauled up to the westward , and lost sight one of the other  but about nine next morning they came in sight , and joined company .
The weather being now piercing cold , the people had an additional quantity of porter and brandy delivered to them  two quarts of porter and a pint of brandy being now every man 's daily allowance .


Saturday July the 10th , the breeze fresh , and the weather cloudy .
They sailed between numberless pieces of ice , among which they saw several whales , but none of the whalers in pursuit of them .
The ice now becoming solid and  compact , they found it impracticable to continue their course .
And the discovery of a passage to the pole in that direction ( upon holding a consultation ) appearing impracticable to every officer on board of both ships , the Commodore , at seven in the evening , hauled close to the wind  and the Carcase , as soon as she could extricate herself , followed his example .
The weather continuing foggy , with rain and snow , the sailors were almost worn out with turning and winding  and although they used the utmost precaution in working through the narrows , yet they could not always avoid striking against the mountains that every where surrounded them .
During this night 's work , they steered a hundred different courses , to follow the channels .


Sunday 11 , having worked out of the ice , they sailed along the main body , which appeared perfectly solid and compact , without any passage or inlet .
This immense mass of ice extended north-east , as far as they could see from the mast-head  and , no doubt , might be a continuation of that in which they were engaged a few days before .
The sea was now tolerably clear , for they met with no more fields , and only a few detached islands .
At half past one in the morning they saw the land from south by west , to south-south-east .
At three in the morning they tacked  Cloven Cliff bearing south-south-east six miles .
At seven  tacked again .
At eight the Commodore bore away , and the Carcase stood after him .
Cloven Cliff south one half west , two or three leagues , latitude 79 degrees 56 minutes north .


Monday 12 , at eight in the evening Cloven Cliff bearing west-south-west four or five miles , they sounded in fifteen fathoms water , and found a rocky bottom .
Saw several English and Dutch Greenlanders at anchor in the Norways : That being their rendezvous to the northward , they never chuse to proceed farther .
Here they found the current setting so fast to eastward , that they were forced to come to an anchor to keep from drifting on the ice  the swell from westward being so great , that had that happened , it would of consequence have staved the ships .
At five in the morning a breeze from north-north-east springing up , they weighed , and made sail .
At eight Hacluit 's Headland west-south-west one half west , six or seven leagues , at noon latitude 80 degrees 2 minutes north .


Tuesday 13 , the weather being clear and calm , and a strong easterly current setting in , at eight in the evening they came to with their stream anchors and hausers in forty fathoms water  but at nine a breeze springing up from the eastward , they weighed , and next day came to an anchor in Smearingburgh Harbour .
Cloven Cliff east one half south one mile .
West  point of Voogle land north-north-west one half west , distant one mile and a half  soundings fifteen fathom sandy bottom .


Here they remained between five and six days to take in fresh water , during which time our journalist was employed in surveying the country , which to a stranger had a very awful and romantic appearance .


The country is stoney , and as far as can be seen full of mountains , precipices and rocks .
Between these are hills of ice , generated , as it should seem , by the torrents that flow from the melting of the snow on the sides of those towering elevations , which being once congealed , are continually increased by the snow in winter , and the rain in summer , which often freezes as soon as it falls .
By looking on these hills , a stranger may fancy a thousand different shapes of trees , castles , churches , ruins , ships , whales , monsters , and all the various forms that fill the universe .
Of the ice-hills there are seven , that more particularly attract the notice of a stranger .
These are known by the name of the seven ice-burgs , and are thought to be the highest of the kind in that country .
When the air is clear , and the sun shines full upon these mountains , the prospect is inconceivably brilliant .
They sometimes put on the bright glow of the evening rays of the setting sun , when reflected upon glass , at his going down  sometimes they appear of a bright blue , like sapphire , and sometimes like the variable  colours of a prism , exceeding in lustre the richest gems in the world , disposed in shapes wonderful to behold , all glittering with a lustre that dazzles the eye , and fills the air with astonishing brightness .


Smearingburgh harbour , where they landed , was first discovered by the Dutch .
Here they erected sheds and conveniences for boiling the oil from the fat of the whales , instead of barrelling it up to be boiled at home .
Here also , allured by the hope of gain , they built a village , and endeavoured to fix a colony : but the first settlers all perished in the ensuing winter .
The remains of the village may be traced to this day  and their stoves , kettles , kardels , troughs , ovens , and other implements , remained in the shape of solid ice long after the utensils themselves were decayed .
Our voyagers were told , that the Russians have lately attempted the same thing , and that ten out of fifteen perished last winter in this second attempt .


Where every object is new , it is not easy for a stranger to fix which first to admire .
The rocks are striking objects : before a storm they exhibit a fiery appearance , and the sun looks pale upon them , the snow giving the air a bright reflection .
Their summits are almost always involved in clouds , so that it is but just possible to see the tops of them .
Some of these rocks are but one stone from bottom to top , appearing like an old decayed ruin .
Others  consist of huge masses , veined differently , like marble , with red , white , and yellow , and probably , were they to be sawed and polished , would equal , if not excel , the finest Egyptian marble we now so much admire .
Perhaps the distance and danger of carrying large blocks of stones , may be the reason that no trials have been made to manufacture them .
On the southerly and westerly sides of these rocks grow all the plants , herbs , and mosses peculiar to this country  on the northerly and easterly sides the wind strikes so cold when it blows from these quarters , that it perishes every kind of vegetable .
These plants grow to perfection in a very short time .
Till the middle of May the whole country is locked up in ice  about the beginning of July the plants are in flower , and about the latter end of the same month , or beginning of August , they have perfected their seed .
The earth owes its fertility , in a great measure , to the dung of birds , who build and breed their young here in the summer , and in the winter repair to more favourable climates .


The plants that are most common in Spitsbergen are scurvy-grass and crows-foot  there are besides small house-leak , and a plant with aloe-leaves  an herb like stone-crop  some small snake-weed  mouse-ear  wood-strawbery  periwinkle  and a herb peculiar to the country which they call the rock-plant .
The leaves of this plant are in shape like a  man 's tongue , above six feet long , of a dull yellow colour .
The stalk is round and smooth , and of the same colour with the leaf  it rises tapering , and smells like muscles .
It is an aquatic , and rises in height in proportion to the depth of water in which it is found .
There are other plants and herbs , but these are the chief .
Of flowers , the white poppy seems the principal .


The rocks and precipices are full of fissures and clefts , which afford convenient harbour for birds to lay their eggs , and breed their young in safety .
Most of these birds are water-fowl , and seek their food in the sea .
Some , indeed , are birds of prey  and pursue and kill others for their own sustenance , but these are rare .
The water-fowl eat strong and fishy , and their fat is not to be endured .
They are so numerous about the rocks , as sometimes to darken the air when they rise in flocks  and they scream so horribly , that the rocks ring with their noise .


There are a few small birds like our snipes , and a kind of snow-bird , but different from that found about Hudson 's bay .
The gentlemen shot some of the water-fowl , but they were strong and ill-tasted .


The ice-bird is a very beautiful little bird , but very rare .
He is in size and shape like a turtle-dove , but his plumage , when the sun shines upon him , is of a bright yellow , like  the golden ring in the peacock 's tail , and almost dazzles the eye to look upon it .


The other inhabitants of this forlorn country are white bears , deer , and foxes .
How these creatures can subsist in the winter , when the whole earth is covered with snow , and the sea locked up in ice , is hardly to be conceived .
It has been said , indeed , that when the ocean is all frozen over , and no sustenance to be procured in this country , they travel southerly to the warmer climates , where food proper for them abounds in the immense forests of the northern continent .
But whoever considers the vast distance between Spitsbergen and the nearest parts of the northern continent , will be as much at a loss to account for the subsistence of these creatures in their journey , as in the desolate region where they undoubtedly remain .
The bear is by far the best accommodated to the climate of which he is an inhabitant .
He is equally at home on land and water , and hunts diligently for his prey in both .
In summer he finds plenty of food from the refuse of the whales , sea-horses and seals , which is thrown into the sea by the whalers , and cover the shores during the time of whaling  and they have besides a wonderful sagacity in smelling out the carcases of the dead , let them be ever so deeply buried in the earth , or covered with stones .
The dead therefore that annually are buried here may contribute , in some degree ,  to the subsistence of a few of these creatures in winter  but the question will still recur , how the race of them subsisted before the whale-fishery had existence , and before men found the way to this inhospitable shore .
Disquisitions of this kind , as they are beyond the reach of human comprehension , serve only to raise our admiration of that omnipotent Being to whom nothing is impossible .


These creatures , as they differ in nothing but their colour and size from those commonly shewn in England , need no description .


The foxes differ little in shape from those we are acquainted with , but in colour there is no similitude .
Their heads are black , and their bodies white .
As they are beasts of prey , if they do not provide in summer for the long recess of winter , it were , one would think , almost impossible for them to survive  yet they are seen in plenty , though , by their subtlety and swiftness , they are not easy to be catched .


The Dutch seamen report , that when they are hungry they will feign themselves dead , and when the ravenous birds come to feed upon them , they rise and make them their prey .


But the most wonderful thing of all is , how the deer can survive an eight months famine .
Like ours they feed upon nothing that can be perceived , but the vegetables which the earth spontaneously produces  and yet for eight months in the year , the earth produces neither  plant , herb , shrub , or blade of any kind of grass whatever .
They are , besides , but thinly cloathed for so severe a climate , and what seems still worse , there is not a bush to be seen to shelter them , within the distance that any man has yet discovered .
The means of their subsistence must therefore remain among the secrets of nature , never to be disclosed , as no human being can ever live here , so as to be able to trace these creatures to their winter 's residence .


Amphibious creatures abound the most about the sounds and bays of Spitsbergen , and they seem best adapted to endure the climate .
These are the seals , or sea dogs , and morses , or sea horses  of which the whalers avail themselves , when disappointed in compleating their lading with the fat of whales .


The seal is sufficiently known  but the sea-horse , as it is a creature peculiar to high latitudes , is therefore more rare .
It is not easy to say how he came by his name  for there is no more likeness between a sea-horse and a land-horse , than there is between a whale and an elephant .
The sea-horse is not unlike the seal in shape .
He has a large round head , larger than that of a bull , but shaped more like that of a pug-dog without ears , than any other animal we are acquainted with .
He tapers all the way down to the tail , like the fish we call a lump , and his size is equal to that of the largest sized ox .
His tusks close over his under jaw , like  those of a very old boar , and are in length from one foot to two or more , in proportion to the size and age of the animal that breeds them .
His skin is thicker than that of a bull , and covered with short mouse-coloured hair , which is sleeker and thicker , just as he happens to be in or out of season when he is caught .
His paws , before and behind , are like those of a mole , and serve him for oars when he swims , and for legs to crawl when he goes upon the ice , or on shore .
He is a fierce animal , but being unweildy when on land , or on the ice , is easily overcome .


These animals are always found in herds , sometimes of many hundreds together , and if one is attacked , the rest make a common cause , and stand by one another till the last gasp .
If they are attacked in the water , they will fight desperately , and will even attempt the boats of their pursuers , if any of them are wounded , and not mortally .
Some of them have been known to make holes in the bottom of the boat with their tusks , in defence of their young .
Their eyes are large , and they have two holes in the upper part of the neck , out of which they eject the water , in like manner as it is ejected by whales .


Though the sea about Spitsbergen is full of fish , yet they rather appear to be designed by Providence for the sustenance of one another , than for the food of man .
The mackarel , of  which there are no great plenty , seem not only to be the most wholesome , and the most palatable , but also the most beautiful .
They seem to be a different species to those caught upon our coasts .
The upper part of the back is of a vivid blue  the other part as low as the belly of a gem-like green on an azure ground .
Underneath the belly the colour is a transparent white , and the fins shine like polished silver .
All the colours glow when alive in the sea with such a richness , that fancy can hardly form to itself any thing in nature more beautiful .
Almost all the other fish on this coast are of an oily nature , and of a very indifferent flavour .


The saw , or sword fish , is remarkable not only for the oddity of his shape , but also for his enmity to the whale .
This fish takes his name from a broad flat bone , in length from two to four feet , which projects from his nose , and tapers to a point .
On each side , it has teeth like a comb , at the distance of a finger 's breadth asunder .
He is also furnished with a double row of fins , and is of astonishing strength in the water .
His length from ten to twenty feet .
He seems to be formed for war , and war is his profession .
The conflict betwixt him and the whale is dreadful , yet he never gives over till his sword is broken , or he comes off victorious .


The whale is a harmless fish , and is never known to fight but in his own defence .
Yet  when he is exasperated , he rages dreadfully .
Though from his magnitude , he may be called the sovereign of the seas  yet , like other sovereigns , he is liable to be vexed and hurt by the meanest reptiles .
The whale 's louse is a most tormenting little animal .
Its scales are as hard as those of our prawns  its head is like the louse 's head , with four horns , two that serve as feelers , the other two are hard , and curved , and serve as clenchers to fix him to the whale .
On his chest , underneath , he has two carvers , like scythes , with which he collects his food , and behind these are four feet , that serve him for oars .
He has , moreover , six other clenchers behind , with which he can rivet himself so closely to his prey , that he can no otherwise be disengaged , but by cutting out the whole piece to which he is joined .
He is jointed on the back like the tail of a lobster , and his tail covers him like a shield when he is feeding .
He fixes himself on the tenderest parts of the whale 's body , between his fins , on his sheath , and on his lips , and eats pieces out of his flesh , as if eaten by vultures .


They found no springs of fresh-water in Spitsbergen  but in the valleys , between the mountains , are many little rills caused by the rain and melting of the snow in summer  and from these rills the ships are supplied .
Some are of opinion , that this water is  unwholesome , but they are more nice than wise .
The whaling people have drank of it for ages , and have found no ill effects from the use of it .
Ice taken up in the middle of these seas and thawed , yields also good fresh water .


On board the Race Horse , Dr. Irvine , the gentleman who received the premium by a grant of parliament , for his discovery of an easy process for making salt-water fresh at sea , tried many experiments at Spitsbergen , and in the course of the voyage  the result of which will appear at a proper time .
That gentleman had formed a project for preserving flesh-meat fresh and sweet in long voyages , but it did not answer in this .


In calm weather they remarked , that the sea about the islands appeared uncommonly still and smooth  that it was not suddenly moved at the first approach of blowing weather  but that when the storm continued , the waves swelled gradually , and rose to an incredible height .
- These swelling waves successively follow one another , and roll along before the wind , foaming and raging in a frightful manner , yet they are thought less dangerous than those that break short , and are less mountainous .


They observed likewise , that the ice that rested on the ground was not stationary , but that it changed place  and they learnt also , that in some seasons there was no ice , where this season they were in danger of being embayed .
 There does not , however , from thence appear the least reason to conclude , that any practicable passage to the Indian ocean can ever be found in this direction  for were it certain that the seas were always open under the pole , yet great bulwarks of ice evidently surround it , sometimes at a less , and sometimes at a greater distance .
Moreover , were it possible that chance should direct some fortunate adventurer to an opening at one time , it would be more than a million to one , if the same opening were passable to the next who should attempt it .


There are many harbours about Spitsbergen , besides that of Smearingburg , where ships employed in the whale fishery take shelter in stormy weather  and there are some islands , such as Charles 's Island , the Clifted Rock , Red-Hill , Hacluit 's Headland , c. that serve as landmarks , by which seamen direct their course .
These islands are full of the nests of birds  but their eggs are as nauseous as the flesh of the fowls that lay them .
The sailors sometimes eat them , but they are filthy food .
Even the geese and ducks on the neighbouring islands eat fishy and strong .


The air about Spitsbergen is never free from isicles .
If you look through the sun beams transversely as you fit in the shade , or where you see the rays confined in a body , instead of dark motes , as are seen here , you see myriads of shining particles that sparkle like diamonds   and when the sun shines hot , as it sometimes does , so as to melt the tar in the seams of ships when they lie sheltered from the wind , these shining atoms seem to melt away , and descend like dew .


It is seldom that the air continues clear for many days together in this climate  when that happens , the whalers are generally successful .
There is no difference between night and day in the appearance of the atmosphere about Spitsbergen , one being as light as the other , only when the sun is to the northward , you may look at him with the naked eye , as at the moon , without dazzling .
The fogs here come on so suddenly , that from bright sun-shine , you are presently involved in such obscurity , that you can hardly see from one end of the ship to the other .


While our journalist was busy in making his observations , all belonging to the ships were differently engaged in one employment or other  some in taking in water , some in fishing , some in hunting , some in handing the sails , and spreading them out to dry , some in scrubbing the ship , and some in viewing the country .
The Commanders and officers , with Mr. Lyon , Mr. Robinson , c. busied themselves in making observations , being furnished with an apparatus , that is said to have cost at least one thousand five hundred pounds .
From such a set of instruments , in the hands of the ablest  observers , the nation can boast , some very considerable discoveries in the phenomena of the polar regions may be expected .
They landed their instruments in a small island , in Vogle Sound , and had several opportunities during their stay of using them to advantage .
Having erected two tents , the Captains from the fishery frequently visited the observers , and expressed their admiration not only at the perfection of the instruments , but likewise at the dexterity with which they were accommodated .


The ice began to set in a-pace , yet the weather was hot .
The thermometer from fifty-six in the cabin rose to ninety in the open air .
It was still ten degrees higher on the top of a mountain to which it was carried .
The island on which the experiments were made , they called Marble Island , from the rock by which it is formed .
Having watered , and finished their observations , the ships prepared to depart .


Monday July the 19th , the Commodore made the signal to weigh  at two in the afternoon the ships were under sail , and as soon as they had made their offing , stood to the eastward .
At three they tacked and steered northward  and before four were again entangled among the loose ice , through which they sailed , directing their course along the main body , which lay from north-west to south south-east .


Tuesday the 20th , they continued their course along the ice , but could discover no opening ,  though they searched every creek , and left no bay or turning unexamined .
This day they observed what the sailors call a mock-sun , a phaenomenon well enough known in this climate .
Hacluit 's Headland bore south-west one half south forty-six leagues  the weather cloudy , with rain  excessive cold .
Thermometer 37 degrees 46 minutes .


Wednesday the 21st , the severity of the weather increasing , an additional quantity of brandy was served out to the people , and every comfortable refreshment afforded them , that they themselves could wish or require .
The course of the ice lay this day north-east .


Thursday 22 , nothing remarkable .


Friday the 23d , they saw land from east by south , to south-east by south .
At four in the morning , Hacluit 's Headland bore south-east ten leagues  the wind variable , and the weather cold , with sleet and snow .
Thermometer 40 degrees .


Sunday 25 , they had gentle breezes , with cloudy weather , and were engaged among some pieces of ice , separated from the main body , which kept them continually tacking and luffing .
At length they entered among mountains and islands of ice , which came upon them so fast , that it was with the utmost difficulty they could proceed  the Carcase having several times struck against them with such violence , as to raise her head four feet out of the water .
They  now imagined , from the solidity and extent of these islands , that the late strong gales had caused a separation from the main body , the Commodore therefore changed his course with a strong gale to the eastward  in the morning the weather became moderate .


Monday 26 , at seven in the morning , they came in sight of Red-hill , a small mount which commands an open plain , known by the name of Deers-field , by reason of its fertile appearance , it being the only spot on which they saw no drifts of snow .
To the eastward lies Muffin 's Island .
Here they sounded , and found forty five fathom water  rocky ground .
Capt. Lutwich sent out the long boat , with orders to sound along the shore , and to examine the soil .
This island is about a mile long , very low , and looks at a distance like a black speck .
Though the soil is mostly sand and loose stones , and hardly so much as a green weed upon it , yet it is remarkable for the number of birds that resort to it in summer to lay their eggs , and breed their young  and these not of one kind only , but of many different sorts , as geese , ducks , burgomasters , ice-birds , malamucks , kirmews , rotgers , and almost every other species of birds peculiar to the climate  insomuch , that the eggs were so numerous , and lay so thick upon the ground , that the men who landed found it difficult to walk without filling their shoes .


 While the crew of the boat , ten in number , with their valiant officer at their head , were examining the island , after having sounded the shores , they observed two white bears making towards them , one upon the ice , the other in the water .
Major Buz , for that was their officer 's travelling title , like Falstaff , was always the boldest man in company over a cup of sack , and minded killing a bear no more than killing a gnat  but seeing the bears approach very fast , especially that which came in the water , he ordered his men to fire while yet the enemy was at a distance , as he did not think it prudent to hazard the lives of his little company in close fight .
All of them pointed their muskets , and some of the party obeyed orders  but the greater part judging it safer to depend upon a reserved fire , when they had seemingly discharged their pieces , pretended to retreat .
The Major , a full fathom in the belly , endeavoured to waddle after his companions  but being soon out of breath , and seeing the bear that came in the water had just reached the shore , thought of nothing now but falling the first sacrifice .
His hair already stood an end  and looking behind him , he saw the bear at no great distance , with his nose in the air snuffing the scent .
He had all the reason in the world to believe it was him that he scented , and he had scarce breath enough left to call to his men to halt .
In this critical situation he unfortunately dropt his gun ,  and in stooping to recover it stumbled against a goose-nest , fell squash upon his belly into it , and had very nigh smothered the dam upon her eggs .
The old saying is , misfortunes seldom come alone .
Before he could well rise , the enraged gander came flying to the assistance of his half-smothered consort , and making a dart at the eye of the assailant , very narrowly missed his mark , but discharged his fury plump upon his nose .
The danger now being pressing , and the battle serious , the bear near , and the gander ready for a second attack , the men , who had not fled far , thought it high time to return to the relief of their leader .
Overjoyed to see them about him , but frighted at the bear just behind him , he had forgot the gander that was over his head , against which one of the men having levelled his piece , fired and he fell dead at the Major 's feet .
Animated now by the death of one enemy , he recovered his gun , and faced about to assist in the attack of the second .
By this time the bear was scarce ten yards from him , and beginning to growl , the Major just in the instant was seized with a looseness , dropt his accoutrements , and fell back , that he might not be in the way of his party , to impede the engagement .
In the hurry he was in , for in a man of such valour we must not say the fright , he entangled his buttons , and not being able to hold any longer , he filled his breeches .
The crew in an instant had brought down the bear ,  and now it was time for their leader to do something great .
Having recovered his arms , and seeing the poor beast groveling on the ground , and growling out his last , like a ram in a pinfold , making a short race backwards in order to redouble his force , he came with nine long strides forwards , and with the strength and fierceness of an enraged bull , thrust his lance full four feet deep in the dying bear 's belly .
And now , says the Major , cocking his hat , have not I done for the bear bravely !
The sailors , who are always in a good humour upon such occasions  but Captain , said they , you have but half done your work , you have another bear to kill yet .
The Major , whose situation began to be troublesome , content with the honour he had already acquired , my lads , said he , as I have been the death of one bear , sure six of you may kill the other  so ordering four of them to row him on board , he left the remaining six to kill the other bear .


On this island two bears were killed , and a sea-horse .
The sea-horse made a desperate defence , being attacked in the water  and had there been only one boat engaged in the combat , he certainly would have come off victorious  but the crew of the Race-horse having learnt that there were bears and sea-horses on this little spot , were willing to share in the sport of hunting them , as well as in the pleasure of tasting their flesh .
They accordingly  landed in their boats , and came in good time to assist in pursuing the conquest .
It happened , however , that their ammunition being almost spent , one great bear came up to revenge the death of his fellows , and advanced so furiously , growling and barking , that he put the whole company to flight , and some of them , it is said , had no great reason to laugh at the Major .


On sounding the shores they remarked , that when the north islands bear north forty-five east , seven or eight leagues , and Red-hill east by south five miles , there is generally from twenty-five to thirty fathom hard ground  but that closer on shore , when Red-hill bears east one-fourth south about one mile , it increases to one hundred and fifteen fathom , with soft black mud .
The current about one mile an hour to the north-east .


Tuesday 27 , the air being perfectly serene , and the weather moderate , the fishes seemed to enjoy the temperature , and to express it by their sporting .
The whales were seen spouting their fountains towards the skies , and the fin fish following their example .
They likewise this day saw dolphins  the whole prospect in short was more pleasing and picturesque than they had yet beheld in this remote region .
The very ice in which they were beset looked beautiful , and put forth a thousand glittering forms , and the tops of the mountains , which they could see like sparkling gems at a vast distance , had  the appearance of so many silver stars illuminating a new firmament .
But this flattering prospect did not continue long .
By an accurate observation , they were now in latitude 80 deg .
47 min .
north  and in longitude 21 deg .
10 min .
east from London  and in sight of seven islands to the north , to which they directed their course .


Wednesday 28 , they had fresh easterly breezes , which , from moderate weather the day before , changed to piercing cold .
At midnight the west end of Weygate straits bore south by east , so that they were now in the very spot where Barentz had supposed an opening would be found into the polar sea .
Yet so far from it , they could discover nothing from the mast-head , but a continued continent of solid ice , except the islands already mentioned .
On this ice , however , there were many bears , some of which came so near the ships as to be shot dead with small arms .
These bears are very good eating , and where no better is to be purchased , the whalers account them as good as beef .
They are many of them larger than the largest oxen , and weigh heavier .
In many parts of their body they are musket proof , and unless they are hit on the open chest , or on the flank , a blow with a musket ball will hardly make them turn their backs .
Some of the bears killed in these encounters weighed from seven to eight hundred weight  and it was thought , that the  bear that routed the sailors on Muffin 's Island , could not weigh less than a thousand weight .
He was , indeed , a very monster !


Thursday 29 , sailing among innumerable islands of ice , they found the main body too solid for the ships to make the least impression upon it , and finding no opening , the Commodore resolved to send a party under the command of the first Lieutenant to examine the land , which at a distance appeared like a plain , diversified with hills and mountains , and exhibited in their situation a tolerable landskip .


On trying the water , it was less salt than any sea water they had ever tasted  and they found likewise , that the ice was no other than a body of congealed fresh water , which they imagined had been frozen in the infancy of the earth .


Tuesday 30 , the weather being clear , they ran close to the main body of the ice , and the sun continuing to shine , made them almost forget the climate they were sailing in , but it was not long before they had reason for severe recollection .
In coasting along , they observed many openings , and were in hopes , from their distant appearance , that a passage might be made between them  but upon trial it was found , as the Dutch fishermen had foretold , that these appearances were deceitful .
At one in the morning fine clear sun-shine , they sounded in sixteen fathom water , and found small stones at bottom .
They were then about four  miles from the north-east part of the northernmost land  the easternmost land in sight , distant about five or six leagues .


Saturday 31 , at midnight , the easternmost land in sight lay east-north east one half east , which they could not make out to be an island .
They rather judged it to be a continent , but found it impossible to determine with certainty , as it lay beyond their reach .
At nine in the morning the Carcase hoisted out her cutter , and filled her empty water-casks with water from the ice .
On this ice he great quantities of snow , and as soon as a pit is dug , it fills with fine soft clear water , not inferior to that of many land springs .
At noon they sounded in ninety five fathoms , the ground soft mud .
This day a bear came over the ice to visit them , the first they had seen since they left Muffin 's Island .
They saluted him with a volley of small arms , and he returned the compliment , by turning his back upon them .
Their longitude was this day 21 degrees 26 minutes east , by time-keeper .
Thermometer forty-five .


Sunday August 1 , proved a day of trial .
Lying too among the close ice , with the loose ice driving fast to shore , the Commodore was desirous of surveying the westernmost of the seven islands , which appeared the highest , in order to judge , from the prospect on the hills , of the possibility of proceeding farther on the discovery .
With this view they carried out  their ice-anchors , and made both ships fast to the main body , a practice very common with the fishing ships that annually frequent those seas .
Of the reconnoitring party , were the Captains , the second Lieutenants , one of the mathematicians , the pilots , and some chosen sailors , selected from both ships .
They set out about two in the morning , and sometimes sailing , sometimes drawing their boats over the ice , they with difficulty reached the shore , where the first objects they saw were a herd of deer , so very tame , that they seemed as curious to gaze at the strangers , as the stranges were pleased to see them  for they came five or six together so near , that they might have been killed with the thrust of a bayonet  a proof that animals are not naturally afraid of man , till , by the fate of their associates , they are taught the danger of approaching them  a proof too , that animals are not destitute of reflection , otherwise how should they conclude , that what has befallen their fellow animals , will certainly happen to them , if they run the like risque .
The gentlemen , however , suffered only one of these fearless innocents to be fired at , and that was done by a sailor when they were absent on observation .


On this island they gathered some scurvy-grass , and in many places they could perceive the sides of the hills covered with the verdure on which these deer undoubtedly fed .


 After having ascended the highest hills on the sea-coast , and taken a view of the country and the ocean all round , the gentlemen descended , and about five in the afternoon embarked again on their return to the ships , at which they arrived safe about ten , after an absence of twenty hours .
They were greatly disappointed by the haziness of the weather on the tops of the mountains , which confined the prospect , and prevented their taking an observation with the instruments they had carried with them for that purpose .


There is here a small variation in the journals of the two ships  that kept on board the Commodore making the distance between the island and the ships near twenty miles  the other only five leagues , which might easily happen , as the ships shifted their stations with the main body of ice , sometimes driving north-west , sometimes the contrary course , as the wind and tides happened to sit .


Their situation now began to be serious , and it was discovered too late , that by grappling to the ice , as practised by the Greenlandmen , they had endangered the loss of the ships , the loose ice closing so fast about them , that they found it absolutely impossible to get them disengaged  and there was , besides , great reason to fear , that one or both would soon be crushed to pieces .
Great minds are ever most distinguished by their expedients on the most alarming  occasions .
The Commodore set all hands to work to form a dock in the solid ice , large enough to moor both ships  and by the alacrity with which that service was performed , the ships were preserved from the danger of immediate destruction .


The ships being thus far secured , the officers , pilots , and masters , were all summoned on board the Commodore , to consult on what further was to be done in their present unpromising situation  when it was unanimously agreed , that their deliverance was hopeless  and that they must either provide to winter upon the adjacent islands , or attempt to launch their boats into the open sea , which was already at a considerable distance  for the loose ice had poured into the bay in which they were at anchor with so much rapidity , and in such astonishing quantities , that the open sea was already far out of sight .
Before any thing farther was undertaken , the men were ordered to their quarters , that they might refresh themselves with sleep .


While their Commanders preserve their fortitude , the sailors never lose their courage .
They rose in the morning with as much alacrity and unconcern , as if they had been sailing with a fine breeze in the British Channel .


August 2 , it was now thought adviseable to make one desperate attempt to extricate the ships , by cutting a channel to the westward into  the open sea .
The scooping out the dock with so much expedition , by a party only of one ship , raised high expectations of what might be performed by the united labours of both the crews .
No body of men ever undertook a work of such difficulty with so much chearfulness and confidence of success , as the sailors observed on this occasion .
Their ice-saws , axes , sledges , poles , and the whole group of sea-tools , were in an instant all employed in facilitating the work  but after cutting through blocks of solid ice from eight to fifteen feet deep , and coming to others of many fathoms , that exceeded the powers of man to separate , that was laid aside as a hopeless project  and another more promising , though not less laborious , adopted in its room .


On the 3d of August , after the men had again refreshed themselves with sleep , it was resolved to fit up the boats belonging to both the ships with such coverings as were most easy to be accommodated , and of lightest conveyance  and by skating them over the ice , endeavour to launch them in the open sea .
Could this be effected , they hoped , that by sailing and rowing to the northernmost harbour of Spitsbergen , they might arrive at that island , before the departure of the last ships belonging to the fishery for Europe .


While the boats were getting ready for this expedition , a second party were dispatched to  the island , with orders to take the distance as exact as it was possible to the nearest open sea .
As all the people belonging to the ships were not to be engaged in these services , those who were unemployed diverted themselves in hunting and killing the bears , that now , attracted perhaps by the savory smell of the provisions dressed on board the ships , came every day over the ice to repeat their visits .
Several of these were killed occasionally , and this day they fought a sea-horse , in which engagement the second Lieutenant of the Carcase signalized his courage in a most desperate rencounter , in which , however , he succeeded , though his life was in imminent danger .


On the 4th the carpenters , c. were still employed in fitting up the boats .
The pilots , who the day before had been sent to make observations on the islands already mentioned , made their report , that the nearest water they had seen was about ten leagues to the westward  that in their passage they had met with great numbers of spars or pine trees , floating about the island , some of them of considerable size , with the bark rotted off , and the bodies much worm-eaten  that there was neither tree nor shrub to be seen growing on any of the seven islands , nor upon any land that they had yet discovered in that latitude , nor for ten degrees farther south , and that the trees they had seen must therefore have come from a great distance .


 Though there is nothing now in this observation , the like being annually observed by all the navigators who frequent those seas in the summer , and who collect their wood from those drifts , yet the country from whence they proceed has hitherto been thought a mystery .
But it being now certain , that many of the great rivers that flow through the northernmost parts of Russia , empty themselves into this sea  and that there is an open communication throughout the different parts of it at different seasons of the year , there seems very little reason to doubt , but that those trees are torn up by land floods , and are precipitated into the sea by the rapidity of the streams .


It has indeed been objected , that all the wood that is found floating in this manner about the islands in high latitudes , is to a piece barked and worm-eaten  and that if these trees were torn up and precipitated into the sea in the manner above supposed , some of it would appear sound and unbarked , as in its first state .
To this it may be answered , that were the course of the tides to run as constantly to the northward , as the course of the rivers runs into the sea , this objection would be unanswerable .
But the very reverse is known to be the fact  and that neither the winds nor the tides tend to the northwards for any considerable part of the year  so that from the time these trees enter the ocean , it must , in the ordinary course of things , be many  ages before they can reach the latitudes in which they are now found .
Because , if they are driven northwards by the strength of a storm from the south , they will be driven in another direction by the next storm that happens from another quarter  and all the while the calm continues , they will be driven to and fro by the tides , which , as has been observed , seldom set long to the north , therefore , being in continual motion for ages , or being cast upon the shore by tempests , or high tides , and lying there exposed to the air , till tempests or high tides return them again to the ocean , they will , in a long progression of time , be reduced to the state in which they are constantly found .
This solution is , however , offered with diffidence .
The fact is certain , of much wood being annually found about the islands in question  and it is now of little importance from whence it proceeds , as a passage by the north east to China will probably never more be sought .


On the 5th they had gentle breezes  but about four in the morning small sleet .
The ice still surrounding them , and appearing to grow more and more solid and fixed , those who had till now retained hopes that the south-east wind would again disunite its substance , and open a passage for their deliverance , began to despair , as the wind had blown for twenty four hours from that quarter , from which alone they could have relief , and not the least alteration to be  perceived .
The men , however , were as joyous as ever , and shewed not the least concern about the danger of their situation .


Early in the morning , the man at the mast-head of the Carcase gave notice , that three bears were making their way very fast over the ice , and that they were directing their course towards the ship .
They had , without question , been invited by the scent of the blubber of the sea-horse killed a few days before , which the men had set on fire , and which was burning on the ice at the time of their approach .
They proved to be a she bear and her two cubbs  but the cubbs were nearly as large as the dam .
They ran eagerly to the fire , and drew out from the flames part of the flesh of the sea-horse that remained unconsumed , and eat it voraciously .
The crew from the ship , by way of diversion , threw great lumps of the flesh of the sea-horse which they had still left , out upon the ice , which the old bear fetched away singly , laid each lump before her cubbs as she brought it , and dividing it , gave each a share , reserving but a small portion to herself .
As she was fetching away the last piece they had to bestow , they levelled their muskets at the cubbs , and shot them both dead  and in her retreat , they also wounded the dam , but not mortally .
It would have drawn tears of pity from any but unfeeling minds , to have marked the affectionate concern expressed by this poor beast , in the  dying moments of her expiring young .
Tho ' she was sorely wounded , and could but just crawl to the place where they lay , she carried the lump of flesh she had fetched away , as she had done the others before , tore it in pieces , and laid it down before them , and when she saw that they refused to eat , she laid her paws first upon one , and then upon the other , and endeavoured to raise them up .
All this while it was pitiful to hear her moan .
When she found she could not stir them , she went off , and when she had got at some distance , looked back and moaned  and that not availing her to entice them away , she returned , and smelling round them , began to lick their wounds .
She went off a second time , as before , and having crawled a few paces , looked again behind her , and for some time stood moaning .
But still her cubbs not rising to follow her , she returned to them again , and with signs of inexpressible fondness , went round one and round the other , pawing them , and moaning .
Finding at last that they were cold and lifeless , she raised her head towards the ship , and , like Caliban in the tempest , growled a curse upon the murderers , which they returned with a volley of musket-balls .
She fell between her cubbs , and died licking their wounds .
If what is related by a voyager of credit in the last century be true , the filial fondness of these animals is no less remarkable than the maternal .
The young ones ,  says he , keep constantly close to the old ones .
We observed that two young ones and an old one would not leave one another , for if one ran away , it turned back again immediately , as soon as it did hear the others in danger , as if it would come to help them .
The old one ran to the young one , and the young one to the old one  and rather than they would leave one another , they would suffer themselves to be all killed .


Friday the 6th , the weather calm , but foggy , and the winds variable  they discovered that the drift of the ship , with the whole body of ice , inclined fast to the eastward  and that they were already embayed in the very middle of the seven islands .
They therefore sent off the pilots of both ships , with a party of sailors , to the northernmost island , to see what discoveries could be made from the promontories there .
They returned at night , after a fatiguing journey , with a dismal account , that nothing was to be seen from thence but a vast continent of ice , of which there was no end  and that the thought of wintering in such a situation was more dreadful , than that of perishing by instant death .


Saturday 7 , the wind set in north-north-east , veered to the north  to the north-east and east , piercing cold .
This day the boats were all brought in readiness on the ice , fitted with weather cloaths about thirteen inches above the  gunnels , in order to keep off the cold as much as possible , if by good fortune they should be enabled to launch them in an open sea .
This day was employed chiefly in boiling provisions to put in the boats for the intended voyage  in delivering out bags to the men to carry their bread , and in packing up such necessaries as every one could take along with him  for now every man was to be his own porter , the necessary provisions and liquors being found load enough for the boats , and twenty-five days bread load enough for each man .
This being adjusted , when night approached they were all ordered on board to sleep .


Thursday 8 , at six in the morning all hands were ordered to turn out , and a detachment of fifty men from each ship , headed by their respective officers , were appointed to begin the hard task of hawling the launces along the ice .
The bravest and gallantest actions performed in war , do not so strikingly mark the true character of a sea Commander , as the readiness and alacrity with which his orders are obeyed in times of imminent danger .
Every one now strove who should have the honour to be listed in the band of haulers , of whom the Commodore took the direction , leaving Capt. Lutwych to take care of both the ships , that if any favourable turn should happen in the disposition of the ice , he might make use of the remaining part of both the crews to improve it .
 Upon a general consultation of officers , previous to this undertaking , it had been agreed , and an order issued accordingly , that no person on board , of whatever rank , should encumber himself with more cloaths than what he wore upon his back .
Upon this occasion , therefore , the officers dressed themselves in flannels , and the common men put on the cloaths which the officers had thrown off .
It was inconceivably laughable to see these motley bands yoked in their new harness  and , to say the truth , there was not one solemn face among the two companies .
That headed by the Commodore drew stoutly for the honour of their leader , and that headed by their Lieutenants had their music to play to them , that they might dance it away , and keep pace with the Commander in chief .
Indeed the officers who headed them were deservedly beloved as well as their Commanders , particularly Lieutenant Beard , whose steady and uniform conduct in times of the greatest danger , can not be sufficiently admired or applauded .
Neither swayed by passion , nor disconcerted by the sudden embarrassments that often intervened , his conduct was always calm , and his orders resolute .
He never was heard , during the whole voyage on the most pressing emergencies , to enforce his commands with an oath , or to call a sailor by any other than his usual name  and so sensible were they of his manly behaviour , that , when the ship was paid  off at Deptford , they were only prevented by his most earnest request from stripping themselves to their shirts , to cover the streets with their cloaths , that he might not tread in the dirt in going to take coach .


In six hours , with the utmost efforts of human labour , they had only proceeded a single mile  and now it was time for them to dine , and recruit their almost exhausted spirits .
As the Commodore had laboured with them , it was in character that he should dine with them also  and an accident happened that made it necessary for him so to do .
The Cook , with his mates , ( who were bringing the Commodore and the officers their dinners under covers ) to keep out the cold after coming from a warm fire-side , had made a little too free with the brandy bottle before they set out , and before they had got half way to the lances , the liquor began to operate  the Cooks were sometimes very near boarding each other , sometimes they hauled off , and sometimes steered right a-head .
At length coming to a chasm , or parting of the ice , which they were obliged to leap , down came the master Cook , with dish , cover , meat and all  and what was still worse , though it was not then thought of much value , the Commodore 's common service of plate , which the Cook carried for the officers to dine on , fell in the chasm , and instantly sunk to the bottom .
This accident brought the Cook a little to himself , and  he now stood pausing whether he should jump down the gulph after the plate , or proceed to the Commodore to beg mercy and make his apology .
His mates persuaded him to the latter , as the Commodore was a kind-hearted gemman , and would never take a man 's life away for a slip on the ice .
Besides , it was a great jump for a fat man , and Commodore , they were sure , had rather lose all the plate in the great cabin , than lose Cookie .
Comforted a little by this speech , the Cook proceeded , but let his mates go on first with what remained , to carry the tidings of what befell the rest .
When the Commodore had heard the story , he judged how it was with them all .
But where is the Cook , said he to the mates ?
He 's crying behind , an please your Honour .
In the mean time the Cook came up .
Cook , said the Commodore , bring me your dinner .
I will dine to-day with my comrades .
My dinner !
Ay , a pound of the flesh next my heart , if your Honour likes it .
The promptness of the reply shewed the sincerity of the Cook 's good-will , and pleased the Commodore better than a feast upon turtle He dismissed him with a smile , and partook with the officers in what was left , who made up their dinners with a mess from the common men .


They had just begun to renew their labour , when word was brought , that the whole body of ice had changed its situation , and was moving  to the westward  that the ships were both a-float  and that the ice was parting .
The joy which this news diffused through the two companies of hawlers is easier to conceive than express .
They instantly shook off their harness , ran to assist in working the ships , and once more to resume their proper employments .
When they arrived at the ships , Captain Lutwych , who was no less beloved by his men than the Commodore , had by his example and his judicious directions done wonders .
Both ships were not only a-float , with their sails set , but actually cut and warped through the ice near half a mile .
This ray of hope , however , was soon darkened  the body of ice suddenly assumed its former direction to the eastward , and closed upon them again as fast as ever .
While the ships remained in the ice dock , they were lashed together for their greater security , but now being launched and a-float , the ice pressed upon them with such weight , that it was every moment expected that the hawser would break that held them together  orders were therefore given , that the hawser should be slackened , and the ships released .


For the remainder of the evening , and till two in the morning , the drift continued eastward , and all that while the ships were in danger of being crushed by the closing of the channel in which they rode .
They had now drifted two miles to the eastward  the men were  worn out with fatigue in defending the ships with their ice-poles from being engulphed  and now nothing but scenes of horror and perdition appeared before their eyes .
But the Omnipotent , in the very moment , when every hope of deliverance from their own united endeavours had relinquished them , interposed in their favours , and caused the winds to blow , and the ice to part in an astonishing manner , rending and cracking with a tremendous noise , surpassing that of the loudest thunder .
At this very instant the whole continent of ice , which before was extended beyond the reach of sight from the highest mountains , moved together in various directions , splitting and dividing into vast bodies , and forming hills and plains of various figures and dimensions .
All hearts were now again revived , and the prospect of being once more released from the frozen chains of the north inspired the men with fresh vigour .
Every officer and every idler on board laboured now for life .
The sails were all spread , that the ships might have the full advantage of the breeze to force them through the channels that were already opened , and to help them , like wedges , to rend the clefts that were but just cracking .


While the major part of the crews were employed in warping the ships with ice-anchors , axes , saws and poles , a party from both ships were dispatched to launch the boats .
This was  no easy task to accomplish .
The ice , though split in many thousand pieces , was yet frozen like an island round the lances , and though it was of no great extent , yet the boats were of a weight hardly to be moved by the small force that could be spared to launch them .
They were besides , by the driving of the ice , at more than five miles distance from the ships  and at this time no channels of communication were yet opened .
But Providence was manifest even on this occasion  for the island on which the lances stood , parted while the men were hauling them , and by that lucky circumstance they were launched with great facility , without the loss of a man , though the ice cracked , as it were , under their feet .


The people on board had not been able to force their way with the ships much more than a mile , when the party in the lances joined them .
And now , excited by what curiosity or instinct is not easy to determine , several bears came posting over the ice to be spectators of their departure , and advanced so near the ships , that they might have been easily mastered , had not the men been more seriously employed .


This day they altered their soundings from thirty to fifty fathoms , and from fifty to eighty and eighty-five fathoms .


The breeze continuing fresh from east-south-east and east , the ice seemed to open as fast as it had before closed when the wind blew  westerly , and from the north  a strong presumptive proof of land to the eastward , which stopping the current of the loose ice in driving from the north and west , closes it in course , and renders it compact .
On the contrary , when the wind blows off the land , and the current sets to the sea , the loose ice being no longer opposed , disperses itself again in the ocean , where it again floats , till the same cause produces the same effect .
If therefore the land which our voyagers saw on the 30th , and which they could not determine with certainty to be an island , should , upon some future occasion , be discovered to be a continent , then the closing of the loose ice so suddenly about the seven islands , and its crouding one piece upon another to a great height , when violently agitated by tempests from the north or west , will be fully and naturally accounted for .


Tuesday the 10th , about two in the morning , the fog being thick , and the weather calm , and the men very much fatigued , they were ordered to their quarters , to refresh themselves with sleep .
It was , besides , very cold , and much rain fell  and as the wind was variable , they could make but little progress .
The ice , in the morning early , seemed rather to close upon them , than to divide  and being apprehensive for their boats , they attempted to hoist the lances on board , but that belonging to the Carcase , being either too unweildy , or  the men too much fatigued to effect it , they slung her to the ship 's side .


About eight the breeze sprung up fresh from the north-east , exceedingly cold , but opening the ice to the westward .
They then made all the sail they could , driving with the loosening ice , and parting it wherever it was moveable with their whole force .
Towards noon they lost sight of the Seven Islands .
And in a very little while after , to their great joy , Spitsbergen was seen from the mast-head .


Wednesday 11 , the men who , with hard labour , cold and watching , were much dispirited , on the prospect of a speedy deliverance , and seeing the ice no longer adhere in immoveable bodies , began , after a little refreshment , to resume their wonted chearfulness .
They had not till the second closing of the ice , after the attempt to dig a passage through it had proved ineffectual , and that the hauling the lances had been tried with little better success , discovered the least despondency .
But when they had exerted their utmost efforts , and Providence , which at first seemed to second their endeavours , appeared to have forsaken them  when their pilots had filled their minds with the terrors of their situation  and their officers had given the ships and their most valuable effects over for lost , the men then began to reflect on the hardships they were likely to suffer , and to be impressed with the sense of their common  danger .
Their apprehensions , however , were but temporary , and the moment they were released from their icey prison , and that they were within sight of a clear sea , their sorrow was changed to mirth , and their melancholy to rejoicing .
Festivity and jolity took place of abstinence and gloomy apprehensions  and before they arrived at Spitsbergen , there was not a sailor on board with a serious face .


The ice that had parted from the main body , they had now time to admire .
As it no longer obstructed their course , the various shapes in which the broken fragments appeared , were indeed very curious and amusing .
One remarkable piece described a magnificent arch so large and compleatly formed , that a sloop of considerable burden might have sailed through it without lowering her mast  another represented a church with windows and pillars , and domes  and a third , a table with icicles hanging round it like the fringes of a damask cloth .
A fertile imagination might here find entertainment enough  for , as has already been observed , the similitude of all that art or nature has ever yet produced , might here be fancied .


They continued working all this day through the loose ice .
Hacluit 's Headland bearing south thirty-nine west , and in their course saw a Dutch Greenlandman in the south-west quarter .


Thursday the 12th , they cleared the ice , and bore away with all sails set for the harbour of  Smearingburg , in which they had before cast anchor .
At two in the afternoon they anchored in North Bay , the north part of Vogle Sound bearing north forty-five east , distance about four miles .
At half after four the Commodore made the signal to weigh  and at half past nine , came to an anchor in their former station , where they found four Dutch Greenlandmen lying in readiness to depart .
These Dutchmen acquainted the Commodore , that all the English fishing ships set sail on the 10th of July , the day to which they are obliged by contract , to stay to entitle their owners to receive the bounty-money , allowed by Parliament for the encouragement of that fishery .


About the same time the greatest part of the Dutch set sail likewise from Spitsbergen , on their voyage home  but it is a practice with these last , to take it by turns to wait till the severity of the weather obliges them to leave the coast , in order to pick up such men as may by accident have lost their ships in the ice  and who , notwithstanding , may have had the good fortune to save their lives by means of their boats .
This is a very humane institution , and does credit to the Dutch Government .
Did the British Government bear an equal regard for individuals , so many valuable subjects would never be suffered to migrate , as now annually hire ships to convey themselves to seek their fortunes in new settlements .
It is estimated ,  that twelve thousand at least are yearly shipt off from Ireland , and not many less from England and Scotland , yet no measures are thought necessary to be taken to retain them at home .


The turn of waiting at Spitsbergen falls annually to the lot of about five Dutch ships , who are obliged to send out their boats daily in search of their unfortunate fellow subjects  some of these boats have themselves suffered severely , and have been detained seven or eight days by severe weather in these excursions , to the great anxiety of their friends .


The day of our voyagers return to Smearingburg Harbour being fine , the Commodore ordered a tent to be raised on the lower point to the south-west , where there was a level plain for the space of two miles , and where all the mathematical apparatus were again taken on shore for a second trial .


They found , on the examination of the vibration of the pendulum , that it differed from that at Greenwich by Harrison 's time-keeper , only two seconds in forty-eight hours  which time-keeper , at their arrival at Greenwich , varied only one second and a half from the time-pieces at the observatory there .
Mr. Robinson , who was articled to Commodore Phipps , from Christ 's Hospital , and who does honour to that noble foundation , was particularly careful to note the result of all the observations that were made in this high latitude .


 The ovens were also here taken on shore , and a considerable quantity of good soft bread baked for the refreshment of the men .


Hacluit 's Headland , of which mention has been frequently made in the course of this voyage , is an island on the north-west point of Spitsbergen , about fifteen miles in circumference , on which is found plenty of scurvy-grass  and in the valleys , some of which extend from two to three miles , there is store of other grass in summer , on which the deer is supposed to feed .


The people were now fully employed in overhauling the rigging , tarring the ships sides , taking in water , peying and securing the masts , and in preparing the ships for pursuing their voyage upon discovery  or , if that was found impracticable , for returning home .


On the 16th , two of the Dutch ships weighed anchor , and sailed away in company .


On the 17th , vast pieces of broken ice , supposed to have fallen from the Icebergs , came floating into harbour .
When these pieces , which are undermined by the continual agitation of the sea in stormy weather , lose their support , they tumble with a crack that surpasses the loudest thunder  but they were told , that no other thunder was ever heard in this latitude .


The activity and enterprizing spirit of the Russians already noticed , begin to manifest itself every where , and it is not improbable , but  that the maritime powers may one day or other have cause to repent their emulation in contributing to aggrandize the naval power of that increasing people .
The dominions of the Russian empire , are situated to command the trade of the universe  they are now actually erecting a yard for building ships at Kampschatka , to improve their discoveries from that quarter , and to open a trade from thence to China .
They have attempted to settle colonies , as our voyagers were told , on the southernmost districts of Spitsbergen , and those of the new settlers , who survived the first winter , were preparing to encounter the rigour of the climate in a second .
This can only be done by way of experiment , to try if a settlement is practicable , for those now sent are said to be criminals .


During the six days which the ships anchored here to make observations , take in water , refresh the men , and refit , our journalist made several excursions to the adjoining islands , where the birds appeared in astonishing numbers  it being the season for bringing forth their young , and teaching them to fly , and to dive .


Of all the birds that breed in these islands , the burgermaster is the largest , and the most ravenous  he is so called by the Dutch , from his size and his authority , as he holds all the other birds in subjection .
His bill is long and crooked , rather like that of the stork , than that of the hawk , and is of a yellow colour .
 He has a red ring about his eyes  is web footed , but has but three claws on each foot .
His wings are of a beautiful pearl colour , edged with white  his back a silver grey  his body white as snow , and his tail of the same colour , which when he flies he spreads like a fan .
He builds his nest very high in the rocks , inaccessible either to bears or foxes .
He preys upon all the other birds , and eats the carrion of fish or flesh , or whatever comes in his way .
His cry is horrible , and when he screams , the mallemuch , a bird as large as a duck , is so much intimidated , that she will sink down , and suffer him to devour her without opposition .


Our journalist found it very dangerous to pursue his way over the hills and precipices in this rugged country .
The clefts on the mountains are like those in the ice frequently impassable  but they are abundantly more hazardous , being sometimes concealed under the snow , so that a traveller is engulphed before he is aware .
Many have been entombed in these clefts , and perished in the hearing of their companions , without a possibility of relief .
To a contemplative mind , however , even the deformities of nature , are not unpleasing , the wisdom of the Creator being manifest in all his works .


On the 19th of August the ships unmoored , and on the twentieth they cleared the harbour .
They found the tide to flow north-east and  south-west , and to rise three feet seven inches perpendicular height .


On the 22d they again found themselves beset with loose ice .
They were then in latitude 80 degrees 14 minutes north , longitude 5 degrees 44 minutes east .


On the 22d they had a heavy sea from the south-west quarter .


On the 23d the Carcase , being a heavier sailer than the Race Horse , lost sight of the Commodore , and fired a six-pounder , which was answered .
In the evening they came in sight , and pursued their course with favourable weather , and without any thing worthy of notice happening till


September 5 , when , being clear and calm weather , the Commodore sounded , and found ground with seven hundred fathoms , very soft mud .
The people were employed eight hours in heaving up the lead with the capstan .
At three in the morning the sun risen , took the amplitude , and found the variation to be 22 degrees 53 minutes west .


September 7 , at five in the afternoon , they had heavy squalls , with rain  at seven in the morning moderate weather .
This day , in 60 degrees 15 minutes west , they found their longitude , corrected by observation of sun and moon , to be 5 degrees 59 minutes east .
Longitude by time keeper 4 degrees 45 minutes east  a very remarkable difference .


 The ships pursued their course home in company together , with high seas and variable weather , till


Sept. 11 , when , at half after ten , the night dark , and the weather moderate , the wind all at once veered to the southward , and a strong gale with a great sea came on .
The ships parted , and never more came in sight till they met off Harwich , on the English coast .


Our journalist being on board the Carcase , can now only relate what happened to that sloop , till her arrival in the River Thames .


When the gale came on , the Commodore 's lights not appearing , the Carcase fired a six-pounder , but that shot not being returned by the Race Horse , it was concluded , that the Commodore was at too great a distance to hear the signal .
At four in the morning the gale increasing , they close reefed the top-sails , and employed all hands in lashing and securing the boats and booms , and preparing to withstand the threatening storm .
At this time they were in lat .
57 deg .
44 min .
north  the Naze of Norway bearing south eighty-eight east , distant thirty-one leagues .


Sunday , September 12 , fresh gales , with frequent showers of rain  handed gib and stay-sail  at two in the afternoon hard squalls and violent showers of rain  handed fore and mizen top-sail  saw a sail to southward standing to eastward  cloudy and obscure sky  at ten at  night came on suddenly a very heavy squall  handed all the top-sails  strong gale , with severe showers of rain .
At midnight blowing a violent storm of wind , reefed and handed the main-sail and fore-sail  lowered down the lower yards , balanced the mizen , and laid the ship too under it , with her head to the westward  the sea making a free passage over the ship .
Shipped such heavy seas , washed all the provisions and casks that were lashed on the deck , over board  kept two pumps continually going  obliged to skuttle the boats , to prevent their being washed over-board .
At four in the morning shipped such heavy seas , as washed all the booms and spars that had been with all possible care secured on the deck , over-board .
The ship mostly under water .
No sight of the Commodore  under great apprehensions for his safety , as his vessel laboured much more than ours .
At this time one of the mates , the carpenter , and a fore-mast-man , were washed over-board .
The carpenter , a very careful sober man , who was in the waste , securing the hatches and stores , was washed in and out at the ports three times , before he could secure himself .
At ten in the morning rather moderate .
Set the mizen-stay-sail  swayed the lower yards up , and set the courses .
At half past eleven , strong squalls and heavy [ ... ] sts  handed both courses  and settled the [ ... ] yards .


 September 13 , strong gales and squally .
Continually shipping heavy seas .
At three in the afternoon rather more moderate  set reef courses  swayed up the lower yards , and set the main-top-sail .
The ship now making no water  at seven in the evening set fore-top-sail and gib  very heavy sea from south-west quarter .
At eight in the evening moderate and cloudy  let the third reef out of the main-top-sail  sounded thirty-five fathoms fine brown sand .
At one in the morning light airs , hazey weather , and great sea .
Wore ship , and stood to westward .
At four fresh breezes , with rain .
At half past eight saw a sail to eastward  supposing it the Commodore , made the private signal , and fired a six-pounder .
At nine bore down upon her , and brought her to .
She proved a Hollander from Archangel , bound to Bremen .
Course south forty-two west , latitude fifty-six deg .
four min .
north .


September 14 , strong gales , and cloudy  under reef courses .
At two in the afternoon moderate  set main-top-sail .
At three set fore-top-sail  a great sea from westward .
At seven in the evening moderate and cloudy .
Out the third reef of the main-top-sail  uncertain weather  squally , and at times much rain  at three great fog .
This day , at noon , Flamborough-head south forty-six west , distance thirty leagues .


 September 15 , light breezes , and clear weather  out all reefs , and swayed up the lower yards .
At four in the afternoon saw a sail to south-east  bore down , and brought her to .
She proved to be a Prussian fisherman , had been ten days from Edinburgh  hoisted out the small cutter  the second Lieutenant went on board of her , and bought a fine cargo of fish .
At five the boat returned  we hoisted her on board , with plenty of mackarel and herrings .
Made sail , and stood to south-west  sounded every half hour  found from thirteen to fifteen , and eighteen fathoms , fine brown sand , mixed with black shells .
At seven in the evening took the first reef , and hauled in the top-sails  fresh gales , and cloudy .
At two in the morning deepened in water to twenty fathom .
Took in second reef of the top-sails  tacked ship , and stood to north-west .
At five in the morning got into fifteen fathom  and at seven into ten .
At nine in the morning close reefed the top-sails , and at ten handed them  very fresh gale , and violent rain .


September 16 , rather more moderate  set the main-top-sail  squally , with rain  a confused sea from west-north-west .
At five in the afternoon soundings from five to twelve , from twenty-seven to thirty-two and thirty-four fathoms , fine brown sand , black specks , fresh gales , and cloudy .
At eight took in first and second reefs of top-sails  at eleven at night  close reefed the main and fore-top-sail , and handed the mizen  fresh gales , and cloudy weather .
At four in the morning shoaled water to twenty-two fathoms  brown sand and broken shells .
At five saw several sail to north-west  fired , and brought one of them to .
At eight shook the first and second reefs out of the top-sail  hove down upon a sloop , which came from Gravesend  took on board the master , as a pilot to carry the ship through Yarmouth Roads  put on board one man in his room , and ordered his vessel to follow us .
Stood to the southward .


September 17 , fresh breezes , and cloudy weather  kept the lead going every half hour  found our sounding from ten to twelve fathoms , fine brown sand .
At six in the afternoon fresh gales  close reefed the main-top-sail  soundings from ten to sixteen fathom  broken shells and large stones .
At seven close reefed the main-top-sail  kept a light in the poop-lanthorn for the sloop .
At ten strong gales  handed the top-sails  laid her to under the main-sail  handed the fore-sail .
At eleven at night got into five fathom  but deepened to eight , nine , and ten fathom , brown sand .
Lost sight of the fishing vessel  fired several guns , and made a signal in the mizen-shroud .
On setting the fore-top-sail stacil , it blew to pieces  bent a new one .
A violent gale of wind  shipped a great quantity of water .
At four rather moderate   set the fore-sail .
At midnight set close  reefed top-sails .
At half past six tacked  at seven saw the fishing vessel  bore down and spoke with her , who had split her main-sail in the night .
At ten saw the land bearing south-west by west , and south and by west .
At eleven being clear and moderate weather , shook all the reefs out of the top-sails , and set the top-gallant-sail  saw Cromer light-house , bearing south 55 degrees west , distance five leagues .


September 19 , fresh breezes and clear weather  bent the sheet-cable , and hauled a range of the best and small bower-cables  bent both buoy ropes and buoys to the anchor .
At five light breezes and fair  tacked and stood to the southward .
At six tacked and stood to the north-west .
Cramer north-west and by north four miles  light breezes , and pleasant weather  handed in top-gallant-sails , and handed the main-sail .
At seven in the evening , to our great joy , saw Yarmouth Church , bearing south-west .
At ten at night came to anchor with the best bower in twelve fathom , fine sand and clay  veered out to half a cable , and handed all the sails .
Winterstone Ness lights bore south and by west four miles .
At two in the morning fresh breezes and cloudy .
At half past four weighed , and made sail .
Employed in working from Winterstone Ness lights , to Yarmouth Roads , making several tacks .
At  seven in the morning set top-gallant-sails  at nine came to an anchor in Yarmouth Road , with best bower in seven fathoms water  sand and clay .
Yarmouth church south fifteen west , distance two miles .
Came on board a pilot to carry the ship to the Nore .


September 20 , fresh breezes and clear weather  sent down top-gallant-yards , and got every thing clear for striking tokens .
At five in the afternoon moored the ship .
Yarmouth church west-south-west two miles .


September 21 , fresh gales and cloudy , with frequent rain .
At four in the afternoon sent down top-gallant-mast .
At eight in the morning sent the long-boat on shore for water .
We were this day visited by several of the inhabitants of Norwich and Yarmouth , who were genteelly entertained by the officers , but we could get no intelligence of the Commodore .


September 23 , dark cloudy weather .
At six in the evening swayed up the top-mast , and lower yards  the wind veered to north-west , we prepared to unmoor .
Fresh gales , with frequent flashes of lightning .
At seven in the morning set on top-gallant-mast , and began to unmoor .
At eight veered away upon the best bower , and took up the small bower-anchor .
At nine weighed and made sail .
At ten got up the top-gallant-yards , in company with several ships .


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  [ ... ]  Saturday 25 , at five came to an anchor in eleven fathoms .
Orford light-house east by south four miles .
This day some religious books were distributed among the sailors , which had been sent on board by some pious person for their particular perusal .


Sunday 26 .
At six in the evening came to with the best bower in seven fathoms water  Balsey church west by south .
At two in the morning weighed , and came to sail  Harwich lights north-west by west .
To their great surprise , saw the Race Horse at anchor .
Hoisted out the cutter , and Capt. Lutwidge waited on the Commodore , from whom he learnt , that in the storm of the twelfth they had all their boats washed over-board  and , to ease the ship , were obliged to heave all their guns over-board , except two .
Came to anchor  Harwich church north-west .


Monday 27 , at two in the afternoon weighed , and came to sail in company with the Race Horse .
At eight in the evening came to in the Swin .
At five in the morning weighed , in company as before .
Turning up the Swin at half past nine , came to  Whitaker Beacon north-north-east one mile .


Tuesday 28 , fresh breezes and cloudy weather .
At half past three weighed , and came to sail .
At half past six came to with the best bower in six fathom water  Shoe Beacon north-west .
At half past five weighed , and came to  sail .
Working to windward at eleven in the forenoon , the Commodore 's boat came on board , with orders to proceed to Deptford .
At noon came to at the Nore with the best bower .


Wednesday 29 , light breezes and fair weather .
At half past five weighed , and made sail .
Employed in working up the river .
At half past ten came to with the best bower in the gallions , in three fathoms water .
Woolwich church north by south one half east .
At noon a hoy came along-side for the gunner 's stores .


Thursday 30 , employed most of the afternoon in getting out the guns , and gunner 's stores .
At nine in the evening weighed , and came to sail .
At ten run foul of a large transport , and carried away the lar-board mizen-shrouds , and part of the channel .
At one in the morning came to anchor at Deptford .
Warped along-side the Bedford Hulk , and moored .
At six unbent the sails , and began to unrig .


Thus ended a voyage , which seems to have determined the question so much agitated concerning the navigation to the north pole , and proved what Captain Wood had before asserted , that no passage would ever be found practicable in that direction .


From the quantities of ice which that navigator met with in latitude 76 north , longitude [ ... ] east , he concluded indeed erroneously , that  the 80th degree would bound the passage towards the poles , and that from thence the polar region was either a continued continent of solid ice , or that land filled up the intermediate space .


It has been found , however , that those seas are navigable as far as between the eighty-first and eighty-second degrees of latitude  and it may possibly happen , that in some future years , they may be found navigable a degree or two farther : but it may now with certainty be concluded , that a course under the pole can never be pursued for the purpose of commerce .


We have already shewn incontestibly , that the north sea communicates with the eastern sea , and that the passage to China and Japan may be performed with difficulty by a north-east course , by watching the opportunity , when a few days in the year the north sea is open .
But who would think of exposing a ship 's company to the hazard of being frozen to death in a tedious , uncertain , and dangerous passage , when a safe , certain , and , one may say , speedy passage at all times lies open before them .


From Behring 's discoveries to the east of Japan , and from the continent he there met with , there seems reason to believe , that the land seen by Commodore Phipps to the eastward of the Seven Islands , might be a continuation of that continent .
In that case it is not improbable , but that either that continent may join to the western part of America , or that it may extend southward ,  and form a part of that continent so much sought after in the southern hemisphere .


A small premium of two or three thousand pounds secured by Parliament , to be paid to the owner or owners of any Greenland fishing ship , that should be fortunate enough to discover such a continent to the eastward or northward of the Seven Islands , might possibly have a better effect , than many expensive expeditions fitted out solely for the purposes of such discovery .
This , by a trading nation , were it only to improve the science of geography , would surely be well bestowed .


It is true , indeed , that the reward secured by parliament for the discovery of a north-west passage , has not yet been attended with that success , with which the promoters of the bill had flattered themselves and the public , from the libera ispirit with which it was granted .


The Hudson 's Bay Company , though bound by their charter to further and promote the discovery , were generally suspected , from interested motives , to oppose and discourage every attempt to accomplish it .
And Captain Middleton , who in 1740 was sent in a king 's ship upon that service , returning without success , was publicly charged with having received a bribe of five thousand pounds to defeat the undertaking , and by his report to discourage any farther attempts in pursuit of it .
This charge was strongly supported , and generally  credited .
And Mr. Dobbs , by whose interest Captain Middleton was employed , had the address to prevail with the then ministry , to preclude any future scheme of private corruption , by promoting the public reward already mentioned .


The preamble to the act will state this matter in the true light it sets forth , ' `` That whereas the discovery of a north-west passage through Hudson 's Streight to the western ocean would be of great benefit and advantage to this kingdom , and that it would be of great advantage to the adventurers to attempt the same , if a public reward was given to such persons as should make a perfect discovery of the said passage  it is therefore enacted , that if any ships or vessels belonging to his majesty 's subjects shall find out and sail through any passage by sea between Hudson 's bay and the western ocean of America , the owners of such ships or vessels shall be entitled to receive as a reward for such discovery the sum of TWENTY-THOUSAND POUNDS . '' '
And as a farther encouragement to prosecute this discovery , and to prevent obstructions from interested persons , it was enacted , ' `` that all persons , subjects of his Majesty , residing in any place where the said adventurers may come in the prosecution of this discovery , shall give the said adventurers all assistance , and shall no way obstruct ,  molest , or refuse the said adventurers reasonable succour in any distress they may fall into in the prosecution of this discovery . '' '


Such was the encouragement , and such the liberal reward that was and is secured by parliament to the fortunate discoverers of a north-west passage to the great pacific ocean  a passage which , it is generally believed , would open a trade with nations on the northern continent of America , wholly unknown to the maritime powers of Europe , and supposed , from their situation , to abound in commodities equally rare and precious with those of any other country under the sun .


The fair prospect of acquiring fame by enlarging commerce , the hope of obtaining the parliamentary reward , and the desire of exposing the dis-ingenuity of Captain Middleton , were incitements sufficient to prevail with Mr. Dobbs to sollicit the equipment of two ships for another voyage , which he made not the least doubt would find out the passage so long sought for in vain , and by the advantages attending the discovery , exceed the most sanguine expectations of the adventurers .


The command of this expedition was given to Captain Ellis , who , on the 31st of May , 1746 , passed Yarmouth in the Dobb 's Galley , accompanied by the California Sloop , and convoyed to the north sea by the Loo man of war .
But in proportion as Mr. Dobbs had flattered the avarice of the adventurers who were to share in the reward , and had elated himself with the thoughts of triumphing over the disgrace of Captain Middleton , so it happened , that when the ships returned without having effected any one thing of consequence , the chagrin of the former for having advanced their  money on a visionary project , and the mortification of the latter in not being able to support his charge , were increased by every circumstance that could aggravate the disappointment .
Captain Middleton now triumphed in his turn , and no ship from England has since been induced to undertake the voyage , notwithstanding the greatness of the reward .


It is now , however , believed , that Government have in contemplation another voyage to the north , to which that of Captain Phipps was only the prelude  but there is reason to conclude , from what has already been said of these latter attempts , and from the ill success of former undertakings , that the discovery of a north-west passage is not the sole object in view .
The figure of the earth , the phenomena of the winds , the variation of the compass , and the attraction of the magnet , are points yet unsettled , of infinite importance to navigation  and it is not impossible , but that a more careful examination of the polar regions may lead to the solution of problems , that have hitherto baffled the enquiries of the ablest navigators .


A very slender acquaintance with the difficulties and hardships attending northern discoveries , will fully account for our knowledge of the countries surrounding the pole being still very imperfect .
A brief recapitulation of the sufferings of those to whom we are most indebted for our information , will not , we hope , be thought an improper conclusion to a voyage solely undertaken with a view to enlarge it .


The first who conceived the idea of exploring the northern regions was Sebastian Cabbot .
That enterprizing navigator , long before Magellan thought of a passage to the pacific ocean  by the south-west , had made two voyages , with a view to direct his course to the same sea by the north-west .
In these voyages , he discovered Newfoundland , the coast of the Esquimeaux Indians , and had penetrated as far as the 64th degree of latitude , when a mutiny among his men , or rather an obstinate refusal to proceed any further , obliged him to return  yet he died in the persuasion that a passage in that direction certainly existed , and that he should have found it but for the opposition of his crew .


The next , who , prepossessed with the same notion , undertook a voyage for discoveries towards the north , was Sir Martin Forbisher .
He discovered Greenland , and in the latitude of 62 deg .
north , passed a streight , which , though it still holds a place in our maps , has never been found navigable since .
He made two other voyages , discovered many bays and capes , to which he gave names , but returned without attaining the principal object of his voyage , though , like his predecessor , he asserted the certainty of its existence to his latest hour .


To him succeeded Sir Humphry Gilbert , who in 1583 traversed the coast of Labradore , entered the mouth of the great river St. Laurence , and , surrounding the island of Newfoundland , laid the foundation of the cod fishery , which has been prosecuted with immense advantage to his country ever since .


The rapid progress of discoveries in the southern hemisphere , which about this time were attended with vast profit to the adventurers , re-animated cotemporary navigators to prosecute , with more ardour than ever , their enterprizes towards the north .
The more the  pacific ocean became known , the firmer the belief prevailed , that a passage into it by way of the north must certainly exist , and that whoever could discover it , would not only immortalize his name , but enrich his country .


The merchants of that time were no less eager to embark their money , than the navigators were to hazard their persons in any new project , where the hope of gain appeared to be well founded .
A company therefore of wealthy persons in London agreed to join a company of merchants in the west , and to sit out two ships for the discovery of a passage , which all agreed was practicable , though none could tell readily where to find it .
To the command of this expedition Captain John Davis was strongly recommended as an able navigator , and of a bold and enterprising spirit .
Accordingly , on the 7th of June , 1685 , he set sail from Dartmouth , in the Sun-shine of fifty tons , and accompanied by the moon-shine of thirty-five tons , having on board both vessels forty-two hardy seamen .
On the 19th of July they were alarmed by a mighty roaring , which was the more terrible , as the fog was so thick , that they could not see each other at a ship 's length .
It proved only the crackling of the islands of ice , which was not then very well understood .
On the breaking up of the fog they discovered land , which , from its horrid appearance , they named the land of desolation .
On the 24th they were in 64 deg .
15 min .
north , the sea open and the weather moderate .
In this latitude they discovered land , and conversed with the natives , who appeared to be a harmless hospitable people , polite in their manners , neatly habited , and not ill favoured .
These friendly people , observing that the English  admired their furs , went up in the country to bring down more , with which they traded with much simplicity .
To an adjoining hill Davis gave the name of Mount Raleigh , from which he took his departure on the 8th of August , and on the 11th doubled the southernmost cape in view , to which he gave the name of the Cape of God 's Mercy , and entered a streight , which bears the name of the Discoverer to this day .
In this streight he sailed sixty leagues , and on the 14th went on shore , and found evident signs of human inhabitants , being met by a pack of dogs ( twenty in number ) that expressed their joy , as if their masters had been returned after an interval of absence .
One of those had on a leathern collar .
The Captain was highly pleased with the promising appearance of the new streights , and consulting with the master , agreed to report , upon their return home , that they had found the wished-for passage to the western sea .


The weather changing from temperate to excessive cold , on the 20th it was resolved to set sail for England .
On the 12th of September they fell in with the land of Desolation , and on the 30th of the same month entered the port of Dartmouth , without the loss of a man .


The account Captain Davis gave to his owners was so well received , that other merchants were desirous of joining in a second expedition , and accordingly he was again employed , and furnished with a much greater force .


On the 7th of May he sailed from Dartmouth in the Mermaid , of 120 tons , in company with the Sun-shine and Moon-shine as before , and an additional pinnace of thirteen tons , called the North Star .


 In the latitude of 60 degrees north Captain Davis divided his force , ordering the Sun-shine and North Star to seek a passage between Greenland and Iceland , while the Mermaid and Moon-shine continued their course to the streight as before .
In the latitude of 64 degrees , and longitude 58 deg .
30 min .
north from London , they fell again in with the land , and met the same people with whom they had traded the former year .
Overjoyed to meet , they renewed their acquaintance , and while the English was preparing a pinnace to facilitate their discoveries , the natives came in numbers to carry on trade .
As soon as the pinnace was fitted for sea , Captain Davis dispatched her to examine the inlets on the coast , and to trace their course up the main land  but that was productive of no essential discovery .


Though the natives attended them with an obsequious diligence , yet on their kindling a fire in their manner , and using some strange ceremonies , Captain Davis supposing them to be using idolatrous sorceries , first thrust the priest into the smoke , and then encouraged his men to tread out the flame , and to spurn the reeking coals into the sea .
Unable to bear the insult , the natives for the first time began to shew resentment .
They seized the boat from the stern of the Moon-shine , cut the cable belonging to the Mermaid , made prize of the implements that lay upon the shore , and , in short , declared open hostilities against the aggressors , who in return discharged their artillery among them , which instantly dispersed them .


No civilities , however , that could be shewn them , after the indignity offered to their priest , could ever after reconcile them , and the year following they found an opportunity to take a  severe revenge .
In the mean time one of them being made prisoner , was taken on board the Mermaid  who , after recovering his fright , trimmed up his darts , repaired his fishing tackle , picked okam , and set his hand to any thing he was set about  and , after a time , became a very pleasant companion on board .


On the 17th of July , in latitude 63 degrees 8 min .
north , they fell in with a continent of ice , very high , like land , with bays and capes , and , till they examined it closely , could not be convinced that it was a mere congelation .
They coasted it till the 30th , when the weather became so tempestuous and foggy , and withal so cold , that the shrouds , ropes , and sails were frozen and glazed with ice  and the men , who the year before found the sea open and the weather temperate , became so dispirited , that in an orderly manner they addressed their Commander , and intreated him to consider their present situation , to have regard to his own life , and the preservation of theirs  and not , through boldness and an indiscreet zeal for a hopeless discovery , leave their widows and fatherless children to blacken his memory with bitter curses .
Moved with their pitiable representation , he discharged the Mermaid with those who were most desirous of returning home , and proceeded in the Moonshine to prosecute his voyage .
Changing his course to recover the opposite shore on the 1st of August , in latitude 66 deg .
33 min .
north , and longitude 70 degrees west , he discovered land , without either ice or snow .
On the 2d they cast anchor in a fine road , and in a day or two were visited by the natives , who came to traffic .
On the 14th they set sail to the westward , and on the 16th changed their course to the southward .
 On the 18th they discovered a high promontory to the north-west , which having no land to the south , recovered their hopes of a free passage .


On doubling the Cape , they found the land trending away to the south in broken islands , and coasting along till they arrived at a fine opening , in latitude 57 degrees , they sailed ten leagues , with woods and lawns on each side , abounding with deer and game of every kind .
Here they staid till the 1st of September , and then set sail , coasting along to the northward , where they were again flattered with the hopes of a passage , by observing a strong current rushing in between two lands to the westward , which they were very desirous of approaching , but the wind blew directly against them .


On the 6th , returning to their former station , five of the crew fell into an ambuscade  for having ventured on shore unarmed in their boat , they were suddenly assaulted from the woods , two of them killed upon the spot , two grievously wounded , and the fifth made his escape by swimming , with an arrow sticking in his arm .
The same evening a furious storm arose , which lasted till the 10th , in which time they in a manner unrigged their ship , and were about to cut away her masts by the board , the cable of their sheet anchor parted , and they every moment expected to be dashed upon the rocks , and to be made a prey by the savage cannibals of the country  but the storm abating , and the sea growing calm , they recovered their anchor on the 11th , and made sail for England .


About the beginning of October they arrived at Dartmouth , where they found the Sunshine , but the North Star having parted company in a hard gale on the coast of Greenland , was never more heard of .


 This undaunted mariner had yet [ ... ] to undertake a third voyage , and then [ ... ] as the 73d degree of north latitude [ ... ] deserted by his companions , was [ ... ] return in great distress to his [ ... ] ?
Upon h [ ... ] s return he wrote a letter to his [ ... ] him , that he had found [ ... ] open [ ... ] lat [ ... ] 73 degrees north , and [ ... ] b [ ... ] oad , and concluded from thence that the passage was [ ... ] .


[ ... ] He sailed April the [ ... ] to Davis 's Streights , [ ... ] latitude 52 degrees north [ ... ] , where on the [ ... ] of November [ ... ] ship was frozen in , and being scantily provided with provisions , the crew mutinied , and in the end most barbarously contrived , as the writer expresses it , to turn the Captain , the [ ... ] arpenter , and all the sick men out of the sh [ ... ] p , who were never more heard of .
After wh [ ... ] [ ... ] leaders  [ ... ] determined to make the best of their way for England  but in their passage home not a few peri [ ... ] hed , and those who survived [ ... ] .


But notwithstanding this disaster , and that it w [ ... ] [ ... ] that the Captain and all w [ ... ] o were loft [ ... ] were either drowned starved , or murdered , the progress he had ma [ ... ] e in [ ... ] encouraged other [ ... ]


The [ ... ] who adventured was Captain B [ ... ] | ton , a man of gre [ ... ] [ ... ] , courage , and exp [ ... ] .
[ ... ] , Prince [ ... ] , and having passed [ ... ] St [ ... ] ght , [ ... ] a different [ ... ] of Captain Hu [ ... ] on , leaving his [ ... ] [ ... ] th-west .


[ ... ] two hundred leagues [ ... ] in a large continent , which , from [ ... ] , he named New [ ... ] the westward , [ ... ] Port Nelson , [ ... ]


In 1615 Captain W [ ... ] Bassin undertook the [ ... ] of the extremity of that sea into w [ ... ] ch Davis?s Streights opened a passage , and he so far succeeded , as to determine its extent , and to [ ... ] scover an outlet marked in our maps , by the name of Sir Thomas Smith 's Sound , which is proudly the only communication between  our northe [ ... ] n bays and the great pacific ocean , which nature has provided , in order to maintain a general circulation , without wh [ ... ] ch [ ... ] is hardly possible to conceive , that the equi [ ... ] of the globe could for a [ ... ] be preserved .


In 1619 Captain John M [ ... ] nk , at the [ ... ] of his Danish Maj [ ... ] sty , underto [ ... ] [ ... ] and arrived safe at Cape [ ... ] , where , though the tackle of the ship was [ ... ] , tha [ ... ] the ma [ ... ] iners [ ... ] uld [ ... ] the ropes yet next [ ... ] it was so [ ... ] , that they were forced [ ... ] .
He [ ... ] Hudson 's [ ... ] tre [ ... ] ght in the month of July , and was forced to winter in latitude [ ... ] degrees 20 min .
north , on an island that still retains his [ ... ] me  but the hardships he endured almost [ ... ] belief .
In May , 16 [ ... ] 0 , he found himself alone in a cave dug in the earth , scarce alive , and almost morally certain , that all his mar [ ... ] ners were dead .
As soon as the weather would permit he crawled forth , and found , of a [ ... ] l his crew , only two left .
By removing the snow , they found some fresh herbs underneath , [ ... ] by eating them , recovered from the scurvy .
Unable to navigate their ships , they abandoned her to the savages , and , by a wonderful provid [ ... ] nce , got safe to Norway in the Pinnace .
Being a man of uncommon resolution , he was still [ ... ] citous to perfect a discovery , which had [ ... ] ed the researches of so many able navigators , and to acquire glory , by accomplishing that which they had failed to attain .
He as [ ... ] ed the existence of such a passage so con [ ... ] ntly , and laid down the method of finding it so plausibly , that he had persuaded the merchants of Norway to raise a joint stock to defray the expences of a second voyage  but applying  to the King for h [ ... ] s permission and pro [ ... ] , [ ... ] known sufferings , [ ... ] his former voy [ ... ] , M [ ... ] told him , he had already been [ ... ] many of his subjects , and [ ... ] to seek to murder [ ... ] Monk gave a quick reply , [ ... ]


Capt. [ ... ] ke [ ... ] and Capt. James were the [ ... ] engaged in this discovery  the [ ... ] in a King 's frigate , victualled for eighteen months , the other in a small vessel of seventy ton [ ... ] , built at Bristol on purpose  victualled and equipped by private adventurers .


Captain [ ... ] departed in the spring of 1631 , [ ... ] all the western bays uncovered by former [ ... ] , examined the westermost part of Huds [ ... ] n 's Bay , and returned in 1632 .
He pub [ ... ] shed a pompous account of his discoveries , which , however , was never much regarded .


On the [ ... ] of May , 1631 , Captain James set [ ... ] from the Severn 's mouth , and on the [ ... ] th of June cleared Hudson 's Streights , where he found himself so pestered with broken [ ... ] , to [ ... ] it out of his power to prosecute his [ ... ] to the north-westward , as he had [ ... ]  he therefore ordered his master to steer west south-wes [ ... ] , and on the 27th of July , after [ ... ] staining most dreadful shocks , found [ ... ] so fast among the ice , that notwithsstand [ ... ] ng it blew a hard gale , and all [ ... ] , she [ ... ] ed no more than if she had  been in a dry dock .
It was now that the men first began to murmur , and the Captain himself was not without his fears [ ... ] should here be frozen [ ... ] and obliged [ ... ] in the middle of the [ ... ] .
By an observa [ ... ] [ ... ] ch they made upon the ice , they found that they were in latitude [ ... ] 8 deg .
54 min .
[ ... ] .


On the 5th of next month to their great joy the ice opened , and on the 6th they were again [ ... ] clear sea .
On the 1 [ ... ] th , seeing some break [ ... ] [ ... ] , and loo [ ... ] ing to clear them , the ship [ ... ] uddenly struck upon the rocks , and received three dreadful shocks , but the swell heaved her [ ... ] , and on pumping she made no water .


They were now [ ... ] bered with rocks , as [ ... ] had been with ice , and in the most [ ... ] [ ... ] ation that can be conceived , and so [ ... ] two nights and two days , every mo [ ... ] expecting to be dashed to pieces .
On the [ ... ] clearing up they saw land from the north - [ ... ] est to the south-east by east , with rocks and [ ... ] kers .
On the 16th they weighed and made [ ... ] , when a storm arose and drove them within [ ... ] ght of Port Nelson .
On the 17th they stood to the southward .
On the 20th they made land , [ ... ] 67 degrees north , where they cast anchor , and call'd it the Principality of South Wales .


Having weighed , on the 27th they set sail , [ ... ] the evening came in sight of higher land .


On the 29th they saw a sail , which proved to be Captain Fox , already mentioned .
They [ ... ] together , and , after exchanging mutual [ ... ] , parted .


Captain James kept coasting along the shore [ ... ] make discoveries , and Captain Fox made the [ ... ] of h [ ... ] s way for England .


The Captain now began to think of a con [ ... ] nt place to winter in .
In this attempt  they met with so many disasters , that at last having no hope left , they began to prepare themselves to make a good end of a miserable life .
On the 10th they lost their shallop , tho ' lashed to the ship by two hawsers , and to their inexpressible grief their boat was almost rendered irreparable .


Winter now be [ ... ] to set in a pace , the nights long , the days close and foggy , the seas rough , and nothing but s [ ... ] oals and broken land to navigate .
Added to all these the men began to sicken , an universal de [ ... ] ection to prevail , and in proportion [ ... ] their distresses increased their strength to [ ... ] up against them grew less every day .


On the [ ... ] th of November , being in latitude 5 [ ... ] [ ... ] north , they [ ... ] in with an island , from [ ... ] [ ... ] mpossible to depart .
The [ ... ] were quite worn down with fatigue , the [ ... ] not to be [ ... ] led , the ropes [ ... ] , and the deck knee deep in snow .
In [ ... ] condition they built a [ ... ] on shore for the sick , and in this tent they kept fires continually burning night and day , but the [ ... ] fast , that beer , and even sp [ ... ] r [ ... ] ts , froze by the fire-side .


The suffering of the Captain and crew from the latter [ ... ] of October when they landed , t [ ... ] ll the 2d of July , when they departed , are hardly to be parelle [ ... ] ed .


This was the last voyage that was undertaken for the discovery of a north-west passage , till that of Captain Middleton , already related .
From all which , and the opinion of Captain James after his re [ ... ] urn , there is great reason to [ ... ] , that what we have said of a north-east passage is likewise true of a passage by the north-west , that it most certainly exists , but will never be found prac [ ... ] cable for mercantile purposes .


FINIS .
Notes * .
M. Bougainville every where calls these islands the Isles Mal [ ... ] u [ ... ] es  but we shall call them by the name of Falkland 's Islands , which was given them by our countryman , Strong , in 1689 .
* .
This description will , of course , be found when we come to give an account of that voyage .
* .
Cape Fendu , in the original .
† .
Longue Rue .

