
BOOK I. CHAPTER I .
THE JAR OF HONEY .
IT was the sweetest month of the sweet young year !
The month when the earth grows more spacious because the light clouds have soared to such dizzy heights in the infinitely receding blue of heaven .
The sun as yet shines with a tempered ardour , almost as if from tenderness for the soft young things too weak to bear the full stress of his beams .
Every little wind then wandering under heaven is sweet , like the message of some loved one dwelling afar .
Stray sunbeams thrill us with tremors of joy , and in the blithe carol of returning birds the yearning heart finds a happy augury of reunion with its dear departed .
O blessed spring days !
is there anything on earth comparable to the page : 2 innocent delight with which you inspire us ?
And what adds such a gracious charm to this pleasure is the reflection that the whole world is made an equally welcome guest to the inexhaustible feast thus spread out on the green gladsome earth .
Spring , in its way , is as great a leveller as death .
The poor , the aged , the unhappy are in its sight as worthy to be caressed by the youngest sunbeam , by the most fragrant of breezes , as their more favoured fellow-creatures .
It is to the former , indeed , O Spring , that is reserved the subtlest enchantment of thy smiles .
For the happy can never experience to the full the healing strength which resides in thy influence .
It is to the lonely , the weak , the unfortunate , those whom man in his reckless search after power and pleasure has roughly thrust from his path , to whom alone is revealed that ineffable tenderness which thy sunshine manifests to the sprouting green leaves and the frail flowers of the youngling year .
No  they know not the infinite sweetness of thy balmy breath , O spring , who have never arisen out of grief as from the dark vault of a sepulchre , and , with the dews of anguish yet fresh on their brow , seen the gleam of the April sun athwart the thaw of falling tears .
With how shy , and tremulous , and fearful a joy , lest even in the apprehension it fade , do they humbly acknowledge that even for them a glory yet shines in the fugitive hours , and a hope is blown from the peaks of the morning .
They and joy then meet like dear friends who parting in anger have long dwelt apart and now , at the moment of final reconciliation , hang back a little with half-averted eyes ere with a low cry they fall into each other 's arms .
page : 3 Yes !
there was no doubt about it , spring had come at last .
Even D - - , that most sleepy of South German towns , shook off its lethargy and became on a sudden preternaturally alive with light and laughter .
For in upon every street shone and nodded the vine-clad hills , their aërial azure fading away into that of the sky  the music of running waters , so long congealed in the fountains , filled the public place once more with a murmur , sounding like an accompaniment to the blithe chatter of girls where they stood leisurely filling their pitchers with the sparkling water  birds flitted from roof to roof , chirping and twittering till the very atmosphere seemed to transform itself into song  and high above the roofs , higher than any bird 's flight , soared the luminous white clouds whose shadows fled dreamlike across the surface of the enfolding hills .
It is in the great sunlit market-place , however , that the life of the town converges  a gay , multicoloured scene , of which the ancient Minster , with its great grave masses cowing the sunshine where it falls , forms the background  in and out among the tapering minor spires flit grey , pink-eyed pigeons , settling every now and then on the projections of the quaintly-carved capitals  while little dæmons , grinning from gargoyles and window bosses , appear to be making fantastic grimaces at the crowd eagerly buying and selling below .
Judging from these impressive preparations , whatever else might move at a sluggish pace in the worthy citizens ' organisms , their digestive apparatus was anything but sluggish , and almost seemed to have achieved the desideratum of perpetual motion .
What with the chaffering , chattering , cheapening of page : 4 maids , matrons , and market-women , the cackling of geese , grunting of pigs , and crowing of cocks , the rumbling of carts , and the protracted shrillness of infants ' cries placed in undignified positions by excited mammas , while engaged in hotly-contested bargains , the confusion of tongues equalled that of a Babel in miniature .
The most trifling purchase was seemingly a feat not to be attempted without the exercise of superior tactics .
For a cook of the highest grade goes to market with a sense of responsibility but little inferior to that of a general on the eve of a battle .
And , after carefully-planned attacks , sham retreats , delicately-executed skirmishes , and final onslaught , how triumphant is the homeward march of the conquering heroine , attended by the cackling , hissing , and squealing of her captured booty !
Instead of so important a personage , however , let us rather follow the respectable housewife  Frau Lichtenfeld , who , engaged in voluble talk with her gossip Frau Obertribunalprocurator Hopfengärtner , makes her way homewards on this April morning of the year 1846 .
After parting from her companion , the first named lady still proceeds along the Silberstrasse the main thoroughfare of D - - , till she reaches the last house of the town , standing by itself in a garden some paces back from the high road , which here assumed quite a rural character .
It was a spreading house with high grey roof , and windows on each side of the door  its gay green shutters , harmonizing with the cream-coloured walls , were either shut , or fastened back by revolving iron clamps .
At its back stretched a long grassy garden , page : 5 left to grow much at its own sweet will , and interspersed with fruit-trees , now covered with buds that seemed on tiptoe to burst into blossom .
Just as the middle-aged woman enters at the front door , a young girl standing at the end of this garden is trying with all her might to unlatch the bolt of the lumbering old garden gate , grown rusty during the long disuse of winter .
Before she has succeeded , however , in thrusting back the bolt , a tiny child issues from the house , and darts at full speed down the garden , its golden confusion of hair gleaming above the grass like a living sunflower .
`` Mina , Mina , '' it calls out in childish treble , `` you have forgotten the jar for the honey , and mother 's just back from market and coming after you ! ''
`` Mina , Mina , you have forgotten the jar for the honey ! ''
calls out in harsher tones of remonstrance Frau Professorinn Lichtenfeld , coming excitedly along the path , and flourishing the article in question to and fro .
`` I declare , '' she goes on , `` little Lulu here , though she 's but three years old , God bless her , will soon be the more sensible of the two  but then , she 's not ' a Hans gape i ' the air ! ' ''
With these words she puts the jar in the girl 's basket , and undoing the gate for her slightly pushes her forth .
She has scarcely shut the gate , however , before she shouts after the retreating figure : `` Whatever you do , Mina , remember your grandmother 's rheumatic cordial . ''
Whether Mina heard this exhortation is doubtful , as in her eagerness to see her grandmother she was already many steps on her way .
Nor did she in any page : 6 marked degree relax her speed till , towards noon , she reached a diminutive house situated on the slope of one of the lower of that range of hills which encircled the town .
This cot , standing in its own vineyard , and partly hidden by a row of enormous beehives , was the home of Mina 's grandmother .
Here the happiest hours of her childhood had been passed , and it seemed but yesterday she had fancied it to be a half-way house to heaven .
Why , had she not actually once believed the story that the sunflowers blazing in a row there were baby suns put out to nurse , till they should be in a fit condition for their heavenly duties , and taken it into her head that the swarms of bees were truant stars who had run away from their celestial tasks to make love to the flowers of earth ?
After several ineffectual raps , the door was at length opened by a wizened yet hale old woman , whose shrunken countenance disappeared behind the voluminous starched frills of a huge mob-cap .
At sight of her favourite grandchild , her still bright eyes blinked with joy athwart their environment of countless wrinkles .
`` Grandmother , '' cried Mina , raising her voice to its highest pitch , `` mother and Lulu and all the boys have sent more love than I found it possible to carry up the hill .
And mother sends you a fresh supply of her cordial for rheumatism , which is stronger than usual , she says .
Hans and Conrad asked me to bring you this fish which they caught yesterday . ''
( A perch about the length of a finger , looking very dead , in a cabbage leaf . )
`` And Hans begs you will keep all caterpillars with crimson page : 7 spots on a flesh-coloured ground with the leaves they feed on till he can come for them in his holidays  while Conrad entreats you will not forget that it is his turn to climb the big cherry tree .
Lulu tore herself from this best beloved of dolls because she says you will find her such good company in bed . ''
( That the doll had lost its hair and one arm possibly enhanced the sacrifice . )
`` And , let me see - dear me - I have quite forgotten the messages of the other boys , '' broke off Mina , with her peculiar silvery little laugh  then added , in a sweet , deprecating way , `` And I , granny , have brought you nothing - nothing at all . ''
`` You have brought me yourself , little love - by far the best message and medicine of all , '' retorted the old lady , with the sort of expression one has when inhaling the fragrance of a fresh-gathered bunch of roses .
`` But here I stand chattering , '' she exclaimed , `` quite forgetting that my pet has had a long , fatiguing walk already , and must be quite tired by this time . ''
Therewith , the good old dame began bustling about the room , attended in all her comings and goings by a dilapidated raven , who although purblind and lame of one foot , hopped behind her with the grave dignity of a mute at a funeral .
By degrees she now extracted from a variety of cupboards , deftly hidden in the walls , a number of delicacies , which , with the help of Mina , were soon spread out on the snow-white tablecloth .
Grandmother and grandchild sat down cosily to a meal of brown bread and butter , honey , preserved fruit , and a big jug brimful of cream ( the former chiefly enjoying it by proxy , one could see )  the raven , who formed part of the company , being treated with respectful awe by page : 8 Mina , and regaled now and then with choicest titbits , which he persisted in carrying off and hiding in dark nooks , where he thought himself safe from observation .
When the simple feast was over Mina , from long habit , drew a footstool close to her grandmother 's brown leather easy-chair , and with her toes curled up and her chin propped between her hands , said , in a coaxing voice , `` Granny , now tell us all about the past . ''
This old , old woman , whose hair was white as with the snow of eighty winters , had been young once like herself and been fallen in love with !
What an inexhaustible romance to this young girl , who had only twice in her life peeped furtively into a real downright novel !
Nothing loth her grandmother began from her copious stock of experience , industriously plying her knitting-needles the while , and Mina , listening open-eyed , said never a word till , abruptly rising from her seat , she exclaimed that she had outstayed her time .
The old woman now filled Mina 's jar with her finest honey , adding many injunctions to be careful , it being the last of the kind which she possessed .
She remained standing in the doorway watching the receding figure of her grandchild till a sunlit April shower drove her indoors .
But Mina , as she danced rather than walked down the hill , listened with delight to the patter of the big bright raindrops , with which the sun , as if in play , pelted the earth , laughing all the while in the face of the storm  presently the valley , in which lay the white houses of the town , was spanned from hill to hill by a mighty rainbow , while under it , page : 9 across a ridge on which it dipped , a flock of sheep defiled slowly one by one , thrown off in bright relief from the green , rain-sparkling slope .
The girl 's road this time took her through a small wood , in which the vegetation had just attained that stage when the trees , some still bare , others just budding and blossoming , others again already covered with delicate foliage , resemble more nearly a green glimmering exhalation which a breath of air may dispel than an actually enduring growth of earth .
This effect was still further enhanced at present by that hazy bloom peculiar to afternoons in spring , and which now seemed to invest the entire scene in some diviner medium than that of our common atmosphere .
No wonder Mina lingered lovingly at every step she took , for was it not April within as well as around her , and did she not feel as though suddenly roused from long unconscious slumbers to the infinite beauty and mystery of the world ?
In the hidden recesses of her heart was a stir and flutter as if there also sweet , shy things were gradually unfolding themselves , so that for the first time she had a dim apprehension of the profound affinity of nature around and within her .
But this dreamy mood was soon dispelled by childish glee , when at a curve in the path she came upon a dell where violets literally seemed to gush from the sod , till she fancied she heard them whispering in the breeze , `` Please gather us , gather us ! ''
and what could a kind-hearted damsel do after that but go down on her knees , pluck them by handfuls , and knot them together in a big , fragrant bunch ?
She had scarcely achieved this to her satisfaction when page : 10 her attention was caught by a butterfly which , floating past her , settled on a flower about a stone 's - throw off , spreading out its glowing wings as though to challenge her admiration .
The young girl stood quite still , scarcely venturing to breathe lest she should startle this etherial creature .
Then recollecting how joyfully her brother would welcome so beautiful a specimen to his collection , she softly untied the strings of her broad-brimmed hat , and gliding forward on tiptoe , brought it suddenly down on the flower on which the butterfly had alighted .
She was too late , however , for , like a winged flower driven from its stem , the latter hovered for some time in front of her , then settled on the trunk of a tree , but flew off as she approached .
Thus in hot but fruitless pursuit Mina continued to run on , till she found herself all at once on the brink of a pool in whose crystalline depths the wood was mirroring itself like a youthful beauty smiling at herself in the looking-glass .
So magical , indeed , was the aspect of this canopy of trees , with their soft , ruddy tassels and bright , almost golden , leaves , and its transfigured reflection below , that for the moment she forgot the object of her chase , and when she again looked round it had vanished !
Hot and breathless as she was , the girl threw herself on a low green bank shelving down to the water 's edge , and with her roughened curly head pillowed on a cluster of hyacinths , she soon fell sound asleep .
And in her sleep she dreamed that she was still pursuing the butterfly she had so ardently longed to capture .
Only that now it was much larger , more mysteriously beautiful , and that its shifting tints , scintillating with a lustre page : 11 as of precious stones , faded ever and anon to a silvery pallor , which flashed as suddenly into renewed brilliancy , and revealed letters , words , and fiery signs covering its broad wings and crossing them in all directions , which as they caught the maiden 's eye kindled a still keener desire for its possession .
She had a haunting sense , indeed , that the happiness of her own life , nay , that more potent issues , depended on her success in this chase , and on her unriddling the bright but evanescent hieroglyphs which so whetted her curiosity .
But ever as she thought she had seized the prize - behold it was but idle air , while the luminous wings now twinkling aloft , afar , shone out fair but inaccessible as the midnight stars .
Nothing daunted , however , she ran on and on , and as she ran , the fantastic branches of twilight trees seemed catching at her garments , as though to hold her back , or lifting lean , tremulous fingers to warn her from her mad pursuit .
Then , before she was aware , she had strayed into a lovely dell , white with innumerable lilies , and , poised on the fairest , with its wonderful wings outspread , behold the butterfly !
She stretched out her hand , heaved a sigh of expectancy , and almost tremblingly tightened the clasp of her fingers , but uttered a loud scream on her hand being stung , finding to her horror that instead of the dainty insect she had got hold of a big venomous spider .
In her effort to shake it off she awoke with a confused sense of hearing her own cry echoed by the solitude around .
Who has not experienced the bewildering sensation of being abruptly awakened from a vivid dream , in which actual sense impressions have become inwoven with the fantastic images of the brain till it seems for page : 12 the moment almost imposssibleimpossible to disentangle the two ?
This was Mina 's case .
She looked around confusedly , still faintly shivering with her dream , when she beheld the cause of the noise in two boys who were violently battering and pommelling each other on a small grass plot behind her .
The roughest and biggest was holding the lesser one by the back of his waistband and administering a perfect battery of blows here , there , and everywhere .
But the advantage was not entirely on his side  for the smaller lad had clutched him by his fierce red hair , standing all on end , and as if on fire with the fury of the combat .
Moreover , his head being perforce in a depressed condition , he had converted it into a battering-ram , with which he violently assailed his oppressor between the ribs , to the extreme detriment of his wind .
So their chances stood pretty even , and cries and blows redoubled with the difficulty of victory .
But what puzzled Mina , who was anxiously looking on , was to see a bird fluttering in strange proximity to the heads of the angry boys , and now and again uttering a low , piteous cry instinct with fear and pain .
As she approached , however , the reason became clear .
Close to the lads , almost in danger of being crushed by their heels , lay a nest with five callow heads showing above the edge .
Nothing more soft , more helpless , more pitiable than those mute , half-open beaks and half-shut eyes , scarcely weaned as yet from the warm darkness of the maternal wings .
And how deeply the parent bird felt this utter nakedness of theirs !
How she yearned over them !
how fiercely her little heart throbbed against her side , till it seemed as though every downy page : 13 feather vibrated on her body !
It was truly a touching sight , this female bird hovering over her young , dimly comprehending their peril  yet how lost on these savage young natures only intent on wresting the spoil from each other !
Mina had come close up to the boys , and was now entreating them to restore the nest to the place whence they had taken it .
But seeing that her words had no effect , she hastily fumbled in her pockets for a few stray coins .
As usual , alas !
they were bare of any .
While she was turning her pockets inside out , and littering the grass with a queer assortment of odds and ends , the lads left off battering each other for a moment to stare at her , half stupidly and half cunningly .
But one of them crying out , `` I found it , 't is mine , you rogue  '' the other shouted , `` I 'm the strongest , and I 'll keep it  '' and so they fell to more violently than before .
A brilliant idea now occurred to Mina .
She remembered her jar of honey .
Taking it from her basket , all aglow with her eagerness , she held it out to the boys , who , nothing loth , snatched it from her dimpled hands .
This scene had not been unobserved , however  and now from behind one of the tree-trunks a stranger advanced , and with a faint smile lurking in the corners of his mouth , threw some silver to the boys , bidding them run as fast as their legs would let them  which they did accordingly , honey and all .
Then stooping , he gently lifted the nest from the grass , and watching the she-bird for a moment , lightly climbed one of the trees as though used to it , and replaced the nest of fledglings amidst its sheltering leaves .
A naïve little page : 14 burst of gladness betokened that the feathered mother rejoiced once more at the possession of her young .
Mina , absorbed in the proceeding , had remained immovable .
Now , however , as the stranger stood once more before her lifting his hat , with a gentle inclination of his head , she blushed as she returned his salute , and then rapidly walked away .
In her confusion she had dropped her whole treasure of violets .
She did not look back or she would have seen that some one stooped , and , carefully collecting the scattered flowers , hid them away in his breast  then , standing still for a moment , he shaded his eyes from the beams of the setting sun , as yet scarcely intercepted by the sparse foliage , and watched the receding figure as it lightly passed down an avenue of noble old beech trees .
The red sunlight just then glowing on their trunks touched the girl 's loose-flowing curls , transmuting their brown to reddest gold , so that , as if encircled by an aureole , she seemed passing down the porphyry pillars of some hushed cathedral aisle .
Hushed indeed , save for the call of the cuckoo - a faint  far-off call , wafted as by fragrant gusts from some dim green valley lying remote on the limits of the sunset .
When the girl had quite disappeared round an angle in the path , the stranger started as from a trance and strode hastily down the same avenue , and when he had passed , shadows as of evening slowly swept over the silent and solitary wood .
page : 15 CHAPTER II .
A GERMAN COFFEE PARTY .
THREE days had elapsed since Mina 's adventure in the wood .
But Frau Lichtenfeld had not yet consoled herself for the loss of her honey .
When she heard her daughter 's story she was so amazed that she even forgot to scold her .
Give away a jar of her finest honey , forsooth , when she was getting up her half-yearly coffee party , and could not make her `` honey-cakes '' without it  the cakes of all others in which she excelled - it was past comprehension !
In spite of her disappointment , the good lady was determined to make her party eclipse those of her rivals .
And to this end she turned a very whirlwind of a woman .
Not that she was ever idle - idleness being in her eyes well nigh as heinous a crime as theft - but the steady trade-wind of her activity now blew a violent gale , so that her children scattered at her advent like leaves before a high wind .
On the first day , broom in hand , and head swathed page : 16 like a mummy , she attacked the dust , her sworn enemy , climbing and ducking with the agility of a wild cat as she routed it from its favourite strongholds - the furniture being huddled on the landing , mostly with its legs sticking in the air .
On the second day , with tucked-up petticoats , she went about sluicing floor after floor , till , like a female Neptune , she had brought a flood about the place .
But on the third day dryness was restored again , and order and symmetry were evoked from chaos .
Then there ensued such a boiling and baking , whipping of cream , beating of eggs and roasting of coffee , as filled the children with ravishment .
At last everything was in readiness for the guests .
The floor of the best room had been sufficiently polished to endanger the necks of the lady visitors on their way to pay their respects to the lady of the house .
The most conspicuous , if not most beautiful , article of furniture in the room was the high , white porcelain stove adorned with brass bands , and supported by way of ornament what looked like four winged claws of a beast of prey .
Near it , highly polished too , stood a piece of furniture much in use with great smokers such as the late Herr Professor Lichtenfeld was in his time , but forgotten in polite English circles .
In the corner opposite the stove , a walnut étagère was covered with yellow Bohemian glass , Swiss wood carvings , and a quite surprising number of florid birthday cups and saucers with large inscriptions , all invoking blessings or imploring remembrance .
A red damask sofa with bolster cushions occupied the space opposite the windows , and dangling near it page : 17 was the broad green velvet bell-rope , heavily embroidered with yellow chenille and pearls .
The chairs , too , were mostly covered with cushions embroidered in Berlin wool , with a dog , a sheep , or a shepherd invariably represented in the centre .
Curtains partly of red damask , partly of white muslin , were elaborately festooned into metal holders , which none but the mistress 's own hand ever ventured to disarrange .
On a side cupboard between the windows ticked a gilt clock under its glass case , while the works moving the hands also turned a spiral jet of glass , which issued like water from a lion 's mouth , as well as the grindstone of a Cupid of similar metal , who was sharpening an arrow .
This clock was always inspected with wondrous awe by Conrad and Otto on the rare occasions when they were permitted to enter these sacred precincts .
On either hand of it was placed an alabaster vase of gaudily-painted wax flowers , likewise under glass .
Above the sofa two life-size family portraits represented Herr Professor and Frau Lichtenfeld in the days of their youth .
The Frau Professorinn , née Elise Duttenhofer , was depicted with a leathery but high-coloured complexion , bright brown eyes , and dark brown hair tightly drawn off the face , àla chinoise , and fastened right on the top of the head in elaborate puffs , while a spiral curl , then known by the French word accroche-cœur , was gummed to each side of her face .
Her green satin dress , with enormous puffs at the sleeves , was made very low , displaying arms and shoulders that did honour to the page : 18 fattening qualities of the national `` Mehlspeisen , '' or flour and milk diet .
The Professor 's portrait , hanging on the darker side , seemed chiefly noticeable for shirt-frill , shirt-collar , and lank reddish hair .
But whoever cared to scrutinize it closer might have detected , even through the mediocre execution of a somewhat characterless physiognomy , an expression of singular earnestness and sweetness , and in the dreamy blue eyes a sort of inverted gaze as of a man always looking inwards or backwards .
These oil pictures were not cracked like English works , but looked in a fine state of preservation , owing to Frau Lichtenfeld 's habit of polishing them once in three months with a piece of fat bacon and a silk handkerchief .
The gilt frames of poorest pattern had not , however , profited much by this , the gold being considerably rubbed off in the process .
Frau Lichtenfeld herself , arrayed in a black silk gown - got on the christening day of her first-born - sat bolt upright under her portrait in the crispest of caps and lilac ribbons  while beside her , in imitation of her deportment , sat Lulu , with her golden hair primly oiled and curled .
Mina in disgrace , left without orders to attend , had gladly enough made her escape from the tittle-tattle which she dreaded .
The large round table in front of the sofa ought to have groaned - if ever table before the days of spirit-rapping did groan - under its load of cakes .
Here were `` Zuckerbretzeln , '' `` Zwieback , '' and `` Bunt , '' `` Mandeltorten , '' and `` Mohrenköpfe , '' all national delicacies with untranslatable names .
When the clock struck three the ladies gradually page : 19 assembled - gentlemen are of course excluded from these solemn rites .
After many complimentary speeches and mutual protestations as to who should take the place of honour on the sofa , they settled down amidst much rustling of skirts .
And presently , when they had partaken of the excellent coffee and other good things provided for them , their tongues buzzed busily to the accompaniment of their knitting needles .
`` Yes , yes , my dear Frau Obertribunalprocurator , '' answered Frau Lichtenfeld to something said in praise of Lulu  `` the poor child was born after her father 's death , you remember , and takes after our family , of course .
She 's quite a comfort already , follows me about like a mouse , actually helps me to lay the tablecloth , born little housewife that she is  but the Duttenhofers always were a practical lot , so different from the poor Lichtenfelds . ''
( During this discourse Lulu was giving proof of her practicality by a demure but continuous consumption of the cakes . )
`` Yes , I might say that I did but one unpractical thing in my life - not that I mean to say that I repented it - repentance is so unpractical - I 'm alluding of course to my marrying the poor dear Professor , blessed be his memory .
And Mina , you know , takes after her father , more 's the pity .
She 's always up in the clouds , but now since the Countess has taken the bel étage , she 's more past my management than ever - not but that her manners are mending , and high time they should , too . ''
At the mention of the Countess all the ladies pricked up their ears , and so keen was their curiosity on this subject that they not only left off praising their children , abusing their husbands , and bewailing the degeneracy page : 20 of servants , but suffered their knitting to drop in their laps , so that an almost ominous silence succeeded the clatter .
The Frau Professorinn , who enjoyed the importance of knowing a little , though in truth only a very little , more than her neighbours on this subject , was not slow to avail herself of the advantage to the utmost .
`` Yes , '' she continued , fired by the curiosity of her listeners  `` one afternoon , come a month last general mending-day , when Theresa , who was helping me with the large basket , was just telling me that the Frau Geheimräthin Fick had it from her husband that the Countess - just think of it - was a spy in the pay of the Czar of Russia , when there came a tap at the door , and before I had time to say , ` Come in , ' in walked - - '' `` Not the Countess ? ''
exclaimed some of the ladies , interrogatively .
`` The Countess herself , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld , casting a triumphant glance around , `` looking so grand and stately , with yards of black velvet sweeping my floor like a broom , that it quite took my breath away  and curtsying to me as if I were her Serene Highness herself .
Our Grand Duchess has not near such a carriage , though she is the niece of the Emperor of all the Russias ! ''
`` I always thought that she must be some unfortunate great lady in exile , '' complacently interposed Frau Obertribunalprocurator Hopfengärtner , a stout , florid woman , inclined to take a hopeful view of things .
`` Now do tell us , what did you do , my dear Frau Professorinn ? ''
`` Why , I was so stunned that I forgot even to ask page : 21 her to sit down  but the beautiful lady sat down beside me , and said smiling ( I never saw any one smile or sit down with such an air ) , ` Pray , ' said she , ` accept my excuses , dear madam , for venturing to intrude thus abruptly upon you , but I have a favour to ask which I hope you will not refuse . ' ''
`` A favour to ask ! ''
echoed three or four of the ladies , nodding or shaking their heads , as they happened to be charitably or enviously inclined .
`` Yes , '' continued the Professorinn , eagerly  `` she said she had caught sight of my Mina in the garden , and that there was something in the child 's face she had taken a fancy to , and would like to paint into a picture - for it seems , instead of doing embroidery or crochet , she amuses herself with dabbling in colours . ''
`` Hm , hm , does she paint ? ''
murmured an acid little spinster , with snuff-coloured locks and a complexion like kitchen soap .
`` I always thought for my part that she was an impostor . ''
`` Ah , my dear Fräulein von Griesbach , are you not slightly confounding the justifiable æsthetic make-believe with morals ? ''
lisped Frau Scherer , in a plaintive voice .
`` You may imagine , '' continued Frau Lichtenfeld , ignoring the interlude , `` that I could not help feeling flattered at such a great lady noticing my chit of a girl , who is well enough to be sure , but no beauty . ''
`` Her hair is against her , no doubt , '' remarked the maiden of the straight , dingy locks  `` it shines like copper , and is always in a tangle . ''
`` Well , '' resumed Mina 's mother , bristling somewhat page : 22 - for though she was always abusing her daughter , she did not relish any one else doing so - `` of course I was only too delighted to have my daughter 's portrait taken , and told her that I had myself been painted in my youth by the Grand Duke 's own painter , Herr Fridolin , ( here the good woman cast an admiring glance at the likeness above her ) , still I could not help asking her what she saw in the girl .
There was Wolf now , the flower of the flock , I should have thought he would have suited her ladyship far better , I said  but the Countess only smiled , shook her head , and repeated it was my girl she wanted .
You see she told me she was lonely , had taken a fancy to her , and was quite grateful to me for granting her request .
Think of that !
There was ever so much I wanted to say and ask her , but before I had time to begin like , she was on her feet , bowing to me again in that stately way , and gone . ''
`` And are you not afraid , honoured Frau Professorinn , '' remarked the maiden lady , `` that poor Mina 's head may be turned in finding herself singled out in this way by someone so much above her in station ? ''
`` With all her faults the girl 's not vain , '' retorted the mother  `` and the Countess often talks to her in French , you know , which is as good as if we paid for a finishing school , and will make quite a lady of her , as I say . ''
`` Before taking her for a pattern , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach again , `` I think it would be advisable to know why this Countess , young , beautiful , and fabulously rich , they say , has come ` snowing ' into our midst from the Lord knows where , and lives quasi hidden in this house ( a house , begging your pardon for saying so , gracious Frau Professorinn , so remote from page : 23 the fashionable quarter of the town ) , and who , instead of showing a natural wish to mingle in the elegant gaieties of the nobility , has positively , I hear , refused access to her presence to some of our leading magnates , and never yet shown herself at our theatre or public promenade . ''
`` Well , well , '' remarked Frau Obertribunalprocurator , in a soothing voice , `` they do say that the poor Countess was the wife of a great Polish nobleman , who , on being sent into exile , went travelling from country to country with her till they settled down in Alexandria .
There , incredible as it seems , the infatuated man was converted to the religion of Mohammed  and so thought it a duty enjoined by his new faith , I am told , to marry at least three wives besides his own to show what a zealous convert he was . ''
`` The poor dear Countess ! ''
commiserated some of the ladies , though they had already believed and listened to dozens of tales of the most contradictory character respecting her .
`` When the Countess found that all her expostulations with that shameless renegade , her husband , were in vain , '' continued Frau Hopfengärtner , `` she left him secretly ( some say she has property of her own  others that she made off with the better part of his , and serve him right , too )  and so has been in hiding ever since for fear her rascal of a husband might do her some mischief , being of a vindictive and desperate character . ''
`` These demagogues and revolutionists always are , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach .
`` But , my dear Frau Obertribunalprocurator , I have it on the best authority , '' interposed another lady , who had hitherto been silent , `` that this Countess for all her page : 24 grand airs was neither more nor less than a singer , who starred it in every capital of Europe , till she married a pseudo-Italian Count , who played the devil with her money at cards , till in self-defence she ran away from him and came here to hide herself . ''
`` Singer , indeed ! ''
burst out the indignant Frau Lichtenfeld .
`` As if I did not know a great lady when I saw one , when my father , the Medicinalrath Duttenhofer , attended half the great ladies in the land .
Why , our Grand Duchess has not such a bearing as she . ''
`` Still there 's a mystery round her , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach , with a little spiteful toss of her head .
`` Yes , that 's it  there 's a mystery , '' said the other ladies , significantly looking at each other and shaking their heads .
After this the conversation veered round to the inexhaustible topic of servants and their enormities , which was suddenly interrupted , however , by Lulu 's loud sobbing .
The child had remained unobserved for some time , and was standing near the table with one of its little fists pressed into its eye  and the other holding a large slice of unfinished cake .
On being asked why she was crying , Lulu presently recovered sufficient breath to confess her piteous plight : `` She could n't eat any moreShe could n't eat any morenot any more - of all the sweeties there . ''
`` Go , take the cake to your brothers , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld  `` I hear them coming  the poor boys have more cause for crying than you , silly child . ''
And now at a still early hour the ladies began folding up their knitting and other work , and , curtseying themselves out with many parting compliments , broke up the conclave of coffee and scandal .
page : [ 25 ] CHAPTER III .
MOONLIGHT MYSTERIES .
WHILE on the floor below the ladies were still at their gossip , Mina was ensconced in her own particular sanctum or bower .
We say bower , because it was green as any bird 's , and as high too , adjoining the roof in fact , so that the big pear tree at the back gave her an occasional call , tapping at the window if closed , and if open , waving a friendly palm in token of good fellowship .
Mina never quite satisfied herself , however , whether the greeting were really for her , or for the swallows who in summer inhabited the storey above , or , in common parlance , the eaves .
But considering the terms of close intimacy on which they all stood , it would have been absurd to inquire too jealously as to the object of these delicate attentions .
Did they not share most things in common , even to a kind of masonic speech , which none but the initiated could understand ?
The room just mentioned was small , like its inhabitant , but nearly as bright and fresh .
Ivy , growing in page : 26 plain earthenware jars , had been trained round the walls , which though simply whitewashed were thus tapestried in quite a festive manner .
Here and there a space had been cleared of leaves in order to hang a few bookshelves , or to fix brackets on which stood vases always filled with fresh flowers .
From the ceiling in the centre hung a flower-vessel in terra cotta , very much like an old Grecian lamp in shape , whence the long tendrils of a creeper fell in graceful festoons .
Against the wall , opposite the window , a narrow bedstead was placed half-shrouded in white curtains , and covered by one of those patchwork counterpanes which are such an eloquent proof of thrift and industry .
A narrow strip of carpet , likewise of patchwork , lay beside the bed on the plain deal floor .
A table , covered with a faded green cloth , stood by the window  on it a globe with gold fish which , glowing like burnished copper , circled unceasingly round it , like an emblem of time itself .
Nor must we forget a mysterious book , bound in red morocco with a steel clasp and a lock and key to it , between whose leaves , had it been opened , would have been found pressed wild flowers and thoughts like flowers .
Now it was a wreath of forget-me-nots , now a pale tracery of primroses or flourish of violets , between which were traced , in a girlish hand , sometimes only a few words or lines , sometimes a verse or two .
What words ?
what verses ?
you ask .
Pry who dare into the secret heart of maidenhood  we shrink from such profanation !
Shut the book .
Come away .
Walls , carpets , chairs , and tables , however , do not alone constitute a room .
The inhabitant breathes his page : 27 own soul into the inanimate objects and stamps them with his seal .
Thus this little chamber seemed to be redolent of virginity , to smell of sweet fancies , to have dainty thoughts stored away amid its plain furniture , as lavender is laid between linen to keep it delicately fragrant .
Mina 's duties for the day were over .
She had toiled through the A B C with Lulu , through the grammar and geography lessons with her dreadfully unruly younger brothers , who could never be made to remember the difference between a noun and an adjective  and invariably struggled through the declensions with the feverish agitation of flies caught in a spider 's web , hopeless of ever getting out again in safety .
What mischief had they not again been up to this day ?
In the middle of a dictation , while carefully enunciating each syllable of the formidable word , `` Me-so-po-ta-mia , '' the teacher had been rudely disturbed , nay , absolutely routed , in her dignified gravity , by a multitudinous whirr of wings , darkly swarming about the room like another plague of Egypt .
For Hans , that ringleader in mischief , had opened on the sly the lid of a capacious box , wherein he had bred a colony of cockchafers , which , just ready for flight , rushed into space with a muffled whirr , covering the walls and curtains , some even - oh , horror !
- perhaps attracted by its brightness , settling on Mina 's hair , thus driving her from the room with arms uplifted , amid tumultuous uproar and screams and laughter .
Not rarely , indeed , did the lessons terminate in such a climax of confusion and horror .
But Mina had now fled to her sanctum under the page : 28 roof .
It was always hushed and quiet there .
So hushed that she could hear the little brook hastily lapping among the weeds and grasses as it flowed past the garden  so quiet that the lisping of leaves , that the mere stir of a spray and the intermittent babble of Nature 's arrant gossip , the wind , were as distinctly audible as the speech of some familiar friend .
At times also , with almost startling distinctness , one heard the distant barking of dogs , the laughter of children at play , or the lowing of cattle trudging home to the stalls .
Curled up on the brown well-worn cushion of the window sill , her favourite seat , by the way , the girl overlooked the garden , then the fields extending to the range of hills that had ever enclosed her horizon , behind which , as it seemed to her , lay the world , with all its boundless life and mystery .
A book of poems lay in her lap , but she was not reading .
She was indulging in one of those day-dreams so dear to girlhood , in which a world , unsubstantial as the cloudland of an evening sky , is constructed out of nothing , to the unspeakable delight of the builder thereof .
Suddenly the girl , leaning out of the window , gives a start and glad exclamation - `` The swallows !
The swallows ! ''
There is a shrill twittering , an ebullition of song , and a number of swallows dart through the air , or hang in clusters to the trees above her .
Not for long , however .
Ere that eastern cloud , all aglow with the sunset , has faded , they have taken flight once more , and the black flash of their wings has subsided behind the hills .
A pair , however , has remained , executing a thousand page : 29 graceful evolutions before Mina 's eyes .
Now they almost brush her cheek with the tip of their pointed wings , vanish , reappear , dive low , razing the grass , then soar aloft , rising higher and higher , till they seem mere specks against the faint hues of the twilight sky .
Here they are again , hovering round the old nest , inspecting it now from this side , now from that , twittering in shrill tones , more expressive than any words , of their heartfelt joy at being at home once more in the old familiar place .
It seemed as though they would never have done .
But , then , they had so much to relate to their old playfellows , Mina and the pear tree - of south lands far over sea , of palm-trees and pyramids , of tawny stretches of sand , burnt through , bare of shrub and herb , like a bone gnawed and licked clean by the hot lips of the sun  then of home sickness and the long , long voyage  of the Peak of Teneriffe , that obelisk of the ocean , where they alit a cloud of wings , and the weaklings drifted helpless like leaves in a high wind , and were swept from the precipices , fluttering down , down into the yawning deep , never to fly any more with the fleet-winged swarm , fly north to the green land of streams , to the land of the lime and the slim-leaved willow tree and steeples numberless  to the land where their nests , whether clinging close to poor man 's thatch , Gothic roof , or castled wall , were ever hailed as harbingers of luck .
Yes , all this and much more did Mina hear as she sat listening to the blithe gossip of the swallows , which subsided at last with subsiding day , abandoning the earth to silence and twilight .
Like a low prelude , which page : 30 by and by will usher in some mellow and perfect piece of music , a vaporous silver light faintly indicated the spot above the hills where the moon would rise anon .
* * * * * But , hark !
What sounds are these ?
Too aërial almost to be evoked by human fingers , too full of harmony for a bird 's singing !
An illusion , no doubt  for not a breath of air even ruffles the profound silence of the night .
Mina listens again in amazement .
Surely these indescribably delicate , elf-like sounds are produced by the strings of a guitar .
Impossible !
Whence , wherefore , should come a musician to this sequestered spot ?
Shyly wondering , the girl peeps furtively through the half-open window  all she sees , however , is the blurred shadow of the blossoming pear tree on the grass beneath , but dimly lit as yet by the rising moon .
Still the music swells into fuller , more continuous melody  and who is this singing with low , seductive voice - Low singing through the night I go , And as the starry beams Into the mellow moonlight flow , I 'll melt into thy dreams .
Thou ` rt like the mellow moon , fair maid , I like that humble star Which , by her light enthralled and swayed , Stands worshipping afar .
The song was ended .
Only a few expiring chords still resounded from the instrument , then its strings burst into a wild , almost unearthly twanging , at once exquisite and demoniacal , which , growing fainter , page : 31 receded as if through the old garden gate and into the footpath beyond .
Although the moon had gradually risen above the hills , and was now bleaching the untrimmed grass of the garden and silvering the milk-white , thick-clustered blossoms of the pear tree , not a trace of the mysterious musician was anywhere visible .
The exquisite charm of the music had certainly ravished Mina to such a degree that her curiosity had been merged in admiration .
She lay quite still , with her face hidden on her arm , and in her childlike simplicity never thought that either song or singer could have any connection with herself .
It was like part of the spring to her  as if the sounds were being exhaled like scent from the opening flowers .
While she thus brooded , striving to recall the exquisite air to her inner sense once more , she did not mark a tapping at her door .
Presently it opened , and a tall woman softly entered , and was going toward Mina , as though with familiar greeting , when she suddenly stood quite still in an attitude of strained attention .
One could see her distinctly , illuminated as she was by the level moonlight , which , streaming through the window into the middle of the room , made a sort of chequerwork on the boards there .
It was to this light perhaps that the beautiful features owed some of their abnormal pallor , a pallor still enhanced by the coal-black hair coiled in heavy plaits round her head , and by the full-coloured coral of lips which even the moonshine could not neutralize .
As she stood thus , with uplifted head and a haunting smile , faint snatches of the wild exquisite air seemed to be wafted from afar with a sudden gust of wind .
page : 32 However incoherent the tune , its fantastic cadence seemed strangely to move this lady , for , apparently under its influence , she began slowly swaying herself to and fro , the undulating curves of her beautiful body being instinct with a dreamy voluptuousness , a sleepy grace , echoed , so to speak , by the suppressed glow of her dark eyes and the inaudible melody framed by her moving lips .
Gradually , however , this rhythmic motion seemed to communicate a passionate impulse to her whole being .
As her gestures became more excited , a black lace scarf fell from her ivory-white arms and shoulders , and now advancing , now retreating , she snapped her fingers with a passionate cry , and glancing over her shoulder , smiled bewitchingly as though she saw some one there in the empty air .
All at once , however , she uttered a moan , and bending low , pressed her hand to her ankle , while a slight shiver passed over her frame .
In this attitude she stood as rigid as a statue , only in the dilated pupils of her dazzling eyes there was a flicker as of fear , pain , or yearning ecstasy .
In another instant her limbs , her features , nay , her very eyebrows , seemed convulsed with emotion , then with abrupt , violent gesticulations , with quivering lips , with heaving bosom , with head thrown back in passionate self-abandonment , chaunting fragments of a wildly thrilling melody , she threaded the bewildering figures of an intricate and mysterious dance .
Her long hair , shaken down by the vehemence of her movements , and black as some raven 's plumage , flapped loosely behind her , while large death 's - head moth swooped on flurried wing above this tall figure fitfully whirling in and out of the pale moonshine .
page : 33 All at once the dancer burst into mocking , seemingly irrepressible laughter .
She had caught sight of Mina 's gaze , half amazement , half terror , fixed full upon her : in the midst of her unaccountable excitement this seemed to have produced a violent revulsion to mirth in her .
Mina abruptly roused from her deep absorption , had , indeed , been breathlessly watching this singular spectacle .
Her sensations were utterly bewildering .
She felt almost like a person labouring under a nightmare , whose lips refuse to make a sound .
Had her friend gone mad ?
Or what was it that suddenly seemed to transform the beautiful woman she admired so enthusiastically into a weird demoniacal apparition ?
What was it that invested the enchantment of her smile , her eyes , her laughter , with the chill of an ominous foreboding ?
This whole scene , long as it has taken to describe , lasted scarcely a few minutes .
The lady , whatever might have been the cause of her previous extraordinary conduct , now moved towards the window with her habitual languid grace , and placing one hand , sparkling with many rings , under Mina 's chin , said with a slightly sarcastic intonation in her voice - `` What a child it is , with its little head stuffed full of fairies , witches , enchantments dire , and such fantastical fiddle-faddle !
Fanciful to the extent of seeing even in me , inoffensive mortal of flesh and blood that I am , some hateful sorceress weaving spells by moonlight to bring ruin on my dearest friends . ''
She laughed again and said , `` Forgive me , but you are too comic , Mina  indeed , you are ! ''
page : 34 So saying she threw one arm lightly round the girl 's shoulders and , leaning far out of the window , gazed intently across the hushed , moonlit landscape , across whose grey breadths of light not so much as the shadow of a moving cloud was to be seen .
Long , long she looked , sometimes faintly humming snatches of the same fantastic tune .
Suddenly she drew in her head again with an impatient action , and turning to Mina said - `` No wonder you grow fanciful , my child , if you will sit here by the hour with your head exposed to the naked glare of this moon  or is there possibly another attraction here  it 's not the man in , but under the moon , perhaps , that lends charm to solitude ? ''
She looked keenly at Mina for an instant as if she would read her through arid through but seeing her ingenuous face flush up with quick indignation and surprise , she laughed again lightly as she said - `` I was only teazing you , ma petite  it 's much too good a girl , I know , even to harbour such wicked thoughts .
But by the way , Mina , I could never have believed that my dancing , which was once upon a time accounted the most graceful thing in the world , could have given any one the fright it did you ! ''
`` I am sorry , so sorry , '' stammered the girl in an apologetic tone  `` it came upon me in such an unexpected , sudden manner - and then the moonlight , I think , made you look changed and strange , as if - - '' But interrupting herself confusedly , she continued , `` Oh , yes , it was beautiful , too beautiful !
and I shall not be frightened now if you will dance again , dearest Countess . ''
`` No , no , '' exclaimed the other , with passionate vehemence , page : 35 making an involuntary gesture with her hand , as though to wave back some influence which might once more blindly dominate her senses - `` think you I would dance thus for your pleasure , girl ?
It was that I thought I heard that to which my limbs - - No matter , no matter !
An illusion , no doubt , caused by this detestable moonlight .
Well , well !
does it not often haunt me in dreams ?
But there , Mina , now you are opening your eyes again in that wide , wondering fashion , which is so irritating at times  you should get out of that habit .
There are stranger things , let me tell you , in the lives of men and women - for all you look down upon them as commonplace mortals - than in all the fairy tales with which you have crammed your brain , till you ca n't hear a cat mew but you think there 's magic in it .
There , I do n't mean to scold .
I simply came up to see if you could sit to me to-morrow .
I wanted to seek you out myself in your loft haunt for once , instead of sending Louise .
Come early , for I want to send your portrait to the exhibition at Düsseldorf , you know .
Now good-night  do n't dream of me as a witch who flies out of window pirouetting on a broomstick . ''
So saying her visitor lightly kissed Mina on the cheek , and again tittered ironically .
The latter saw her friend to the door , and profusely apologized for her inability to light her down the narrow , break-neck stairs .
page : [ 36 ] CHAPTER IV .
THE COUNTESS STARAJA .
IT was past one o'clock the next day when Mina , at last dismissed by her mother , came tripping down the staircase , taking two or three steps at a time , and thereby giving such an impetus to her course that she ran some danger of precipitately flying through the glass door opening on the bel étage .
The spruce French lady 's maid told her , as usual , that her mistress was not dressed yet , but Madame would receive her in her bedroom .
Although the day outside was brilliant with that shrill distinctness of light often peculiar to spring , within all was subdued to low semitones of colour , imparting to this room an air of mysterious quietude and absolute seclusion .
A certain liliputian reflection of the outer world was visible , however , in an antique mirror , wherein the green fragment of a landscape receded far into a background tremulous with vernal gold .
All clamours , and echoes of clamorous hours , seemed page : 37 to be for ever excluded from this dim , perfumed chamber , where , in a mellow twilight , a woman was sitting , combing out her long hair , darkly shed about her smooth white shoulders .
Intently absorbed in watching her own reflection in the looking-glass before her , she did not notice the girl 's entrance till the latter , putting an arm round her , had saluted her with a kiss  when looking up with a faintly ironical smile , she tapped Mina on the cheek , saying - `` So you are no longer afraid of me , little one !
Truly I did not know whether , crediting me , as it seemed , with the gifts of magic and witchcraft , you did not intend cutting me in future , for fear I should cast some spell upon you , more especially as I am painting your portrait just now . ''
At the remembrance of the weird , almost baleful impression which her fascinating friend had produced on her overwrought fancy on the previous night , Mina burst into a merry laugh , and then with a sudden transition from her exuberant gaiety to a certain impassioned earnestness , she exclaimed fondly , `` You have indeed cast a spell on me , or how account for my worship of you , Countess ?
But what could painting my portrait have to do with the matter ? ''
`` Oh , '' replied the Countess , carelessly , slowly passing and repassing a tortoise-shell comb through her luxuriant black hair , `` I was alluding to an Eastern superstition , according to which the person who paints your portrait gets a hold for better or worse over your soul - and mostly for worse , '' she added under her breath , with a certain gleam in her eyes .
`` Therefore , page : 38 beware , beware , little one , how you entrust your portrait to my keeping  who knows but the day may come when I shall imperil your soul 's happiness to serve mine . ''
While she was speaking she dexterously twisted her heavy plaits round a dagger-like hair-skewer at the back of her head , her movements being somewhat impeded , however , by her companion , who had impetuously flung her arms round her neck exclaiming - `` Do you think if there were truth in this superstition I would not trust myself in effigy in your hands ? ''
`` Well , let 's not waste any more time , for I mean to put the finishing touches to your portrait today , '' said the Countess , passing Mina 's arm in her own , and leading her down the corridor into a lofty room , half studio , half salon , in which the smell of oil paint was disguised by rich , enervating perfumes .
On the lady 's entrance two macaws of peculiarly brilliant plumage began violently swinging themselves backwards and forwards in their rings and screaming vociferously .
Mina always felt herself transported into some enchanted demesne of the Arabian Nights on entering this apartment , so gorgeous to her , accustomed as she was only to the most homely style of living and furniture .
She was never tired of admiring the costly knick-knacks and ornaments , not only arranged on cabinets and stands , but carelessly strewn about in all directions .
Here a delicately tinted Louis Quinze fan was half buried under a pile of music  there bottles of attar of roses , worth their weight in gold , costly old laces and page : 39 richly embroidered scarfs were mixed up with brushes and coloured chalks , while Indian cashemeres and other Eastern fabrics were flung over sofas , or even on the floor , like common rugs .
What attracted the girl more than anything , however , were the pictures , chiefly portraits , on the walls , and a large portfolio filled with sketches of people and places .
She now again turned over these latter while the Countess was arranging the draperies for a background to her liking , and getting her palette ready .
Suddenly Mina came upon a sketch which she wondered at not having noticed before , and which exercised a kind of fascination over her .
It was a sunny Italian scene such as Leopold Robert loved to paint .
An open space on the Chiaja at Naples , about the hour of sunset .
A young girl of Capri , queenlike of bearing , but with a tambourine in her hand , seemingly dancing to the strains of two street musicians in the midst of a circle of ragged girls children , and fishermen .
Her inimitable grace of motion was dashed off in few colours by the hand of a master .
On the extreme foreground , leaning against the parapet , a few scratches of charcoal conveyed the impression of a tall man , seen in what the French call a profil perdu , intently gazing , as it seemed , at the beautiful dancing figure .
It was the vivid impression of a scene that had evidently stamped itself on a great artist 's mind , sunlight and all .
`` Oh , '' cried Mina , impulsively rising and taking the sketch to her friend 's side , `` what a wonderful thing this is !
Dear me , as I look at it , it seems to remind me - why , it is - - '' page : 40 But before she had time to finish what she was going to say , the Countess had snatched the sketch from the girl 's hand , and tossing it into a corner , said imperiously , with a sudden flashing of the eyes - `` I wish you would sit still , Mina , and hold your head in one position , if only for ten minutes , or I shall once for all throw your portrait in the fire .
What a little plague you are , always rummaging amidst this old litter of mine ! ''
Then , as if to make up for her irritable manner , she chucked the girl caressingly under the chin and said - `` There , pet , just raise your head a trifle more in that direction  no , more to that side .
You can study my copy of the famous ` Mona Lisa ' yonder , while I try to put in your eyes . ''
The Countess now painted away with fitful energy .
She put the eyes in  she took a piece of rag and rubbed them out again .
Then she put them in once more of a different colour .
For a while she looked at them , then she threw down her mallstick , stepped back from her easel , and said petulantly - `` There 's something very perverse about you , Mina .
Do what I will your eyes still get that tragic look in my picture , though they are sunny enough of themselves . ''
It must be admitted here that the Countess , though she had occasional flashes of inspiration , was not what would be called a good artist .
Once she had had the opportunity of studying under a great master , and she might perhaps have attained considerable excellence had it not been for an unaccountable perversity , which no teaching or remonstrance could break her of .
This was a curious preference for some colours , and an page : 41 equally curious aversion to others , which at certain times seemed to grow quite uncontrollable .
Thus though she occasionally hit off a very successful likeness , she usually injured it through too lavish use of red or hot pigments in contradistinction to the blue or cold ones .
Nevertheless , she had already exhibited several portraits and one or two pictures , and at the time we are writing of she was determined ( for reasons of her own ) to make an income by art .
She had taken a good deal of pains with Mina 's portrait , therefore , and had on the whole successfully rendered the softly rounded outlines of the face and the general character of the features .
While trying to put the finishing touches to the breezy ripple of her bright chestnut hair , she said - `` What magnificent hair you have , child !
Only Titian could have done justice to it .
Now be honest for once with me , and tell me how many of the good youths of this town have paid you compliments on it , for all your simple looks . ''
Mina , who had never speculated much on her personal appearance , was more unconscious of herself than many a child , and thought the Countess must be mocking her , her hair having always been a source of trouble to her .
`` The boys often joke me about my hair , '' she said , smiling in a deprecating way  `` and when mother 's out of temper with me , she says it 's part of my general contrariness  and I think she fancies it has something to do with poor papa 's having been such a great Sanskrit scholar . ''
page : 42 The Countess , bursting into a peal of laughter , cried - `` Oh , Mina , Mina , what an oddity you are !
But you 'll learn differently when you get a lover one of these days .
A pretty girl like you is as sure to attract them as a candle does moths .
Nay , there 's nothing to look so shocked about  friendship wo n't always suffice you , I prophesy .
Now promise me , Mina , when the first lover makes his appearance that you 'll make me your mother confessor .
There 's that Lieutenant Knapp  now , he seems a tidy youth , and from the way he clatters up the staircase rattling his sword , I should think his impatience to see a certain - - '' `` Please , please , do n't talk like that , '' said Mina , moving restlessly in her chair  `` if you will only put up with me and be my friend , dearest Countess , that is all I care about . ''
`` Yes , yes , '' replied the latter , `` I do very well for the present , but suppose I were to put your friendship to the test . ''
`` Put it to any test you like ! ''
exclaimed Mina , impetuously jumping up and kissing the Countess , who was looking at her with her enigmatic smile  `` and see what there is I would not sacrifice , were it possible for such a one as me to do anything for your happiness . ''
`` Oh , Mina , these are weighty words , but I do believe you are fond of me and have a faithful heart .
Well , '' she continued , passing her hand over the girl 's hair  `` if I should ever be in trouble , be sure I 'll remember that there is a little friend - - '' A rap at the door interrupted the speaker  and the lady 's - maid entered and handed a letter with several foreign-looking postmarks to her mistress .
The latter page : 43 took it languidly enough , but on seeing the handwriting uttered an exclamation , and feverishly tore it open .
In a moment she had devoured the contents of the letter , and then began perusing it a second time more slowly and carefully .
There were only a few lines , indeed , and these seemed written as though each letter had cost the writer a supreme effort .
A wild excitement had suddenly taken the place of the lady 's habitual languor , and she rapidly paced up and down the long room , while an irrepressible look of triumph flashed for an instant over her features .
`` He must and shall be mine yet ! ''
she muttered between her teeth .
It was clear she had absolutely forgotten Mina 's presence .
She rang the bell with violence , and when the maid entered , said hurriedly - `` Pack up my things at once , Louise , and send Hector round to Herr Professor Sontheim to say I must see him immediately on pressing business : let him also get everything ready for our departure , as I start for Russia to-morrow morning . ''
Louise , like the well-bred maid she was , took the tidings without any signs of surprise , as though this was simply one of her mistress 's many caprices .
As she was leaving the room the Countess called her back , saying - `` Wait a minute , I will write a note to Herr Sontheim myself . ''
She sat down at her secretaire , dashed off a few lines , sprinkled them with gold sand , sealed the note and handed it to the maid , who immediately left the room .
She then for the third time began conning the contents of the letter , which ran as follow - page : 44 `` Though I know everything , yet I forgive .
My honour and loyalty protect you from my revenge , had I wished for any .
I love you unchangeably , and all I ask for the ruin you have wrought is , Come to me before it .
is too late !
I am dying , but your secret shall die with me ! ''
Having now engraved every word on her memory , the Countess lit a candle , and holding the letter to the flame , saw it shrivel up in a moment  she then hurried out of the room , without a word to Mina , apparently to give some further directions about her approaching journey .
page : [ 45 ] CHAPTER V. LEAVE-TAKING .
SOME time elapsed before the Countess returned .
Her face was even paler than its wont , and her eyes glittered more restlessly .
When she caught sight of Mina , who for the last hour had been crying like a forlorn child , with her head buried in the cushions of the sofa , she was for the first time reminded of her existence .
The girl on hearing of this sudden journey to Russia had , indeed , been fairly aghast .
To her small-town notions of a journey , as a thing that must be arranged , planned , and thought of at least a month beforehand , such a proceeding was simply incredible .
An then to lose her friend in this abrupt manner !
the only friend she had ever had , and to whom she had attached herself with all the ardour of a nature which for the first time finds the shapes of beauty that have haunted it incorporated in a living form .
What a contrast was there not to the imaginative page : 46 Mina between the prim Philistines of D - - , with their interminable twaddle , and this noble lady , who , in her eyes , was invested with the double charm of beauty and mystery !
And now the Countess was not only going to leave her thus suddenly , but while still present in the body seemed already absent in the spirit .
`` Why , pet , '' said the latter , who for the last minute or so had been teazing one of her macaws , now sitting down beside Mina , `` what 's the matter ?
One would think you had the toothache , or is it that you are so sorry I am going to Russia ? ''
Mina raised her head , and looking fondly at her , said with brimming eyes , `` To Russia !
all that long way , and so soon !
No , no , you can not be going yet ! ''
`` Yes , yes , child , to Russia !
Why if I were going to the Antipodes you could not look more woebegone .
Cheer up !
The world is not such a large place as you imagine , and people are always knocking up against their next-door neighbours in the most unlikely places .
We shall meet again  Mina , never fear . ''
`` But you are going far , far away , '' sighed Mina , with a droop of the corners of her mouth , as if she were trying not to cry again .
But it was no use trying  in another minute she was sobbing as though a terrible misfortune had befallen her .
Poor child !
to her it was the first experience of parting from one she held dear , and fancied that she held still infinitely dearer  and a first parting is always a foretaste of death .
`` Why she is actually crying in earnest , the little tender-hearted goose ! ''
exclaimed the Countess , taking her scented pocket-handkerchief and daintily wiping page : 47 away the tears that were still rolling down Mina 's cheeks .
`` Now do be good and do n't cry any more , or I must ring for Louise to bring me another handkerchief .
Besides , crying is bad for the eyes , and yours are too bright to spoil . ''
This playful tone , instead of cheering Mina , had the contrary effect  she felt suddenly quite lonely , and miles upon miles seemed already to intervene between her friend and herself .
`` Now , Mina , '' said the Countess , getting up and beginning to collect some of the knick-knacks scattered about , `` come and help me put some of these things together , like a good child .
There , '' she continued , taking up a coral necklace with a golden clasp , and passing it round Mina 's lovely cream-white throat , `` keep this in remembrance of me till we meet again . ''
Mina protested that the trinket was of too great value for her to accept , and that she did not want anything to remember her friend by .
But if she wished to make her a present at parting , would she give her that sketch of the dancing girl that bore such a wonderful likeness to herself .
She did not as yet know the relative value of the roughest sketch by a master and trinkets .
The Countess looked annoyed for an instant , then , shaking her head , said , laughing , `` Not so bad an exchange certainly , Mina  but what you ask is quite impossible . ''
Then the girl begged for some little sketch or portrait of her friend , but that too was denied , the Countess remarking that she had a dislike to giving away any likeness of herself .
page : 48 `` But do n't look so downcast , my child , '' she said , pulling Mina along with her to the other end of the room , where her easel and colour boxes were , and jumbling all her painting implements together in her haste .
`` You must come and stay with me some day , either at Paris or St. Petersburg , for I shall be rich now , very rich , perhaps .
Is there anything to astonish you so much in that , Mina ? ''
`` But you are very , very rich already , '' said Mina , to whom her friend had always appeared as revelling in the wealth of a Crœsus .
`` Oh , nonsense ! ''
exclaimed the Countess  `` I was getting poorer and poorer , and was going to turn artist for a living  but all that is changed now , '' she laughed .
`` When I 've settled down , you shall come to me , and we 'll introduce you to the world  and a lover , I dare say , will not be long in making his appearance on the stage , too .
But I 'm forgetting this levity is out of place , '' she said , as though recalling something to her mind , and assuming a sudden gravity which her eyes belied , however .
Mina had not been roused from her sorrow .
The prospect of going to stay with the Countess was certainly enchanting  but in the last hour she had gone through an experience painfully startling to her warm heart .
While the Countess was still busy getting together some of her property , there was another rap at the door , and a man of Falstaffian proportions was ushered in by the maid as Professor Sontheim .
He was chiefly noticeable for one of those powerful Germanic heads that look , and indeed are , a Cosmos in miniature .
His page : 49 eyes of an indefinite blue , and the rest of his features were disproportionately small compared to the massive outline of his square-set jaw and lofty forehead , whose vastness was increased by a complete absence of hair , save for a meagre bright red fringe , extending from the temples to the back of the head .
A man , however , usually finds a certain consolation for this lack of hair in the reflection that it gives him the appearance , at any rate , of having an abnormally large development of the cerebral organs .
`` Long hair , short wit , '' as the proverb has it , was a saying probably invented by a bald-pated person  the belief , no doubt , being a salve to the nakedness of his crown .
Leopold Sontheim , with his clothes hanging about him in a loose , random fashion , giving one the uneasy impression that on the slightest provocation they might come tumbling down all of a heap , was got up for this occasion in floods of clean , rumpled linen , of innumerable pleats , which his waistcoat of checked buff , rebellious with starch , always refused to cover .
His lavender-coloured pantaloons , of enormous width , were strapped down so as to project them almost over the shiny black tips of his light jean half-boots .
A brown tail-coat , ornamented with gilt buttons placed high between the shoulders , flapped about his portly figure , its long tails swaying from side to side as he walked .
Necktie he had none , but a velvet collar , a straw hat , and diamond studs  hideous in pattern , but of considerable value , completed a costume which , though creased , fluffy , and ill adapted to his red hair and pink complexion , the owner nevertheless knew to be in the last fashion .
To Mina 's astonishment Herr Sontheim seemed quite page : 50 at home in the room , though to her knowledge he had never been there before .
He was strangely excited , and on first entering seemed not to notice her , but was going straight towards the Countess in a rapid , vehement manner , when she said , glancing round at Mina - `` You must leave us for the present , my child  I have to consult Herr Sontheim on pressing and particular business . ''
But seeing Mina 's piteous expression , she added , `` If your mother permits it , mind you look in again this evening , little one  I wo n't take leave of you now . ''
Mina , who could not disguise her vexation at having her last interview with the Countess interrupted , hardly nodded to her old friend , who , for his part , seemed utterly unconscious of her presence or exit .
Scarcely had the door closed when the Countess motioning him to a chair , said , `` I 've sent for you because I must instantly leave for Russia , and there is no one I would turn to in a difficulty so soon as you , Herr Sontheim ! ''
`` Impossible !
You can not be cruel enough to leave us so soon , Countess ! ''
cried the gentleman , in a voice he vainly tried to render steady .
`` I must , indeed ! ''
replied the Countess .
`` For I have just received news necessitating my immediate departure for St. Petersburg .
But unprepared as I was , I must in the course of this day raise a sum of money not only sufficient to defray the expenses of so long a journey , but to settle all my outstanding accounts here , as it is quite uncertain when I may be able to return .
Now what would you advise , my page : 51 friend ?
I have some Brazilian bonds by me that you might sell on this emergency . ''
Herr Sontheim , instead of having taken the proffered chair , had been pacing up and down the room in great agitation .
He now stood still in front of the lady , exclaiming , `` Heavens , Countess , you ask the impossible with the charming peremptoriness of your sex !
Bonds can not be converted into ready money at a minute 's notice , at least in this dilatory town of ours  besides , the bank is just about to close .
Surely there is no such urgent haste , dearest lady ! ''
he said , looking at her entreatingly  `` only give me a little time to collect my thoughts , and everything shall be arranged to your entire satisfaction . ''
While he was speaking the Countess had been tapping the floor impatiently with her elegant Parisian slipper  she now suddenly raised her eyes to his face , exclaiming , `` Good God !
When one 's husband is dying far away in Russia is it a time to speak to me of delay ? ''
`` Your husband dying ! ''
echoed Herr Sontheim , taking two or three rapid strides across the room , while a deep colour suddenly crimsoned his face to the hair on his temples  then , sitting down close beside the Countess , he said , lowering his voice , `` Command me in everything , dear lady  all I have , and myself to boot , are entirely at your service  '' and in a still lower voice he added , `` Is it necessary for me to tell you so ? ''
Then , after a moment 's silence , as though the thought had only just occurred to him , he added , `` So sudden !
It must have been a dreadful shock to your feelings . ''
page : 52 The Countess lay back on the sofa covering her face with her hands .
Her bosom was heaving spasmodically , and one or two broken sobs convulsed her beautiful frame .
Quite beside himself at this sudden outburst of grief , Leopold Sontheim went down on his knees before the sufferer .
There was no one , luckily for him , to witness the feat .
`` I can not bear to see you suffer !
There is no man living worth one of those tears ! ''
he cried , in a voice quivering with emotion  and , seizing hold of one of her hands , he pressed it with the unconscious force of an athlete .
`` Oh , you are hurting me so ! ''
gasped the lady , with her lips curiously twitching , as though she were trying to overcome some emotion  and , withdrawing her hand , she pointed to the deep , red incision of a ring which the Professor 's pressure had left on one of her long , shapely fingers .
`` Oh , pardon , pardon my brutality , dearest lady ! ''
cried Herr Sontheim with deep contrition , pressing his lips on the spot indicated .
`` You are forgetting my position , sir , and the object of your visit here , '' said the Countess , with a certain irritation of tone , as she motioned him to rise - a feat which the Professor at length achieved .
`` There is no time to lose , '' she continued  `` if you really wish to help me in this matter , you must do so at once . ''
Sontheim sat down , and , slowly passing his hand across his forehead , as though to clear his ideas , said , after a moment 's cogitation , with quite an altered manner , and the tone of a man of business - `` As to those Brazilian bonds you mentioned , they page : 53 are bad things to negotiate at present .
But let 's see , what will you want about - you will be posting all the way - it can not after all cost you more than about nine hundred florins , and if you will permit me to advance you that sum , I shall esteem it a favour you are conferring on me , dearest lady .
I may say , '' he added , joyfully , `` that I have from about nine hundred to a thousand florins in savings ! ''
`` I thank you , my friend !
But I am sure you will understand that I can not think of accepting your generous offer .
And you have such very economical notions here in Germany , '' the Countess said , with the faintest smile .
`` Nine hundred florins will never do !
Besides , I 've just sent Hector to see about buying a carriage for me , and I must wind up my outstanding accounts here , as I mentioned before . ''
`` Let 's consider for a moment then , '' said the Professor , jumping up , and pacing to and fro again .
`` Oh , I forgot , there are my diamonds ! ''
cried the Countess , rising too , and begging Herr Sontheim to excuse her for a moment .
She left the room , returning , after an interval of a few minutes , with a large morocco case .
Opening it , she displayed a set of brilliants such as the dazzled Professor had never yet beheld .
`` How much are they worth ? ''
he exclaimed , rather awe-struck .
The Countess considered , and then said , indifferently , `` I think they were valued at fifty thousand florins by a jeweller in Paris .
I suppose you could sell them for me ? ''
`` Sell them ! ''
exclaimed Sontheim .
`` Oh , that were page : 54 impious !
Besides , they would n't give anything like a fair price for them here  if , indeed , you 'd find a customer to make an offer for them . ''
The Countess , who had carelessly taken up a bracelet and was slipping it on her arm , said , with a slight shrug of the shoulder , `` Instead of smoothing away difficulties , you do nothing but raise new ones , Herr Professor . ''
`` Only in your interest , dearest Countess , and because I would act for the best ! ''
exclaimed Sontheim , deprecatingly .
`` But I think I have hit on a plan that I hope will meet with your approbation .
Leave the diamonds with me , and let me advance you the twelve hundred florins you may require for immediate use  I shall manage to raise them somehow  then the moment I can get away , I will myself take your diamonds to Frankfort , and negotiate a loan for you with Ladenburg and Co. .
I can then settle all your debts here , if you will kindly leave directions to have the bills sent in to me , repay myself the trifling sum I shall have the felicity of lending you , and the rest , if you will favour me with your address shall be forwarded to you in draft from the bank at Frankfort , if you approve my scheme . ''
`` My dear friend , thank you a thousand times for all the trouble you are taking on my behalf , '' said the Countess , rewarding him with one of her most seductive smiles .
`` Nothing could be better than the scheme you propose .
When do you think you will be able to let me have the money ?
As for the drafts you spoke of , they had better not be sent on to me till I am sure of my movements - I will then send my address . ''
page : 55 `` Let me see , '' said Sontheim , pulling out a turnip-shaped silver repeater  `` it is now four o'clock  I will be back with the money at seven .
But , '' he cried , as though suddenly recollecting the state of the case , `` are you really going to undertake such a long , tedious journey all by yourself , with only servants ?
Is it safe ?
Ah ! ''
he cried , becoming excited again , and looking at her with glistening eyes .
`` Would I were the fortunate man to be allowed to escort you thither !
Is it not possible ? ''
he added , oblivious of everything else for the moment .
The Countess shook her head softly , and gave him a long look from under her half-drooped eyelids .
`` That , my friend , is impossible , '' she said , `` under the present melancholy circumstances  '' and she pressed her handkerchief to her eyes again .
`` But we are wasting time here , '' she continued , in an altered tone  `` if you can procure me this money , do it at once , there 's a good man ! ''
`` I hasten to do your bidding , my lady , '' cried Sontheim , raising her hand to his lips .
Then , seizing his hat , hurried to the door , where , turning round once more , he said , `` I will be back without fail at the time mentioned , '' and left the house deeply commiserating the beautiful woman .
The Countess had no sooner heard the street door close than , rising from the sofa and humming the popular tune - Oh qu'il est beau , qu'il est beau , qu'il est beau , Le Postilion de Lonjumeau , she passed into her bedroom , where her maid , busily page : 56 engaged in packing , was folding up a magnificent ruby-coloured velvet dress , trimmed with Venetian rose point .
`` What are you doing , you idiot !
Will you never learn the proper way of folding velvet ? ''
cried the Countess , in an irate voice , snatching the dress from the abigail 's hand , and giving her such a violent push that she sent her spinning against a large wardrobe , a corner of which bruised her shoulder .
When Mina returned , towards eight o'clock , to take a final leave of the Countess , to her surprise she saw Herr Sontheim with his hat in his hand , a wild look in his eyes , and broad red streaks furrowing his brow , rush past her on the landing without recognizing her .
page : [ 57 ] CHAPTER VI .
WHITSUNTIDE AT THE SILBERBURG .
IT was Whitsuntide , and numbers of citizens with their wives and children thronged the streets on their way to the Silberburg , which lay just on the outskirts of the town .
The Silberburg , in sooth , seemed a spot purposely created for the celebration of this most poetic of all festivals .
It was a beautiful garden , planted on a hill , in the centre of which stood a spacious pavilion , and near it a semicircular stand embowered in frees , but opening on to a lawn in front , and capable of affording ample accommodation to the excellent orchestra , which , on certain grand occasions like the present , replaced the usual military band .
The before-mentioned grass-plot , smooth as an English lawn , reached nearly to the hill 's edge , but was fenced off by a screen of lime-trees extending along one side of it .
Beyond these a growth of underwood formed a green garden wall , not high enough , however , to shut out the page : 58 view into a cozy strip of valley , chequered with kitchen gardens and orchards , and threaded here and there with the silver glint of a rivulet .
To the north and south of the lawn extended small groves of shrubs and trees which at this season of the year were a perfect labyrinth of intermingled blossom .
Here clumps of laburnums showered their vegetable gold over the delicate cloud-like bloom of the lilac trees , there - like some gigantic chandelier on which May has kindled ten thousand tapers - a broad-boughed chestnut tree held its roseate blossoms aloft  while yonder , most poignant scented of flowers , pale jasmine stars gleamed athwart the gloomy green of their foliage .
Yes  the flowers had mustered in full force !
It seemed as though in their hot haste to put in an appearance at this festival , which they apparently regarded as given in their honour , some had hardly given themselves , time to smooth their petals , which looked as though still tumbled from sleep .
And now that the flowers were there to receive them , the children likewise appeared on the scene .
For this was pre-eminently a children 's festival , and the enjoyment of the grown-up folk consisted , to a great extent , in watching that of their little ones .
According to custom , most of the young girls were clad in white , and a prettier sight could hot well be imagined than that of children of all ages now gradually assembling on the lawn which they were to have entirely to themselves for their games and dances .
Their elders meanwhile were sitting round the numerous little tables , where the feminine occupants chiefly consumed coffee and cakes , while their male page : 59 relatives solaced themselves with beer and tobacco .
The mammas , it need scarcely be said , were fully occupied in admiring their children , and were constantly circulating backwards and forwards between them and their seats .
The young ladies , whose turn was to come later in the evening , when there was to be a ball in the pavilion , were now walking about by twos and threes , or standing in groups , chatting and laughing with the young men , few of whom had arrived as yet  others , again , were busily flitting hither and thither amongst the children .
Just as the orchestra struck up one of Strauss 's animating waltzes , two men engaged in eager conversation issued from a by-path and seated themselves at one of the tables , so as to command a full view of the entire festive scene .
`` I have hardly yet recovered from the pleasant surprise of meeting you thus unexpectedly ! ''
ejaculated one , whose portly proportions were unmistakably those of Professor Sontheim .
`` To think that you have actually been here three whole weeks , and only now made yourself known to your old comrade !
Shame , shame , Emanuel !
But you always were a whimsical , unaccountable fellow , for all your genius .
I bet that , according to our proverb , you 'll only cut your wisdom teeth at forty , true son of Suabia that you are . ''
The other laughed , and said , `` That 's right , Leopold  I see you have not forgotten your old views respecting me .
I remember how , when we were long-haired students together , you used to express them to me with that charming courtesy and candour for which we were renowned .
You , I remember , used to be considered page : 60 the sentimental savage of our circle , and we even nicknamed you ` Isegrimm . '
But now you have , to all appearance , developed into a full-grown élégant , '' glancing slightly at the fashionable points of his friend 's costume .
`` Well , well , '' rejoined Sontheim , not without complacency , `` from the raw youth to the man of the world there 's room for progress .
Life , I begin to find , is not such a bad invention after all .
Once I was as defenceless as an unfledged chicken , and drew in my horns at every breath  but now I 'm armed like a porcupine , and able to hold my own against man - and woman too . ''
`` Then hold your own with the waiter and catch him as he passes , or our wit may run too dry , '' the stranger remarked in bantering tone .
`` Now he is here , in what liquor fit for the gods shall we celebrate this auspicious meeting , Emanuel ? ''
`` Let 's have Johannisberger , '' said the one addressed , `` for so joyful a meeting can only be drunk to in the most precious of wines . ''
`` I have no objection to make  '' replied the other , slightly raising his eyebrows .
`` But , now that I think of it , '' he added , with a comically pensive expression , `` the good old adage recommends wine after beer , but deprecates beer after wine .
Yes , yes !
it 's never wise to neglect these saws .
Waiter !
some bottles of Bairish beer and a bottle of Johannisberger . ''
Characteristic of the two men was the beverage each had selected  indeed , broadly speaking , all Germans might be classified as either beer-imbibers or wine-imbibers , and such a classification might well take the place of ethnographical or political subdivisions .
page : 61 Thus no greater contrast could have been found than these two friends , who seemed to have met after a long lapse of years .
One huge of bulk , ruddy of face , and `` puffed up '' with health , as it were  the other tall and thin of person , slightly hollow-chested , and seeming rather to be borne along than to walk , with eyes of chameleon tints , and long , strong hair that always seemed to have a storm in it .
The same character was expressed in the hands , with their knotted veins , never for an instant still  they might have served as models for some saint 's or martyr 's , so expressive of spiritual energy were the long , pale fingers .
`` After all , ` on revient toujours à ses premiers amours ! ' ''
the latter abruptly exclaimed , as with a mixture of humour and pathos he looked at the scene before him .
`` What innocence , freshness , simplicity reigns here , Leopold !
What artless joy in young and old !
Look at those children there , crowned as of old with moss and flowers , and dancing in a ring !
And those sturdy , broad-cheeked youngsters defiling in procession two and two , bearing branches of birch and oak and elder .
Just look at those blooming girls all in white , their long tresses plaited with ribbons , carrying wild strawberries and cream and milk rolls to feed those little ones there .
It makes my mouth water , I swear .
Would n't I like to be that small urchin yonder whom the tall girl is feeding so daintily with her own beautiful fingers , for fear , I suppose , of his daubing himself all over with the juice of her fruit . ''
While thus talking with a certain whimsical tone in his voice , the stranger every now and then cast a quick , searching look from end to end of the garden  and page : 62 suddenly , after one of those rapid glances , he said to his friend , `` Leopold , do you ever think of Elfrida now ? ''
The latter , who , though giving an occasional approving glance at the scene around him , had been more engaged in he demolition of an enormous black raddish , now drew the knife , with which he had helped himself to a piece of Swiss cheese , from between his lips , and said , with lugubrious mock gravity - `` I also was born in Arcadia , therefore it 's hardly fair to remind me of how you supplanted me .
But , to be serious , tell me about your life , Emanuel - your works , your plans for the future , whence you come thus abruptly , where you are going to from here .
Why , you have not even vouchsafed to tell me your reason for stealing upon us thus incognito , for all the world like Zeus when engaged in the pursuit of some fair mortal maid !
Come , I 'm not to be blinded  confess , therefore , confess as you were wont , old fellow .
And console yourself in advance , my son , with the reflection that , the more heinous your sins , the more soothing will it be to receive absolution for them .
Ah , '' he continued , stroking his portly double chin , `` I really possess the chief requisites of a father confessor .
Begin  I listen . ''
Emanuel laughed impatiently , and , shrugging his shoulders , said , `` Do you not see , Leopold , that I shrank from the idea of the fuss that would be made ?
My life turns perpetually in a dazzling , deafening circle .
I eat , drink , work , talk , even sleep in a fever .
Ah , you here in Arcadia know nothing of the incessant wear and excitement of life in great cities . ''
page : 63 `` Arcadia ! ''
grunted the Professor , parenthetically .
`` I see you have forgotten our coffee parties and carnivals . ''
`` It may seem unkind , Leopold , '' the other continued , `` that I even avoided you on my first arrival  but you will understand me when I tell you that I needed - I might almost say , for the sake of my reason , absolutely needed - this short spell of complete solitude . ''
Leopold Sontheim took his friend 's emaciated hand in his own broad fleshy one , and gave it a strong but silent grip .
`` Yes , '' continued Emanuel , softly , `` I will tell you some day , when we have greater privacy , for what more particular reason I craved with an exceeding craving for silence , obscurity , peace .
After an absence of well-nigh twenty years I was suddenly seized with a burning desire to revisit once more the scenes and places of my childhood .
`` It was in Paris , in a crowded concert-room , when this wish seized me .
Suddenly , as in the vividness of a dream , the hills , the woods , the vineyards of my native town rose beckoningly before me  I heard the swallow call me , and the stork , and the passionate sob of the nightingale wailed from afar : ` Why tarriest thou so long ? '
How describe the kind of pang I endured !
A hot , stinging sense of remorse enveloping my whole past , a fierce thirst to plunge back into memories in which my tired senses might be refreshed as in a bath .
` Home , home ! '
it cried in me .
And that same evening I settled my affairs as well as I could , took the post-cabriolet to Strasburg , and then came on here , on one of those beautiful spring mornings when everything in page : 64 the world seems to be born again except the poor human heart .
`` As I walked through the dear , drowsy streets of my native town  as I saw the blue hills nodding in on every street , I seemed to myself like a ghost revisiting the scenes of his former existence .
`` I did not dare look at my father 's house in the daytime - the house whence I had fled , which I had been forbidden to re-enter  and , before I could return and heal the bitter breach , he , whose creed had barred heart and home against me , had passed away suddenly , without word or sign .
Only in the quiet moonlight , when I could venture near unseen , did I dare pace to and fro on the pavement in front of it .
`` The same old elm trees still rustled in the night air as when I stood a child at my mother 's knee , repeating some hymn to her , or looking over the pictures of the old family Bible  but the familiar faces had vanished for ever !
`` I could not bear it .
I hurried away , Do you guess the spot I re-visited next ?
The wood , the wood , of course , Leopold .
I went up the well-known hill , and the delicate scent of the new-blown vines smote my nerves with a pang of mingled pleasure and pain .
`` But in the lapse of years , probably also owing to my excitement , I had forgotten the way , and went now to the right , now to the left , sniffing the air like a dog who has lost his master 's trail .
`` At last , however , I came upon a landmark - the little house commonly known as the Raven 's hut , where the grandmother of Elfrida used to live .
There it was with the bees humming about the blossoms , strangely page : 65 unaltered , yet , no doubt , long ago vacated by that kindly old dame who once moved so briskly about amongst her bee-hives , followed by the child and the old raven !
`` Suddenly , however , I came to a dead stand .
Who was that propping up a young plant against the wall ?
stooping painfully at her task ?
a lame raven limping stiffly at her side ?
Was it possible the beautiful child had been dead and buried so long , and that these two aged ones had remained unchanged , untouched by time and death !
`` With my heart beating violently , and trembling like a thief who dreads detection , I begged her to show me the nearest way to the Engelswald .
There was no fear , however , of her recognizing me .
The years had changed me out of all semblance to the favoured boy she was wont to entrust with Elfrida 's care .
`` She looked up at me with just the face I knew , and , pointing down , said , ` Keep straight along this path till you come to a brook further down , then turn to the left  following its course it will take you straight to a pool which is the finest bit of the wood .
It is well worth a stranger 's while to visit . '
The raven had limped up to me , and , cocking his head in such a fashion that his sound eye gazed straight up at me , his look of unfathomable sagacity seemed darkly to hint that it was labour lost to try and come over him .
`` I strode on rapidly  I felt as if I had seen a ghost . ''
` Here I am at last , ' cried I , catching sight of the water glimmering through the grey trunks of the beech trees .
`` As I looked down into that still , deep pool , across page : 66 whose surface the cloud-shadows drifted so languidly , there rose upon my soul , pathetic as the moon at midday , the memory of my first love .
The present was annihilated .
I was a boy once more .
My heart beat high with the first ecstatic thrill of hope and love . ''
` Here , ' I cried , ` are the trees which I climbed to get the birds ' nests in order to show her the speckled eggs so warmly and tenderly pressed each to each .
Yonder is the thicket where I gathered whortleberries and hazelnuts !
On the brink of this pool Elfrida used to sit , dabbling her rosy feet in the water , and with innocent coquetry watching the reflection of her beautiful face therein . ' ''
` Oh , beautiful face !
never has thy image left my heart , image of my first love  would to heaven thou hadst been my last also .
To die so young !
Never to wait till I came back to lay fame and wealth and love at your feet as I had sworn I would .
To die and leave me behind in a world where no one was ever again so intimately twined with my heart-strings ! '
`` Restlessly I paced the narrow woodland paths , and a pang of ineffable yearning seized me for the child that was dead , had been dead and buried long , long years ago .
Then - as all that lay between that first pure love and the present swept in one bitter wave of remembrance through my memory - I flung myself on the ground in a passion of sorrow , crying out , ` Elfrida , come back , oh , come back to me ! '
`` The sound of voices , the rustle of a dress , recalled me to my senses .
Loth to meet anything in human shape just then , I slid behind a clump of trees . ''
` Good God !
was I mad or dreaming ?
Was this page : 67 Elfrida come to life again at my call ?
the dead child re-risen , with the violets and daisies growing on her grave ? '
`` I stared blankly at the apparition  I passed my hand over my eyes , only thinking her one more spectral form come to haunt me on the paths we had trodden together in bygone years .
`` But no !
this was no dead child come to life again  neither was it a spirit of wood and water , though the hem of its dress was wet as a naiad 's , and its hands were , at that moment , stretched out in fond protection over beasts and birds like a beneficent fairy 's .
And yet , when it lifted its eyes to me , those eyes shining as with morning dew , I felt inexpressibly bewildered and amazed .
Those eyes , with the wide , unconscious gaze , so distinct in my mind from all others , were the eyes of Elfrida .
`` I had hard work not to say to her , ` So you have come at last , my child !
Come , when I called on you in utter weariness of heart .
Do not leave me again .
Stay , oh stay ! '
`` Nothing could have been more familiar than her presence .
I had great ado not to take her in my arms .
But before I had time to recover my presence of mind , before I had time to do anything but take off my hat and bow like a fool , she went her way , and the sun seemed to follow her . ''
`` Why , it all ends in smoke , like ` the shooting at Hornberg , ' '' grunted Professor Sontheim .
`` I expected some grand coup de thé , tre at the last , worthy of the consummate artist .
Take my word for it , your fairy nymph or spectre was in sober truth nothing but a page : 68 little goose of a girl , who most likely had stolen to the wood on the sly that she might wash her face in maydew , which our silly maids hereabouts credit not only with unlimited curative qualities for removing freckles , sunburn , c. , but with an occult power of making them beautiful for ever .
But you waved your wand of magic before her , and straightway she was transformed into a divinity . ''
`` Let 's have a bowl of maitrank , Leopold , '' said Emanuel , with a faint ironical smile .
`` Perhaps after a sufficient number of fragrant draughts you also will see fairies in all the fair ones about us . ''
`` Maitrank , capital !
I will go at once and see after the ingredients myself . ''
And the Professor went towards the pavilion with as much haste as his bulky stature admitted .
He had scarcely left his seat , however , than Emanuel , who had again restlessly glanced about him , gave a start , and then for a moment or two evidently subsided into brooding oblivion of everything around .
Suddenly , as if an idea had struck him , he left his seat with a vivacity peculiar to him , and strode to the stand where the musicians , after their vigorous efforts , had ceased playing for awhile .
Unobserved , he made his way to the leader of the first violins and whispered something in his ear .
The man almost bounded from his chair , but at a word from the stranger assumed an air of unconcern , and in another moment had quietly yielded him up his seat and violin .
page : [ 69 ] CHAPTER VII .
COMING OUT .
THE festival at the Silberburg was a more than commonly important one to the Lichtenfeld family  for it was to be the occasion of Mina 's introduction to society  an event equally thrilling to maidens , be they denizens of `` Krähwinkel '' or Belgravia .
The coming event had cast its all-engrossing shadow across the good widow 's thoughts for at least a month beforehand  and she might often have been seen in deep consultation with the seamstress , the maid of all work and her neighbourly gossips , Frau Obertribunalprocurator Hopfengärtner and Frau Scherer .
These two latter ladies had been summoned one afternoon by the anxious mother to discuss and critically weigh in the balance the respective merits of pink , white , and azure .
It was a knotty point , and so the ladies found it over their cups of afternoon coffee .
We must remark , however , by way of parenthesis , that page : 70 the occasion had not seemed to warrant the Frau Professorinn in having fresh coffee made for her guests , who were consequently now imbibing a rather indifferent-looking beverage , which , carefully saved at breakfast time , had since then been put to warm in the oven .
`` If I were you .
I should decide in favour of pink , '' said the Frau Obertribunalprocurator , emphatically  `` pink is a sweet pretty colour , and , to my thinking , always so becoming to dark eyes such as your Mina 's . '' ''
` Jugendzeit , Rosenzeit , ' as the poet has it , '' lisped Frau Scherer , who , under the impression of its imparting a certain elegance , habitually garnished her discourse with stray verses , proverbs , and pickings from her brother 's talk .
Such sentences , however , had frequently as little connection with her own words as the bits of parsley have with the cold mutton they are supposed to adorn .
`` Yes , yes , '' murmured Frau Lichtenfeld , pensively  `` a great deal is to be said in favour of pink , a very great deal .
Now that I think of it , it was pink , so it was , that I wore at my first ball . ''
And she complacently smoothed out the folds of her apron and gave a knowing smile , which implied more plainly than her words could : `` Ah , what conquests I could tell of , what triumphs , friends  and all owing to that pink dress , and those roses of genuine Parisian make .
That was the time , dear Frau Obertribunalprocurator , you remember my telling you , that the Chevalier von Tor said to me , in a burst of enthusiasm , ` Ah , beautiful Fräulein had I met such an enchanting vision of youth and beauty in days when I might have - ah - summoned up the courage - yes , the courage of aspi - aspiring page : 71 ring - ah - I should not be a lonely old bachelor - ah - but - `` What do you say to blue , now ? ''
remorselessly broke in the Frau Obertribunalprocurator , interrupting these tender reminiscences which she knew from a hundred previous experiences would meander on for at least half an hour if not turned , into other channels by a sudden diversion .
`` Blue 's heaven 's own hue so tender and true ! ''
exclaimed Frau Scherer , enthusiastically .
`` How heavenly sweet the maiden will look attired in a sky-blue robe ! ''
Therese , the seamstress , who , perched on a high step in the window , was deftly turning Frau Lichtenfeld 's old-fashioned grey brocade that had been on duty these twenty years , now leaned forward to join in the conversation .
She did half the dressmaking in the town , and was quite a character in her way .
Not only was she considered a kind of genius for the skill with which her nimble fingers turned old dresses into new , and appealed to in the last resort as to all matters of taste and fashion  but her knowledge as to what was , had been , and would be worn by every lady , whether of high or low degree , amounted to the miraculous .
`` Begging your pardon , gracious ladies , '' she said , while stitching away as fast as ever  `` and if I may be permitted to tender my humble opinion , I should say white - white - nothing but white is the colour for a girl to wear on first coming out .
There 's the daughter , now , of the Frau Baronin , Fräulein von Berlichingen .
She came out this winter , you know , and of course you have all heard how much she was admired .
The sweet young lady wo n't let any one but ` my Therese , ' as she page : 72 calls me , make her dresses , even those she goes to court in .
Well , I made her a plain white gown of the finest ` Donna Maria gauze  ' nothing but that , honoured Frau Professorinn . ''
This argument did not fail of the powerful impression it was intended to create .
`` White , the colour of innocence ! ''
exclaimed Frau Scherer , with enthusiasm , `` the garb of the lamb and - - '' She stopped cudgelling her unwilling brains to think of something else that should be equally appropriate , when Therese came to her rescue by adding - '' and of the gänseblümchen '' ( the little goose-flower , as daisies ace called in South Germany ) .
`` Yes , '' she continued , `` the gracious Fräulein Agnes von Berlichingen wore her dress trimmed with daisies  and a wreath of the same flowers in her hair . ''
`` Oh , our Mina will look like an angel of light ! ''
cried Frau Scherer , ecstatically , casting her eyes to the ceiling - for such was her wont .
`` The girl will do well enough , '' said the Frau Professorinn  but added , with a sigh drawn from the depths of her maternal bosom , `` Alas , she , is as careless of dress as a tomboy , and I foresee already what a sight she will be when , all rags and tatters , she comes home in the evening .
Well , Therese , I think we have settled this point so far .
You shall make us a dress the exact counterpart of Fräulein von Berlichingen 's , only it must be of mulled muslin instead of gauze - a poor widow like me with six children left on her hands , you know , Therese , ca n't go spending money like a Frau Baronin , for all that she is , or once was , the ninth daughter of Medicinalrath Duttenhofer , and could hold up her head page : 73 with the best of them  and so , as I was saying , my daughter must not be a disgrace to him , in spite of her taking after her poor father 's family  and she ca n't be got to understand , though I may talk myself hoarse to make her  and as to the daisies , Therese , we can get those for nothing in our garden  she 's for ever lugging flowers into the house as I tell her - but it 'll come in useful for once , - they wo n't be so genteel , I know , as the sweet artificial flowers at Madame Borrel 's  but we must cut the coat according to the cloth , you know . ''
After having arrived at this important decision the ladies set out in a body to purchase twelve yards of muslin at Kübel 's , the chief draper and haberdasher in the Lange Strasse .
The eventful day had come at last , and , like a sheep led to the slaughter , Mina yielded herself up with passive resignation into her mother 's hands .
She had been looking forward with wondering eagerness to this day , but the rites of the toilet appeared to her to detract considerably from the pleasures to come , and under her mother 's vigorous handling she lost all sense but that of present discomfort .
Besides the maternal hands , two other pairs were busy about her person .
At last , being judged sufficiently prepared , the cloudy fabric , white as a snowdrift , with touches of pale pink here and there , was carefully passed over the girl 's curly head by the adroit fingers of Therese .
Frau Lichtenfeld stood a little to the right watching the progressive effect of the toilet with knitted brows , compressed lips , and occasional h ` ms and ha 's .
She looked on with that air of superior critical acumen , only rarely lapsing into admiration , which would not page : 74 have misbecome a dramatic critic on whose sealed lips trembles the verdict to make or mar a first appearance .
Quite the reverse was the feeling with which Sabina , the maid of all work , whose mouth , stuck full of pins , presented the appearance of a pincushion , gazed on the same spectacle .
`` Do n't stand there like a graven image , child ! ''
remonstrated Frau Lichtenfeld .
`` How can I or Therese judge of the fit if you stand with your limbs stiffer than broomsticks ?
One would suppose from your doleful air that you were expecting to undergo an operation instead of being dressed for a ball .
In my young days we girls looked more alive on such an occasion . ''
Therese , by way of averting the lecture that she saw impending over her favourite , now exclaimed - `` Does n't the dress suit her to perfection , Frau Professorin ? ''
And she eyed her handiwork with proud content .
`` Sabina , you may call the children now , '' said Mina 's mother , sitting down in a chair to test a moment from her labours , and blandly eyeing her daughter much as she would have done a specially successful Mandeltorte , for the confection of which she had acquired just celebrity .
On the cessation of the manipulations Mina was bid to take a look at herself in the glass .
She did so , but grew hot and abashed , and turned quickly away .
She so rarely looked at herself thus consciously that she shrank from the inspection with instinctive shamefacedness .
Suddenly the door opened with a bang , and the boys tore in with Lulu at their heels .
For a moment the latter gazed in astonishment , not unmingled with fear , page : 75 at the figure in the white cloud  then , scuttling across the room to her mother , she buried her head in the stiff folds of her gown , only now and then peeping shyly round out of the corner of one blue eye .
The boys meanwhile stood in a row , staring open-mouthed , with their thumbs in their mouths , at the sister , whom they hardly recognized in her present transformation from chrysalis to butterfly .
`` Is it the fairy Magelone ? ''
whispered Conrad , a boy of about seven , just now deep in fairy lore .
`` Perhaps it 's Christkindchen , '' replied Otto , tentatively , but was instantly crushed by Conrad 's scornful exclamation - `` Did you ever hear of Christkindchen coming at Whitsuntide ? ''
`` What 's Therese been doing to her eyes , mamma , that they shine so ? ''
lisped Lulu , under her breath .
`` You little goosey , '' said Conrad , who had now recovered from his surprise  `` Therese does n't polish sister 's eyes as you did your doll 's yesterday when you had pushed one of them in  it 's the Silberburg she is thinking of . ''
Lulu tittered and took another shy peep , without changing her position , however  and Otto and Conrad , now sufficiently emboldened , made a rush forward in order to convince themselves , apparently , by such tests as pinching , c. , that this beautiful creature and their sister were one and the same person .
They were warned off in time , however , by their mother , who , in her sternest , most impressive tones , now shouted , `` Hands off , or I lay on the rod ! ''
Everybody seemed ready at last .
The Frau page : 76 Professorinn surveyed her brood with an approving glance , while putting on her long , knitted black silk mittens , which she considered of a finer effect by night than the new-fangled white kid gloves , besides - as she remarked confidentially to whoever she could get for a listener - having the wear of half a dozen of the latter .
But just as they were starting it appeared that Wolfgang , her favourite , was missing .
`` Where is he ?
Who has seen him ? ''
she asked , with an ominous ring in her voice , implying that they were one and all responsible for his disappearance .
`` I got him ready more than an hour ago , '' she continued , with waxing wrath , `` and bade him be sure and not rumple his hair again . ''
So instead of starting as it was high time they did , the whole family had to begin hunting for Wolf .
They searched high and low , in the house and out of it , but could nowhere come upon any trace of the culprit .
Under these aggravating circumstances what wonder that the Frau Professorinn 's temper , after the manner of a weathercock , from due south should be veering round in a threateningly north-eastern direction .
It was not good just then to dare to face the biting current of her speech .
Every one in turn was more or less accused of being the cause or the accomplice of Wolf 's mysterious disappearance .
After long searching Hans shouted from the gloomiest depths of the coal-hole , `` Here he is , mother  I 've got him safe ! ''
The Frau Professorinn immediately hastened to the rescue , and between them they dragged the recalcitrant Wolf to the light of day .
page : 77 Ah , what a sight here met the horrified mother 's eyes !
Black , black from head to foot , her sooty son scowled defiance at his captors .
After one or two spasmodic attempts , however , to recover his liberty , he submitted with the dignity of a savage chief to the melancholy fate awaiting him .
`` Behold , the king of the Blackamoors led into captivity ! ''
cried the irrepressible Hans as , whooping and shouting , he followed his brothers in the steps of the runaway .
But poor Hans , instead of being rewarded for having effected the capture of the deserter , was grimly told to hold his tongue on peril of being shut up in the coal-hole himself .
For the second time that day the miserable Wolf had to undergo the ordeal by soap and water .
But when at last he emerged from that detested operation , he looked - but for a little shininess about the cheeks and nose - as handsome a boy as could well gladden a mother 's eyes .
He was , however , at the age when the idea of having to encounter a lot of young ladies fevered his blood , and caused the tips of his ears to burn as the approach of cannons might .
And he often told Hans , who was his confidant when they were not at daggers drawn , that he would far rather face an angry bull , or even his mother on washing-day , than those girls that did nothing but giggle and whisper together in corners , and made a fellow beside himself with anger and dislike .
As it seemed impossible to escape a second time , he submitted with the stoicism of a philosopher .
Thus the Lichtenfelds were under weigh at length .
page : [ 78 ] CHAPTER VIII .
MUSICAL PICTURES .
IT might have been a few minutes after the Lichtenfelds ' arrival , in the thick of the merry-making , that the stranger , whom the Professor had addressed as Emanuel , had taken the seat and instrument of the first violinist .
No one probably had noticed this substitution  and even when the new musician began playing a solo , a variation on a pathetic old Volkslied  hardly any one listened with the attention necessary to discern that this indeed was the performance of a master hand .
The fact was , that although every South German is more or less born with the singing soul , yet such a tumult of joyous excitement filled the place that it was well-nigh impossible to give ear to the music , even had the people been desirous of doing so .
Indeed , the performance on this occasion bore a strong resemblance to that of a London drawing-room in the season , as its function apparently consisted in page : 79 promoting a clatter of talking and laughter .
The little folk , it is true , had been having a good many dances , to the accompaniment , as they fondly deluded themselves , of music .
This was a fiction , however .
Between dancers and fiddlers reigned absolute divorce  and a merry wag of a boy , with his hand behind his ear , kept rushing to and fro between the two , in order to let each of the parties know what the other was about just then .
Nevertheless , one man , probably a musician , pricked up his ears at the very first notes , and , pushing close up to the stand , remained leaning against the woodwork with folded arms , now fixing his eyes on the violinist , now half shutting them , then softly nodding his head or again shaking it , with the air of a person divided between approval and amazement .
Before long others among the crowd , either musicians themselves or connoisseurs of music , began to gather in knots round the orchestra , and , while listening eagerly , to occasionally exchange looks and whispers of astonishment .
Gradually the spell began to work on the whole crowd of these South German holiday-makers .
Little by little the groups that had been desultorily strolling through the devious paths and alleys of the garden thronged to the centre , pressing towards the neighbourhood of the orchestra .
Little by little men left off jingling their glasses , women and girls forgot their chatter , and waiters ceased hurrying to and fro .
At last the very children desisted from their games , and stood or lay on the grass nestling together by twos and threes , the smallest of them with their flaxen heads lying in their sisters ' laps , and fresh bare legs and arms looking like ruddy fruit scattered about the grass .
page : 80 The crowd , which had grown denser and denser , pressed quite to the garden 's edge in a semicircle , while the fortunate possessors of chairs and benches sat closely together on each side of the green , the latter , by common consent , being left in possession of the children .
Nothing exalts the heart more than seeing a mass of people thus swayed by one common emotion .
We then consciously realize the solidarity of those human units , each of which , bent on its individual desires , aims , and passions , seems often so indifferent , alas !
even so antagonistic , to its fellows .
Once , however , let the vital impulse of some mastermind go forth like an invisible presence among a multitude consisting of many mixed , nay , incongruous elements  let them feel the electric thrill of that occult demoniac force we call genius - that instant one and all are called out of , beyond themselves , that instant they are liberated from the dull , cold obstruction of self , are made partakers of intellectual beauty , are made inheritors of spiritual force  merged , confounded , absorbed in one universal element of delight , worship , beatitude .
Such divine power of fusion abides , above all , in music  and beneath its irresistible influence , here , in that promiscuous throng , all hearts - whatever the throb of their individual sorrow , joy , hope , despair , love , or ambition - yearned , heaved , and inclined beneath the sway of that melodious compulsion , as we see the countless leaves of a forest , or blades of meadow grass , bending as with one individual will beneath the breath of summer winds .
And here forsooth - here in this garden laughing all page : 81 over with the flowers of May - there stood one who suddenly , with the witchcraft of his playing , startled the dullest , kindled the coldest , roused the saddest , to life and enthusiasm .
What had come to the musician , though ?
What change had been wrought in his countenance since he woke those ineffable lengthening sounds of yearning from the shivering strings ?
He stood there like some wizard , consumed with the energy he emits , who with his bow constrains to his bidding the illimitable host of sounds .
But how render in words what only the ear can appraise and transmit ?
There are minds , however , which have the faculty of translating sounds into colours and visible shapes of delight , to whom the theme of sonata or symphony assumes the outline and proportion of objects clearly projected on the inner vision .
This quality , which has since been developed into a new art manifestation by the great musicians of the present , was clearly discernible in the wondrous tone-poem , which , in a series of musical pictures , gave , as it were , an allegory of love .
Love , in its twofold nature , swaying man 's destinies for good or evil , now uplifting his soul in a passion of aspiration , now hurling him down disillusioned and despairing , to be finally guided through labyrinthine error to ideal attainment .
It began with a sort of barcarolle movement in allegretto , illustrative of dipping oars and of singing mouths , where a boat , gliding across the reflection of the mystical white face of the moon that yearned to the sunset , approached the lake-washed stairs of a marble palace .
page : 82 And as the boat drew near and nearer , a youth on the topmost flight saw a beautiful woman at the prow , crowned with roses and waving a red rose-bough in her hand  and the hue and fragrance of the roses was reflected and multiplied a thousandfold in the sky , in the water , in the features of the woman glowing like a celestial rose .
She held her rose-bough out to the youth whose step rang clear , as bounding down the marble stairs , he leaped into the boat .
Back across the lake glided the boat , and from afar was borne a sound of singing - the voice of one singing the quest of the deathless rose of love .
* * * * * * * Is this a sound of tears , or of falling rain that now , in tremulous adagio measure , seems splashing through the moonless night ?
the weeping of one that sorroweth , or but the wailing of winds through the wet , shaken boughs ?
Hissing and shuddering , the rushes stoop to the water-stoop round the stranded boat with its riven sails , stoop round the forsaken youth whose tears mingle with the driving rain , with the drifting petals of the roses .
`` Why weepest thou ? ''
cried one , hurrying towards him , flushed and panting in the van of a jubilant throng .
`` What , the storm has ravished thy roses !
Come !
I will lead thee to bowers where fresh ones are blowing , which now , even now that thou tarriest here , wait but thy gathering .
Fool !
if thou wouldst have eternal roses , bid death pilot thee to the stars . ''
* * * * * * * page : 83 To what shrill , rapid , passionate pulsations do those stricken minor chords respond ?
Now piercing with strange discords , now liquidly dissolving in voluptuous languishment .
Then , returning to the major key ( allegro ) , a troop of revellers rush tumultuously through the bountiful summer-world now as on fire with roses .
Hither and thither they sway  some with rhythmically flying feet lead the entrammelled youth through labyrinths of scented gloom  some lure him to fields of somnolent poppies clouding the sense with sleep  some pelt him with roses , a red rain of incessant maddening roses .
A strident clangorous chord like an ear-piercing cry harshly jarring the noon - the revellers fly asunder , abandoning the youth - pierced and stricken to death with the cruel thorns of the silken roses .
* * * * * * * Low , faint , and unearthly , without rhythmic subdivisions , in sounds almost too thin for mortal ear , the muted violin seems to exhale itself with the departing spirit , while interspersed fitful staccato notes follow one by one like receding life-blood , slowly ebbing , dying away .
* * * * * * * A silence as of suspended breathing pervaded the listening crowd on the momentary cessation of the music .
They forgot to applaud  they instinctively shrank from breaking the charm of those divinest sounds .
But what had come to Mina ?
What made her heart throb with an emotion almost painful in its intensity ?
page : 84 It so happened that she sat right in front , facing the musician , and he , this ruler of the realm of sound , this despot at whose command the multitude wept , rejoiced , exulted , despaired , was the same - she knew it instinctively - whose music had floated in through her open window , once and again , these nights of spring !
Hitherto it had been an unbodied voice , insinuating itself with the unforbidden moonlight into her chamber  now it was more incomprehensible still !
But the pause was brief : the musician 's sense of completeness was not yet satisfied .
Once more the key changed , the movement quickened , and from the foregoing expiring sounds burst into an allegro vivacissimo .
Dizzily whizzed the bow , waking from the inexhaustible strings a myriad quivering scintillations of sound through which the dominant motive of final victory , that had from time to time reappeared through the whole fantasia , finally culminated in one supreme melody as the mystic rose of heaven appeared to love 's martyred pilgrim above the perishing roses of earth .
* * * * * * * It was over .
The people applauded , shouted , laughed , yelled with delight .
Again and again the thunder of acclamations burst forth as though it could have no ending .
When at last the unknown musician was suffered to come down the steps , the holiday-makers began looking at each other in astonishment , and asking each other eagerly who this wonderful violinist could be  and when it became generally known that he was their own fellow-townsman come back amongst page : 85 them , the man with whose fame all Europe had rung , their enthusiasm knew no bounds .
One young fellow in his transport forced his way to his side , threw himself on his knees , and covered his hands with kisses  girls rifled the garden of its flowers to scatter them at his feet  mothers snatched up their children that they might see him the better and clap their little hands  stolid , matter-of-fact citizens seemed unusually excited - all crowding round him with kindled , admiring looks and words , till at last he grew weary of their enthusiasm .
For he glanced restlessly about him as though he were seeking an outlet by which to slip away from the crowd , or else a face that was not amongst it .
page : [ 86 ] CHAPTER IX .
ELFRIDA 'S BEQUEST .
WHERE was Mina all this while ?
She had gone off by herself , stolen to the shadiest , farthest corner of the garden where it sloped down to the valley  and then as she pressed her hot cheeks against the hedge , large tears , hotter than her cheeks , forced their way through her closed eyelids .
She knew not why she wept , but still wept on .
Her mother and some of the children found her out at last .
They came strolling towards her with Professor Sontheim and Frau Scherer .
Emanuel had succeeded in regaining his friend at last , and was introduced by the latter to his widowed sister .
After pouring a torrent of voluble rapture in his ear she hurried after Frau Lichtenfeld , who had just begun scolding her daughter for skulking away into a corner by herself .
Emanuel was saying , half wearily , `` Let 's get away from here  I 'm tired out , '' when , abruptly seizing his friend 's arm , he asked , `` Who 's your sister talking to page : 87 just now ? ''
and , pulling him forward , he went on eagerly , `` I should like to be introduced to your sister 's friend , now at once . ''
`` Why , Emanuel , '' cried the other , hesitating , `` introduce you to her !
What attraction could that good woman possess for you ?
Be warned in time , my friend  for her tongue is a mill-wheel - once you get caught in its course your wits may be mangled in the process . ''
`` Never mind , '' said Emanuel , impatiently , `` I wish to be introduced .
She 's the sort of woman I like  she will not pester me with a lot of nonsensical cant about music .
These simple , unpretending sort of women repose one as much as quiet fields with sheep and cows do . ''
`` Repose ! ''
repeated the Professor : `` I wish you joy of the repose you will get !
But come along  of course I will introduce you with pleasure , considering she was the wife of my best friend  but why you should wish it , when just now you refused to let me present you to Fräulein von Berlichingen , our beauty , who was dying to know you - is - well - - '' `` Oh , I did n't come here to see your beauties and listen to their gushing talk  I have plenty of that elsewhere - more than plenty  let me have a little simplicity , a little nature , '' said Emanuel .
They had reached the ladies by this time , and Sontheim presented him to Frau Lichtenfeld , who had not yet done lecturing Mina for not being a bit like other girls - not at all amiable - who , instead of showing some pleasure and gratitude for the pretty music they had been having - and all for nothing , too , as she ob - observed page : 88 served in parenthesis , had slunk away as though she simply hated it .
The worthy lady had got thus far in her discourse when she was not a little startled and flattered by Sontheim 's coming up to her and introducing his famous friend , while Mina shrank still farther into the shadow of the lime trees .
`` What an unlooked-for honour , '' exclaimed Frau Lichtenfeld , `` for one so unworthy !
Ah , you have given us a treat such as we never had before .
And Lulu , the dear pet , never felt sleepy all the time you played ( and it was a good long time too , and I do n't think the boys were fretting to be at their games , though they are sad fellows at sitting still )  and then of her own self she wanted to give you some flowers  but here now , my eldest girl , I have just been scolding her , sir .
I think she is the only one - I do think the only one of us - who did not seem to enjoy your pretty fiddling .
I really think , as I was just telling her , that she must have been asleep the greater part of the time , for she had her eyes shut fast - I saw her  and as soon as she could , she went off from everybody - so churlish , I say , so strange not to be fond of music .
I know I have heard once - or stop , was it my dear departed - heaven rest his soul - read it me ?
Yes , to be sure , the year Mina had the measles , and I was obliged to sit up at night - yes , poor man , Mina was his favourite  he quite behaved like a sensible creature that time , nor once confused the medicine bottles  for there was Wolf , too , laid up with a sprain which had to be rubbed with opodeldoc night and morning .
Dear , dear , what a terrible boy he was to be laid up ( but then he always had such high spirits ) - takes after our family , page : 89 the Duttenhofers , you see , and so does Lulu here , she 's quite a comfort already to me  but as I was saying - ah !
to be sure , the Professor read to me while I was sitting up from a book called Shakespeare - Shakespeare , Mina , was n't it ?
but of course you were too young then to understand .
Well , I could almost take my oath upon it that somebody or other in that book said only wicked people did n't care for music .
Not that I mean that my eldest is wicked , sir  no , no , but so odd at times '' ( she said this , dropping her voice a little , in a loud aside to her bewildered listener ) , `` just like her blessed papa , in fact , God rest his soul .
Ah well , we are as God made us , I suppose , so we must be content .
Come here , child , though you do n't deserve it , yet you shall be able to tell your friends that you 've been introduced to this great man too .
Well , well , this is an unlooked-for honour - - Ah !
how do you do , my dear Frau Obertribunalprocurator ?
What fine music , was n't it ?
I shall sit down here with my knitting  the boys will want to have a good run after sitting still so long .
Oh !
what 's Wolf doing to Lulu ?
he will have her rolling down the hill in another moment !
Dear , dear  there they go !
Oh , how kind of you , dear Professor , to go and see after them !
Do bring Lulu back .
Wolf is a good lad , but too rough for the child .
I 'd better come with you , though . ''
Thus everybody dispersed for the moment , so that after this peculiar introduction Emanuel was left standing alone with Mina .
She seemed well-nigh as silent as her mother was loquacious .
But Emanuel , who was at last able to address her , said smiling , `` I am sure you can not hate music  or do page : 90 you think it compares so unfavourably to the little music-makers of the woods that you are so fond of ?
And are you aware , by the by , that you have never yet thanked me for coming to the rescue of your protégées ? ''
Mina flushed at the sudden question .
`` Oh , '' she cried , partly forgetting the shyness that lay so heavily on her , `` it was kind to put back the nest !
I was so glad the poor birds were saved .
Thank you , now . ''
`` Would you like to have news of them ? ''
inquired Emanuel .
Mina for all answer looked up with a quick , inquiring glance .
`` Oh , I never do things by halves , '' he said  `` having rescued them from death , you know , I felt bound to watch over them from time to time .
It was pretty to see them trying their wings , flying farther and farther from the nest , till they returned no more one fine day .
I dare say they were engaged in building nests of their own .
It was not quite for their sakes , I own , that I sought out the spot where I saw you that day in the wood - a spot endeared to me before you were born , I dare say .
But how came you there by yourself , and so far from your home ? ''
`` I had been to grandmother 's , '' said Mina .
`` Ah ! ''
he cried , `` your name is Lichtenfeld !
Is it your grandmother that lives on the hill above the wood ? ''
`` Oh yes , she has a cottage there , and keeps lots of bees .
Everybody knows grandmother 's bees for miles and miles round the town . ''
`` Once , '' said Emanuel , with a peculiarly yearning expression , looking far away across the valley , `` once I page : 91 had a little playfellow that I loved very fondly .
Her grandmother lived in a cottage on the hill-side too , and when I went away to make my fortune I promised my playfellow that I would come back for her one day , and take her into the great world  but when I had been gone - I forget how long - they told me that she was dead .
Her name was - - '' `` Elfrida , '' cried Mina , who for some time had been looking at him intently - `` Elfrida  and it was I , I who was the cause of her death ! ''
`` You ! ''
cried Emanuel , in blank amazement .
`` You !
How is it possible ? ''
`` Alas !
I have sad cause to remember her , though I was such a little child .
In my recollection of her it seems as though she had been something too fair to have ever lived amongst us like one of ourselves  she is something bright , shining far off among my earliest memories , like a star at the bottom of our long avenue .
`` One day , I and another little girl went to the wood bilberrying , and Elfrida came to take care of us .
But she had a long , foreign-looking letter in her hand - - '' `` Ah ! ''
ejaculated Emanuel , `` a letter ! ''
`` This letter , I remember , she unfolded again that day for the hundredth time , and began reading it , and I hated the letter , for I knew that then there was no hope that day of getting Elfrida to tell me one of her stories that were like none any one else ever told .
So I went away pouting , and there by the pool that you know saw such a flower as I had never seen the like of  and then I called to mind a certain tale Elfrida had told me , of how there is a flower which blow once in a hundred years , and is never seen at other times by any page : 92 man .
But , '' she said , as though suddenly recollecting , `` this is too childish to tell you , only you wo n't understand - - '' `` Go on , go on , '' Emanuel said , eagerly , `` and what came of this blue flower ?
for blue it must have been ! ''
Mina , not without astonishment , said , `` Indeed it was blue , but how do you know ? ''
`` Oh , because it was the fabled flower of romance that chose to reveal itself to you , that 's all .
There are few eyes so favoured in this world , I can tell you  but I am not astonished .
What did you do when it showed itself ?
I want to hear all about it from one who can give me such authentic information . ''
Though not quite apprehending his meaning , Mina was too much at home in fairy-land to be exactly perplexed , so she went on to say how her cousin Elfrida had told her that whoever plucked this wonderful flower had only to dig up the earth , Where the root was , to come upon a great treasure of gold and precious stones  `` and then , '' said Mina , `` I thought how rich I would make Elfrida , and how rich she would make - - '' Here she seemed suddenly , recalled to the present by a half-stifled exclamation on her hearer 's part , and colouring up to the roots of her hair , said , in an apologetic tone , `` I only mention it because it made me quite wild all at once to pluck this flower , which grew so close to the water 's edge that it might have been floating on it , and in my eagerness I lost my footing and fell in . ''
`` What !
you fell into the water ? ''
cried Emanuel .
`` They ought to have taken better care of you than that ! ''
`` Oh no , no , '' said Mina , `` please do n't say that .
page : 93 Elfrida took such care always  but you see she was reading that letter . ''
`` Ah ! ''
sighed Emanuel , under his breath , `` yes , I had forgotten .
I was at the bottom of all the mischief .
And to think that it might have been your - - '' He seemed to shrink from the idea with a shudder , and only said , `` At all events you were saved ! ''
`` Yes , '' said Mina , `` my screams brought Elfrida to the pool  and when she saw what had happened she jumped in after me .
It was not too deep for her to keep her foothold at the side , and so , by clinging to the stump of a tree with one hand , she just managed , after several unsuccessful attempts , to clutch hold of my dress and drag me on to the shelving bank .
I was quite insensible when she got me out  and how she could ever have managed to carry me in her arms up-hill all the way to grandmother 's - which was the nearest house , but still a long way , you know - none of us could ever understand .
As soon as she had put me in grandmother 's arms she fainted clean away .
The other little girl had been so frightened , thinking I was dead , that she had run straight away home .
And Elfrida never was herself after this  they said she , had taken a chill , but she grew more and more beautiful , and only a little thinner and whiter , day by day , till it seemed as though she were made of melting snow  and she never could bear me out of her sight then , and begged them to let me stay with grandmother a little time - till - till - - '' Mina caught her breath for a moment - '' and she had my hand in hers that morning she lay dying , and said to me quite low , so low it seemed a ghost speaking , 'Em anuel !
who will welcome Emanuel now , when he comes home ? ' ''
page : 94 `` And will you welcome me ? ''
he asked , with exceeding gentleness , and his eyes had a strange watery look .
`` Oh , yes , '' said Mina , simply  `` Elfrida would have wished it . ''
`` And is your name Elfrida , too ? ''
he asked .
`` You are so like her , but like as a red rose is like a white one . ''
`` No , my name is Mina , '' she answered .
`` Mina , '' he repeated slowly , as though there were some secret enchantment in articulating each separate letter of the name .
`` Mina , I have come home at last . ''
And as he spoke was it the pink sunset flush , which made the earth just than appear like a glorified place , that also lit up his pale , habitually sombre features , imparting to them a look of beaming peace and beatitude ?
`` Are you all here at last ? ''
cried Frau Lichtenfeld , coming up hot and out of breath , with the sobbing Lulu holding on to a corner of her shawl .
`` There , do n't cry , do n't cry  it wo n't bring your red shoes back if you go on crying till doomsday .
Oh ! ''
shaking her fist at the recalcitrant Hans , who was being dragged along by Professor Sontheim , `` you scapegrace , you ne'er - do-weel , you wild goose , you plague of my life , you devil 's imp , you - ` tiger 's brat ' - you - say what you 've done with them , or I 'll shake you to within an inch of your life  speak when you are spoken to , ca n't you ? ''
`` Hans , '' said Sontheim , with a gravity the had much ado to maintain , `` Hans , my boy , do not grieve your mother more by your obstinacy . ''
But Hans 's lips were locked as in a vice , and he looked doggedly to the ground .
page : 95 `` Oh ! ''
said Lulu , gaspingly , between her sobs , `` they were playing pitch and toss with them , down there , mother - and one fell into the water , and Hans took t ` other - - '' Here Hans scowled ominous warning at her , `` and Hans took t ` other - - '' `` Yes , and he said , '' broke in Conrad , '' ` that it would fetch back the other one  and do n't let them part company anyhow , ' he said , and flung in Lulu 's other shoe . ''
`` Lulu 's other shoe , '' assented Otto , divided in his sympathies between Hans and Lulu , but always sticking to everything that Conrad said .
`` My pretty shoes that grandmother gave me , '' sobbed out Lulu , with renewed energy .
`` There , do n't cry , my pretty  she shall have another pair , she shall .
But however are you to get home without shoes , and the dew falling at this hour , and Wolf gone off with his friends , and you such a heavy girl for your old mother to carry ? ''
`` Oh , '' said Mina , `` let me carry her  I 'm sure I could  '' and she was bending down to lift the child in her arms , when Frau Lichtenfeld cried - `` Will you never get any sense , Mina , or take thought for any one ?
What , after all the pains I 've taken with you , and the money it 's cost , and Therese in the house too , crush a bran new dress by carrying a brat all the way home !
Ah , it 's hard on me , but I knew how it would be all along  I said so to the Frau Obertribunalprocurator , and to the good Frau Scherer , I said - - '' Emanuel , who had remained somewhat in the background watching the proceedings with considerable amusement , here stepped forward , and said with his most winning smile , to the indescribable astonishment page : 96 of his friend Sontheim , `` If you will let me carry your child , dear Madam , you will be conferring a favour . ''
`` You carry Lulu , sir ! ''
cried Frau Lichtenfeld , overwhelmed at the bare notion .
`` Oh , impossible !
Too kind of you to mention it  fancy that , now !
If only Fräulein von Griesbach were here - she thinks my children not well-behaved - that would settle her , I should think , that would !
But here we are discussing all this time , and yet the poor children must be put to bed  though a nice time I shall have of it , as I have to return presently with Mina in time for the ball .
Lulu , do cease that whimpering  Otto , do n't cling to my skirts . ''
Emanuel , without asking further leave , simply lifted the astonished Lulu off the ground , and sitting her on his left shoulder , passed her right arm round his neck , and held her fast by it .
Then , turning to Frau Lichtenfeld , who was talking so fast that her sentences simply came tumbling one over another without stops of any kind , he said , smiling , `` Pray let me have my way , for I always do have it .
I have so often seen men and women carrying children in this way in Italy , that I am quite an adept at it .
Is n't it a picturesque fashion , Sontheim ? ''
Sontheim , who had been looking on with a puzzled air , said , rather emphatically , `` It 's not the fashion here , at any rate , for us to be carrying children through the streets  well , I hope you 'll enjoy your walk .
I must be off now on some pressing business .
Good-bye ! ''
`` Good-bye , '' said Emanuel  and then , turning his face up to Lulu , asked , `` Are you comfortable , my child ?
Yes !
then en avant children all ! ''
And he strode on with Frau Lichtenfeld interminably discoursing to him on one side , and the blushing Mina silent on the other .
page : [ 97 ] CHAPTER X. LEOPOLD SONTHEIM 'S CONFESSION .
IT was very early yet , barely five o'clock , but Leopold Sontheim was already up and stirring , for from the back-yard of his dwelling you could hear the powerful strokes of his mallet , as he was hewing the unwieldy logs of wood into smaller pieces available for kitchen use .
No wonder therefore that , absorbed in his work , he did not catch a quick , impatient drumming at his study .
window , which , increasing in loudness , at last merged into a regular tune .
After the interval of a few minutes the window , which was only on the latch , was pushed inwards , and the impatient drummer vaulted into the room , and thence passed through the passage into the yard , where he suddenly saluted the hard-working Sontheim with a sounding slap on the shoulder .
`` What 's the matter ? ''
exclaimed the latter , looking up .
`` Oh , it 's you , old fellow  I 'm right glad to see page : 98 you ! ''
and he cordially extended his disengaged hand , while with the other he continued to direct several more blows on his iron wedge with all the zeal of an amateur .
`` What a Jack-of-all-trades you are ! ''
remarked Emanuel , looking on .
`` Not satisfied with being a professor of jurisprudence , an authority on Aristophanes , a skilled translator from some half a dozen languages , you must needs turn hewer of wood and drawer of water also ! ''
`` The wood 's very well , but where 's the water ? ''
asked Sontheim , grimly .
`` Why , trickling down your nose in a little rivulet , to be sure , '' said Emanuel , making a grimace .
`` But come , put down that appalling implement  one would think I was an inopportune guest at this fashionable hour . ''
`` Well , well , '' replied Sontheim , putting down his mallet , and wiping the perspiration from his heated face , `` laugh away , my son  but this is my way , you see , of keeping down the flesh and : the devil  besides , one wants something of the kind for the muscles and sinews to come into play as well as the brain fibres  and here in Germany , with our eternal stooping over books , we are all in danger of growing as limp as rags , and as shortsighted as owls .
But come in where you can sit down somewhere  '' and he led the way into the house .
`` Here 's a seat for you , '' he added , eagerly sweeping a lot of books , pamphlets , newspapers , and time-yellowed manuscripts from the shabby old sofa , and clearing just enough space for his friend to sit down upon  then , slipping a somewhat tattered dressing-gown page : 99 over his shirt-sleeves , he filled himself a pipe and offered one to his friend .
The latter , who had flung himself on the sofa , and was leaning back as if quite wearied out , declined , saying that he never smoked .
`` But dear me ! ''
exclaimed Sontheim , after looking more attentively at his visitor , `` instead of the briskness of an early bird , you have the air of a dissipated night-bird with its feathers all awry !
Why , what on earth have you been up to now ?
Look at your boots all sopping wet , for all the world as if you had jumped over a hedge into a duck-pond , running away from some farmer 's wife 's husband ! ''
`` My boots have as little polish on them as your remarks , '' said Emanuel , shrugging his shoulders  `` but farmers ' wives have no attraction for me .
The fact is , I 've been half over the country to-night . ''
`` Why , you must be famishing , my boy ! ''
cried Sontheim , jumping up .
`` How stupid of me not to have thought of it before ! ''
and he went to the door calling loudly , `` Pauline , Pauline ! ''
After what appeared a considerable interval , a lady 's head with meagre hair in curl-paper became visible through the half-open door .
`` Come in ! ''
she said , in a whispered consultation with her brother , which might have been heard at the other end of the room  `` that 's like your want of consideration for one 's feelings .
How can I show myself before the ` Friseurin ' has been , and before such a very genteel-looking gentleman , too ?
I 'll see what we can dish up at this unseasonable hour , and cook shall bring it in as soon as ever it can be got ready . ''
page : 100 `` Beat up a dozen of eggs or so , '' whispered Sontheim after the retreating figure .
`` Well now , Emanuel , let 's hear all about your adventure , '' said the Professor sitting down , and following with his eyes the wreaths of smoke that went dwindling away into ever thinner circles above his head .
`` Oh , '' said Emanuel laughing , `` I leave adventures and farmers ' wives to you .
Sorry I ca n't gratify your curiosity , but I only rambled abroad because I had a sleepless fit on me , and when I heard the watchman call - ` Past twelve of the clock , and a fine starlight night , ' I donned my cloak , stole down the stairs and out into the open , where the sky was alive with stars .
I walked over the hills some eight miles or so , and got into a dale on the further side that I did n't remember having seen in my youth .
There was a mill there by the side of a stream , and some scattered farms with orchards about them  resting in an apple-tree , I had the most delicious reverie , and one or two themes came into my head that I mean to work up by and by .
Indeed I 've made quite a good business of this night escapade . ''
`` At any rate you wo n't tell me more than you choose , I see , but I hear the welcome clatter of cups and spoons , '' said Sontheim , as the door opened and a slatternly maid brought in a tray , and without much ado banged it down on the table and disappeared again .
Sontheim poured his friend out a large cup of café au lait , which the latter emptied at a drain , and then began vigorously tugging away at the scrambled eggs and smoked ham , declaring he had not tasted anything so delicious for a long time , and finishing off with some milk rolls hot from the oven .
page : 101 `` By the way , '' remarked Sontheim , who had sat benignly watching the other , and filling his cup or plate as it was emptied - `` I thought you seemed rather taken with my little god-daughter , Mina , yesterday .
What could you have to say to the chit ? ''
`` Oh , your god-daughter , is she ! ''
said Emanuel , shortly .
`` How comes she to be that ? ''
`` Why you see , '' answered Sontheim , `` her father and I were great chums .
He was one of the best fellows that ever lived , and one of the most learned , and taught me Sanskrit , to boot  but I never knew any one less fitted to grapple with the realities of life than him , poor man .
How he ever came to be married is one of those mysteries of human nature that defy explanation .
Had Elise , indeed , been a crabbed Sanskrit manuscript , I could have understood his falling in love with her .
But no doubt our omniscient Shakspeare is right in making the women folk take most of the lovemaking on themselves  and my poor professor was just the man to fall a helpless prey to the first she who should take it into her head to bring a fellow under petticoat government .
And if ever a man had to bow his neck ` under his wife 's slipper , ' it was poor Heinrich Lichtenfeld .
I remember one day , '' he continued laughing , `` he ought to have been on his way to give a Greek lesson to some rich , stupid ass of a fellow , but had clean forgotten about it , and was poring over some obscure passage in the Mahabharata , when his wife , broom in hand , suddenly popped her head in at the door , and seeing her husband placidly sitting there in dressing-gown and slippers , waved her broom in the air , and flying at him , screamed - page : 102 `` Are you to be for ever at play , when there are five hungry mouths to be fed , leaving alone your wedded wife and the servant .
We shall come to beg in the street , yet , ' she lamented , the while poor Heinrich looked helplessly at her with his pale , glassy-blue eyes , as she helped him on with his coat , and pushed his hat on the back of his head .
` There , go and give your lesson , if you have any pity on your poor starving children , ' she ended , leading the bewildered man to the street-door , and pushing him out as though he were blind . ''
Emanuel looked very much amused at the description of Mina 's father , and remarked - `` Well , after all , there 's something to be said on the wife 's side , too  a married man must keep the pot boiling somehow .
But is the family as badly off as all that ? ''
he added , more seriously .
`` Oh , not now , '' replied Sontheim .
`` During the Professor 's lifetime the wolf was with difficulty kept from the door , and one must in justice admit , that if any one in the world could have succeeded in making the two ends meet , it was the Frau Professorinn .
But on her husband 's death , his ill-luck seemed to die with him , and the good widow soon afterwards came into a very tidy little fortune , which , with her habits of thrift and industry , she makes go twice as far as any one else could .
Even as regards my poor friend 's unrequited labours , curiously enough his dissertation on ` The supposititious conjoined authorship of the Valmikisloka , and the Ramayana , ' has been recognised as one of the most valuable contributions to our knowledge on the subject .
The best of it is that Lichtenfeld never considered himself unfortunate as another man would page : 103 have done , but was so devoted to his studies that he never looked to get any reward beyond the pleasure he derived from them  in fact , his wife was not so far out when she considered he was always at play . ''
`` You quite rouse one 's interest in the luckless Sanskrit Professor , '' said Emanuel  `` such an abnormal specimen of humanity is not to be met with out of the fatherland .
Has he been dead long ? ''
`` Let me see , '' answered Sontheim , `` he died nearly four years ago , the youngest child was born shortly after her father 's death .
The only one who at all reminds me of the good man , my god-child , Mina . ''
`` What , Fräulein Mina ?
You must be joking , my good fellow , '' said Emanuel , smiling  `` what resemblance can there be between the abstracted book-worm you describe , and this sunshiny child of nature that seems thrilling with life as a bird does ? ''
`` Oh , that 's how you see her , '' said Sontheim , casting a shrewd glance at his friend .
`` The resemblance lies deeper down than that , and would escape the notice of any but an intimate friend .
I am very fond of the little one , and feel almost bound to watch over her in a way .
But I confess , '' he added , carelessly , `` she does n't strike me as the sort of girl men are apt to fall in love with , there 's not enough of the woman about her , she 'd be the better for a spice of coquet , in fact ! ''
`` Dear me , Sontheim , '' said Emanuel , somewhat ironically , `` I did n't know that amongst your multifarious studies you included that of the fair sex . ''
`` Oh ! ''
exclaimed Sontheim , with a fatuous expression , `` when one has had the good fortune to fall in with all that 's fascinating , alluring and supremely page : 104 beautiful in womanhood it makes one critical of the rest of the sex , no doubt ! ''
`` Dear me ! ''
said Emanuel , in a bantering tone , `` you arouse my curiosity , you do .
Can it be that this phœnix amongst women hides her charms in this town of yours ?
And is she visible to eyes other than your favoured ones , Leopold ? ''
`` Jeer on if you like , my boy , '' said Sontheim , not at all put down by his friend 's manner .
`` You 'd sing to a different tune did you see her I 'm bragging of .
I tell you she is a goddess , Emanuel ! ''
he cried energetically , getting up in his excitement , and pacing up and down the room  `` a goddess even you would bow the knee to , had you but the privilege of knowing her .
Such a walk , such a figure , such grace in every motion , and oh , Emanuel , such a subtle , bewildering , intoxicating way of smiling at you , to drive a man out of his senses !
Give me such a woman , and to win her love but for a day and a night a man might gladly give his life , I say . ''
`` Why , I declare , head over heels in love , and ` mad as a herring ' ! ''
said Emanuel .
`` Come tell us all about it , as no doubt you are dying to , and perhaps , as I 've some experience in these delicate matters , I can be of use to you .
First of all , who is this smiling divinity , Leopold ? ''
`` Oh ! ''
said Sontheim , mysteriously , `` she 's a very great lady  here 's the proof , so do n't think I 'm raving  '' and he went to a wooden chest standing in a corner of the room , and doing duty for several pieces of furniture in one .
Having unlocked it he took out a morocco case , then producing a small gold key , which he wore page : 105 on a black silk cord next to his heart , he unlocked this also , and , to his friend 's astonishment , revealed a complete set of the most effulgent diamonds , brooch , earrings , necklace , bracelets , and all .
They seemed to emit light of their own as they flashed on the sordid surroundings of the professorial abode .
Emanuel took the necklace , and holding the stones to the light , eyed them critically , then said , `` You 're right  they 're splendid indeed , and of the purest water .
Many such sets have I seen , flashing round me on fair shoulders , in the capitals where I 've played .
The lady to whom these belong is , or has been , very rich , no doubt about it ! ''
His words apparently recalled some painful memory or other , judging from the contraction of his brows and the slight start he gave , as again looking at the jewels , he said , with a certain forced levity of manner : `` By the way , you have not told me the name of your charmer yet .
Although one of the divinities , she is not Venus Anonyma , I suppose ? ''
`` Though you neither deserve to know her name nor anything else about this most beautiful of women , still I will have pity on your benighted condition , and condescend to illumine your darkness a little .
You must know , '' said Sontheim , emphatically rubbing his hands , `` that she is none of your trumpery German nobility , with inordinate pretensions and nothing to back them with , but a real , great Countess , and no mistake ! ''
`` A Countess ? ''
said Emanuel , with a certain feverish impatience in his tone , tapping the floor with his boot  `` why in the devil 's name ca n't you tell one her name , then ? ''
page : 106 Sontheim , whose own excitement prevented his noticing that of his friend , said , `` What 's in a name , old fellow ?
What can it signify to you what she 's called ?
However , there 's no mystery about it , if you must know , she 's the Countess Staraja . ''
Emanuel , drawing a deep breath , sounding suspiciously like a breath of relief , handed the brilliants back to the Professor , and said , with a mischievous twinkle in his eye : `` But you 've not told me how those valuable stones came in your possession , Leopold  you have not turned pawnbroker in addition to your other avocations , have you ?
Besides , goddesses are above pecuniary embarassments , I suppose ? ''
`` Oh , for shame ! ''
cried Sontheim , `` you unbelieving Thomas , you !
tremble lest she reveal herself some day to you in her godhead .
I wo n't keep you on the rack of expectation any longer , however , and may as well tell you , '' he continued , with an air of vast importance , carefully putting the diamonds back in their case , which he locked , `` that I am this very day going to Frankfort , either to Ladenburg 's bank or Goldschmidt 's to raise 50,000 florins on these jewels . ''
`` Then she 's after all only like one of us prosaic creatures , and has outrun her account at the banker 's , '' said Emanuel , with a mock-heroic expression .
`` Ah , why did you raise an illusion but to destroy it again , Leopold ? ''
`` I assure you it 's not at all a thing to joke about , '' said Sontheim  `` the fact is that this heavenly creature - so I concluded from some casual allusions of hers - had had serious differences with her lord , a crabbed , jealous old brute , no doubt , and so preferred eschewing page : 107 his company for a time , living in the meanwhile , mind you , in a retirement strict enough for a nun . ''
`` Where gods are in question miracles are sure to follow ! ''
put in Emanuel .
`` Well , you see , '' continued Sontheim , throwing himself well back , and expanding his chest , `` by some tremendous piece of good luck the Countess Staraja comes to me with a letter of recommendation from her man of business ( who once passed a few days in this town ) , so I have the felicity of rendering her some trifling service .
I also flatter myself '' ( here he managed to infuse an extraordinary amount of knowingness into his small blue eyes ) `` that I succeeded in whiling away some of the leisure moments of this glorious woman - well , let 's not dwell on that - when one day she sends for me in distress and perplexity - think of it !
- her husband is dying , and she says she must instantly start for Russia . ''
`` For Russia ! ''
exclaimed Emanuel , giving his friend a quick look .
`` Yes  did n't I tell you that she was a Russian Countess ? ''
asked the Professor .
`` Never mind , '' said Emanuel , who had recovered from his momentary uneasiness of manner  `` go on with your story . ''
`` Well , fancy the delight of being of some use to the beautiful Countess ! ''
cried Sontheim .
`` Not prepared for the emergency , she wants ready money of course  asks me to sell these diamonds for her in the course of a few hours ( like all women she has no conception of business , you see ) , and when I explain that that is impossible in a small town like ours , she consents to page : 108 accept the money from me , and leaves these stones to raise money upon , so that I may recoup myself and pay all her outstanding debts with .
If I am not mistaken she was not insensible to my devoted exertions in her cause .
After all , '' he went on , excitedly , his face gradually getting as red as his hair , `` the qualities women most value in men are energy and manliness and - - '' he broke off suddenly , and turning abruptly to Emanuel said , with a world of meaning in his look and tone - `` She may be a widow now . ''
`` And have you heard from her lately ? ''
asked Emanuel .
A certain confusion might have been detected in the Professor 's manner as bending over the table he said , in a rather less elated tone than hitherto : `` No , I can not say that I have . ''
`` Well , you can not expect a goddess to observe the ordinary rules of politeness , '' said Emanuel , rather sardonically  `` but , my dear Leopold , I am more concerned than I - - '' But before he had time to finish the door opened , and the lady of whom he had caught a cursory view at an earlier hour now entered boldly in the consciousness of carefully adjusted curls and a gaudy Scotch plaid dress .
Smirking and curtsying to Emanuel , and apologising for her intrusion , she asked her brother , with a certain querulousness of tone , whether he still had the intention of starting for Frankfort at one o'clock , for that in that case she must know how long he intended remaining , on account of the clothes that he 'd want to take with him .
`` Men of learning , '' she said , looking at Emanuel page : 109 with a killing smile , `` always treat these sublunary details with scorn , and yet no one is more put out than they if everything does not go as smoothly as on wheels . ''
`` Very true , dear Madam , '' said Emanuel , with a courteous inclination of the head .
`` I have no doubt this big fellow here gives you no end of trouble to keep in order . ''
`` Ah !
no one knows what it is keeping house for a great scholar like that , dear sir , '' said Frau Scherer , casting her eyes up to the ceiling in an interestingly plaintive manner .
`` Well , well , you may abuse me another time to our friend , Pauline  but come along now and let 's attend to the packing .
You wo n't mind amusing yourself with my books till I come back , will you , Emanuel ?
and we 'll walk to the stage coach together .
By the way , here 's an interesting treatise by a man who thinks he has found a key to the unity of language , that you may like to look at , '' cried Sontheim , eagerly fishing out a thin , mean-looking pamphlet from under a pile of books .
`` No , no  I 'll none of your etymologies or philologies  they are the worst of bogies to me .
Here 's something will suit me better , '' said Emanuel , seizing upon a translation of Hafiz which had just been published , as the others left the room .
page : [ 110 ] CHAPTER XI .
SOAP BUBBLES .
Sun , sun shine !
Ride over the Rhine !
Ride over the house of gold , There sit three spinsters old .
The first she spins a silken thread  The second winds the reel of death  The third hies to the spring water , And finds a little golden daughter .
WITH this old nursery ditty grandmother , one warm afternoon in June , sang Lulu to sleep  while in the darkened room a large fly , drowsily buzzing , went knocking now against the window , and now against the ceiling as if tipsy with heat .
A sunbeam slanting through a hole in the shutter , and alive with countless luminous motes , fell across the room just behind the woman 's head .
Outside , the lavish sunlight lay fostering the grapevines and the plot of garden edged off from the vineyard by a border of lemon thyme and raspberry bushes .
page : 111 There , growing in unpruned luxuriance , were all sorts of delicious flowers - sweetwilliam with its deep-hued , copious clusters  rough-leaved borage , larkspur , and the tall aromatic spikes of the lavender  spotted dragon 's mouth , and white and purple poppies , whose drowsy fumes they say , even lull the usually hard-worked bees to sleep .
The noontide with its vibrating atmosphere lay over the simmering earth .
A brooding stillness pervaded all things , only the bees glanced restlessly from flower to flower , and from one spot behind the hut came now and then explosions of laughter , or the sound of voices raised in mirth or anger .
For there , sitting astride on one of the boughs of the cherry-tree , Hans was gathering the fruit , and his brother Conrad , standing underneath , caught it and filled a large basket which they were to take to their mother .
If one or the other ate more cherries than seemed his fair share there was a general protest , and whenever Conrad , with the dexterity of long practice , cleverly caught one of them between his lips as it fell , the children uttered a joyful shout .
For they had all come to spend the day with their grandmother , it being the Frau Professorinn 's half-yearly washing day , on which they were invariably packed off to granny 's under the escort of their eldest sister .
Mina , who had herself been watching the gathering of the cherries with childish eagerness , suddenly remembered with dismay that she had promised her mother not to let Otto eat too many of them , as he had been ailing the last few days .
And he must already have devoured at least a peck !
page : 112 Yet how prevent his eating any more !
If she could only divert his attention to some new interest .
At last she hit upon a device .
She went into the house and came back presently with a basin , water , soap , and a clay pipe .
Lulu , who had woke up , followed her , with the cheek on which she had been lying much redder than the other .
Mina established herself in the garden , and Lulu clapping her hands ran to the back calling : `` Otto , Otto , Mina 's blowing bubbles ! ''
The little fellow looked reluctantly at the cherries , then rushed round to the front , while the other boys , pocketing as many as they could , followed more leisurely .
If there was one thing their souls delighted in more than another it was soap-bubbles , especially as they were forbidden to blow them at home , Frau Lichtenfeld considering it a messy and extravagant amusement .
`` You use quite enough soap in scrubbing and washing , '' she averred , `` leaving alone wasting it in baubles . ''
So the children gathered round their sister with their mouths unnaturally red , and of mask-like dimensions , and their fingers stained as a dyer 's .
Finding they could positively not manage any more cherries just now , they contented themselves in using the remaining clusters as ear-rings .
With breathless interest they watched Mina , who was an expert in the art of blowing bubbles .
All tried their hands at it in turn , but she had the knack of producing the largest , and then a dexterous shake sent them floating right up in the air .
Whenever an unusually magnificent one , iridescent with the hues of the page : 113 rainbow , drifted glistering in the sunlight awhile , and alighting in its descent , was shivered in the calix of a flower , or spluttered on one of their eagerly-lifted noses , they screamed with delight .
Grandmother , too , was looking on , standing under her doorway knitting , and benignly watching their happy faces .
As her eyes followed those airy resplendent bubbles floating so buoyantly in the summer air , her thoughts went drifting , drifting far away to her own childhood , that was like an old , dimly-remembered legend , and yet a thing of yesterday too .
For childhood and old age have much in common  theirs is the illimitable outlook , theirs the infinitely receding horizon .
Standing aside from the strenuous , enthralling struggle , where in the noonday glare men and women are jostling and trampling each other in the thoroughfares of life , they gaze dreamily into a far beyond - future or past , what matter - essentially identical as these are .
From the old woman 's ken the present had disappeared like a dream one awakes from with a sigh and a start .
Behold , she was a child again , a nimble , sportive child , running lightly to and fro , blowing her bubbles fast , her bright but evanescent bubbles of life .
She was a maiden too , bright-eyed and elastic of step , and her heart beat again in that strange , tumultuous fashion as sitting sewing by the window , she caught the sound of a certain step on the pavement , and lifting her eyes demurely , met the eyes of somebody , who raising his hat passed slowly , oh !
so very slowly .
page : 114 Those were days bright as the soap-bubbles , and as fleeting too , alas !
And once more she was a young mother with children clinging round her , the little helpless hands of children whose touch felt sweeter than aught else on earth  and her whole frame thrilled again as the soft lisp , and broken , cooing tones of infancy came borne to her ear .
And that , too , was as a bursting bubble , that young sad-eyed woman , lying weak and wan on her pillows , spasmodically clasping the breathing atom in her arms , as though it could delay her being swept away by the tide of death .
And a second time all her motherhood yearned in her , and went out to her child 's child , sweet to her widowed heart as a violet sprouting amidst fallen autumnal leaves .
Sweet Elfrida , sweetest child of her old age  she sees her now with her soft , star-like eyes , and dreamy smile , coming home from school with a crown of field-flowers on her head , the little sweetheart had gathered for her .
And she hears the coaxing , musical voice calling - `` Granny dear , I 've brought Emanuel to have bread and honey with me , because he 's in disgrace at home . ''
And there also is the boy carrying her girl 's satchel , crushing his cap into a ball in his bashfulness , and whistling as though he did n't care a bit - not he !
Ah !
was it yesterday or a lifetime since ?
* * * * * * * A grey shadow was projected on the garden plot , and a tall , thin , striking-looking man stood for an instant , looking at the merry group with a beaming countenance , then strode rapidly through the little garden , and page : 115 stretching out both his hands to the old woman , said with a certain heartfelt intonation in his voice - `` You remember Emanuel , do n't you , little mother ? ''
The old woman stared at him intently , her features worked convulsively .
She suddenly leant her trembling head against the man 's shoulder and wept , sobbing out : `` Then it was you ! ''
The stranger , gently soothing and supporting the old lady , led her into the house , where she tottered into her easy chair .
Mina , who had been looking on sympathetically , flung her arms round her grandmother 's neck , and called her by a thousand names of endearment .
When the latter had regained her composure , Mina , raising herself from her stooping posture , encountered Emanuel 's eyes , who said , bowing to her - `` What an unexpected pleasure to find you here , Fräulein  and yet unexpected is not the word either .
It seems as if I had been here with you before , and everything had been just so , even to the very words I am saying now .
Does it seem strange to you ? ''
he asked , in a low voice .
Mina , who had seemed on the point of answering something impulsively , suddenly changed colour , and instead of speaking bent again over her grandmother .
`` Forgive me , children , '' said the old lady , drying her eyes and attempting a smile .
`` We old people move and have our being in the past , and when 't is brought before us sudden like that , it quite takes our breath away .
Dear heart alive ! ''
she cried , looking scrutinizingly at Emanuel , and nodding and shaking her head by turns , `` and is this my little Emanuel , my bonny lad that was ?
Ah , Emanuel , '' she went on , taking page : 116 his long bony hand in hers , `` they tell me you have become a great musician , and that you can move people this way or that , just as it pleases you  but what have they done to you , my boy ?
you look that thin and tired it makes my heart ache to see you . ''
Emanuel had flung himself on the floor by the old lady , and as she looked at him with tender concern , he kissed the withered hand that still held his own - she was the nearest approach to a mother he had left .
`` Give me my spectacles , Mina  I must look at the boy more closely , '' she said , suddenly .
`` I am not so young as I once was , little mother , '' remarked Emanuel , smiling , `` and the passing years are not so considerate to all of us , '' looking at her admiringly  `` but when one lives in a little earthly Paradise one may well defy the passing years .
Ah , 't is well to be here ! ''
he sighed  `` and here 's old Mugin , too , I declare , looking more wise and weird than of yore , '' and as in his schoolboy days , he began teazing that dignified bird , who seemed to resent the unwonted familiarity with disgust .
`` Susan , '' called out the old lady to her servant , `` make us some coffee directly  very strong , mind .
That will refresh the boy , '' she added , in an aside  `` he looks as if they did n't half feed himself enough  and Mina , my pet , go and get us the cherries they have gathered , I know he is very fond of them . ''
Then she gave a little start , and cried , `` I beg your pardon , Emanuel  I was quite forgetting that you are not a boy now , and that we have really nothing to offer that 's fit for a great gentleman like you to eat . ''
`` Let me still be a boy with you , '' he said , stroking page : 117 the old woman 's hand , `` and see if I ca n't eat cherries against the best of them . ''
Mina , who had taken an earthenware dish from one of the cupboards , now left the room  and she had scarcely done so before Emanuel said , `` Little mother , how like , how very like she is - you know who I 'm thinking of ? ''
`` Yes , more like than I could wish , '' she answered , with a nervous shake of her head .
`` Old age breeds more care than need be , perhaps  but it makes me fear sometimes - - '' Mina 's return , however , at this moment put a stop to her sentence .
They all gathered round the table now , and the coffee , cream , and appetising bread and butter , not forgetting the cherries , were done justice to by the musician .
In this homely circle he regained the inexhaustible spirits of his youth  and among the children seemed , indeed , to have become a child again .
Presently they all adjourned to the garden , Emanuel exclaiming , `` And here are the identical old bee-hives , too , just the same as ever - only that they have multiplied according to the Biblical command  '' and he watched the bees at their work with lively curiosity , old Frau Lichtenfeld leaning on his arm .
`` Why , little mother , '' he said , `` to judge from the marvellous activity of these small creatures , and the incessant flux and reflux of life , there 's as much business doing as in some of the streets of London or Paris , only that they manage their musical accompaniment better here .
How much honey would one of these communities manage to make per day , on an average ? ''
page : 118 `` Well , that 's according to the time of year , and the condition they 're in , you see , '' replied Frau Lichtenfeld .
`` Sometimes we 've what 's called a ` hunch-back ' brood , and there 's next to no honey to be got from them  then , again , if the queen should be taken sick , the whole state is thrown into disorder , and wasps , moths , and thieves of that sort , break through the gates and do no end of damage .
But as a rule , bless them , they are far more hard-working and orderly in their proceedings than most of us .
But if you really care to know , Emanuel , I 'll tell you how much honey each hive makes a day  for I weigh them myself every evening , and put down on my slate how many pounds ' worth of honey has been added by each during the day .
Ah , '' she said , fumbling at her side where she usually carried a little slate tied round her waist  `` let 's see , Mina dear , did n't I leave it on the table at the back , where I was shelling the peas in the morning ? ''
`` Yes , granny  I 'll go and fetch it directly , '' said Mina , running off .
`` Oh , granny , will you weigh the bees now , while we 're here ? ''
cried Conrad and Otto , with sparkling eyes .
`` No , no , let me weigh them , '' cried Hans .
`` I 'll do it tip-top , just see whether I wo n't . ''
`` No , me , me , '' cried Lulu 's childish voice , impatiently pulling her grandmother 's skirts to enforce her request .
`` Why , children , they might sting you as like as not  they do n't know you as well as me , you see , who watch over and care for them as if they were little children almost  and they 're very grateful when you show them kindness , more so than many a Christian , bless you .
page : 119 But what 's that ? ''
she said , lowering her head and listening for an instant .
`` Why , surely the hive must be going to swarm a day sooner than I expected - dear , dear , I must go and get the basket from the house , and my bee-cap and gloves .
Out of their way , children ! ''
she cried , seizing Lulu and pushing the others back into the doorway  `` Keep quiet here , you 'll see them directly .
Stay where you are , Hans , they are dreadfully excited now and I would n't guarantee that they might n't sting you if you got in their way . ''
She had scarcely finished speaking before there was a rushing noise of wings , and many thousand bees , as though propelled by some invisible force , precipitated themselves from the narrow aperture in the space of a few minutes .
`` Herr Jesu !
O Lord , have mercy upon us ! ''
gasped the old woman , in a voice almost inarticulate with terror , clutching hold of Emanuel and trembling from head to foot as she leaned forward with straining eyes .
For just then , Mina , turning quickly round an angle in the path , was suddenly enveloped by the tumultous host .
On her hair , on her cheeks , on her delicate sloping shoulders , protected by nothing more solid than a thin cambric chemisette , they settled by hundreds  while thousands more , hovering round , hid her in a winged , murmuring cloud .
Dumb with horror the girl stood rooted to the spot .
Indeed , she had sufficient presence of mind to remember that her only chance of safety was to remain as quiescent under the circumstances as a tree or a flower .
Emanuel had no sooner realised what had happened than he was going to dash forward at all risks , but felt page : 120 his arm spasmodically clutched by the terrified old woman , who whispered in a quavering voice - `` Be quiet , for God 's sake !
If you irritate them now they may sting her to death as sure as I live ! ''
But Emanuel , wrenching himself almost roughly from her grasp , said hoarsely - `` Let me be , I know them of old , '' and darted forward before she had time to answer or remonstrate .
In a moment he had reached the spot where the girl stood with the bees surging round her in palpitating multitudes  walking unmoved through the formidable swarm , he said - `` Trust me , '' in a low voice , as he looked at Mina with infinite solicitude .
There was no need for the injunction , indeed .
The moment he had approached Mina , her painful apprehension was replaced by a sense of security .
Emanuel , watching the bees for an instant , suddenly put his hand in her hair , and with his dexterous fingers extracted one of the bees from amidst its luxuriant wavy mass .
He had not been mistaken - it was the queen he captured and now carried back to the old hive .
No sooner had he done so than all her subjects , as though they had but one soul between them , wheeled round , and leaving Mina perfectly unhurt , rushed with incredible haste into the basket after their queen .
`` My child !
my child ! ''
gasped the grandmother , examining Mina all over with her trembling hands , and kissing her and sobbing over her .
`` You 're safe , quite safe !
Not one of them has stung her , not one , God bless them !
Oh , '' she cried , pressing the girl to her heart , `` I am a faithless old woman .
I ought to page : 121 have had more confidence in my bees .
You showed you knew them better than I did , Emanuel  but I was quite beside myself at the moment  ah , Emanuel , '' she continued  but on looking round found he had left her side .
For Emanuel had no sooner seen that the girl was unharmed than he walked rapidly down the garden path , and once or twice an irrepressible shudder seemed to pass over him .
On hearing himself called he joined the others in the room , looking very white and like one who has recovered his self-control with an effort .
`` I thank you from my heart , Emanuel .
Next to the Lord I owe the child 's safety to you , '' cried Frau Lichtenfeld , holding out her hand to him .
`` Oh , I do n't think she was in any danger , little mother , '' said Emanuel , lightly  `` the creatures ' instinct told them that she is a protectress of their kind , indeed I think they clung to her for pure love , only we were too obtuse to understand their peculiar way of manifesting it .
You alone showed some kind of trust , '' said Emanuel , softly , bringing Mina a chair and sitting down beside her  `` would you always be so trustful , I wonder ? ''
`` Why should I not , '' said Mina , looking straight at him for a moment with her sweet frank eyes , but immediately dropping them again .
`` Trust comes easy to the pure in heart , '' Emanuel murmured , half inaudibly , while an expression of sorrow swept over his features , which though lasting but an instant unconsciously disturbed Mina .
`` If I had reflected a little , '' he said , after a moment 's abstraction and as if making an effort over himself , `` I page : 122 should not have been so disturbed when I saw the swarm surrounding you  neither bird , beast , nor insect would ever hurt a hair of your head , I am certain . ''
`` Do you mean because I love them so ? ''
asked Mina , in perfect seriousness .
`` Well , yes , '' said Emanuel , smiling , `` and because you are such a child of nature that all her beneficent powers must watch over you . ''
`` It is true I have never been stung or bitten by anything , not even by the gnats that torment the others so much - only once , '' she said , in a ruminating manner , and then with a brightening look , `` the very day you rescued that nest for me .
I had a dream - oh , you ca n't think what a vivid dream it was : I was chasing the most wonderful butterfly , and when I thought I had caught it , it changed to a horrible monstrous spider , which stung me quite real like - oh , what is the matter ? ''
For Emanuel , who had at first listened to her with evident delight , suddenly showed signs of inexplicable agitation , and seizing her hand pressed it violently , exclaiming , `` And you too , my child  you too ? ''
Mina 's query , and her startled , bewildered look , recalled the musician to his senses  he let go her hand abruptly , as though it burned him , and said with a forced laugh , `` I beg your pardon , Fräulein  I had quite forgotten that you were only telling me a dream , and that in the fatherland here there are no - - '' ( he apparently checked the word that was trembling on his tongue ) `` snakes or poisonous spiders to speak of . ''
`` Well , Mimchen , '' said her grandmother , who had only just succeeded in pacifying Lulu 's sobs and cries , coming up and laying her hand on Mina 's head , `` have page : 123 you quite recovered from your fright ?
Is there anything I can do for you ? ''
`` No , granny , '' said Mina , with a certain preoccupation in her manner , which , however , escaped her grandmother 's notice  `` but do sit down and rest yourself in your chair , now .
It is you who must be frightened .
I had no time for it . ''
`` I remember your bees since I can remember anything .
What made you first think of keeping them ? ''
asked Emanuel .
`` It was my husband who was so fond of them - they helped to ruin him , in fact  but when he died broken-hearted , I found them a livelihood .
It 's a long story , and some day maybe I 'll tell it you . ''
page : [ 124 ] CHAPTER XII .
THE FAIR .
A FORTNIGHT or so had elapsed since Emanuel and Mina had accidentally met at the Raven 's hut .
Since then a tall , elegant-looking man might sometimes have been seen bending his steps to the last house of the town , to the astonishment and secret envy of some of Frau Lichtenfeld 's neighbours .
One of these , more particularly , kept a sharp lookout on all the incomings and outgoings of the Lichtenfelds .
This was Fräulein von Griesbach , who lived only a stone 's throw off , and passed the better part of her time sitting on the high step by the window , scrutinizing the passers-by and bewailing the degeneracy of the times .
The better to make her observations she had a looking-glass fastened on either hand outside her window , which enabled her to see all that was going on up and down the street .
From her all-seeing eye no poor servant wench could hope to hide page : 125 her stolen interview with the soldiers  it would be no exaggeration to say that she was privy to every incipient love-affair in the street , and sometimes prognosticated a rising passion before the parties concerned knew of it themselves .
In the lady 's formal drawing-room some of her intimates were assembled one afternoon at the hour of coffee , an occasion on which she felt it incumbent on herself to impart to them , out of `` sincerest '' regard for that poor widow Lichtenfeld , what she could n't help seeing - much as she might wish to shut her eyes to it .
She only hoped that that dear , sensible Herr Sontheim , as Mina 's godfather , would put a stop to these proceedings before things had gone too far .
`` In fact , '' she said , turning to Frau Scherer , who was stooping over some fine white embroidery , `` I am inclined to think that it would be acting the part of a true friend to give your brother a hint in this matter . ''
`` Dear , dear , '' sighed Frau Scherer , bending still lower over her work , `` you do n't know my brother as well as I do , Fräulein von Griesbach , or you would know what a firebrand he is if there 's what he rudely calls any scandalmongering going on .
Besides , girls should n't be forward , and throw themselves in the way of people , you know , or they must take the consequences . ''
`` That 's very true , very true indeed , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach , snapping off her thread .
`` Everybody knows what these great artists and musicians are .
` In each new place , a nice new face ! '
is their motto no less than the soldiers ' .
And this Herr Sturm , to be sure , looks a regular lady-killer .
Only to see him taking off his hat is enough .
Now , if that enigmatical Countess , page : 126 - what d' ye call her - who came and went who knows where , had still been at their house , one could understand there being an attraction for such as he !
Artists always pair-off with these sort of adventuresses , you know .
But what he can see in that Lichtenfeld girl quite passes my comprehension . ''
`` Well , well , '' interposed Frau Obertribunalprocurator Hopfengärtner , in a soothing tone , `` the girl has been getting prettier and prettier of late , there 's no denying that  and what a bloom she has ! ''
`` Oh , she 's passable enough , '' said Frau Scherer , `` and all very well for such a man as Lieutenant Knapp to run after  he 's getting more hopelessly in love with her than ever , they say . ''
`` The more fool he ! ''
said Fräulein von Griesbach , severely , `` for she wo n't have anything to say to the deserving young man  though what she is to give herself such airs for , I do n't know , for one . ''
`` No , no , there you wrong the girl  you do indeed , dear Fräulein von Griesbach , '' put in Frau Hopfengärtner , hastily gulping down a piece of rather stale cake  `` nothing is farther from poor Mina 's nature than airs of any sort - she 's too little of that , if anything .
But she 's not like other girls of her age exactly .
Her mother tells me she 'll spend hours lying on her back in the garden , staring up at the sky  and then talk in the oddest way about things she 's seen in the clouds . ''
`` Ah , her father always looked a queer , dazed sort of creature , in spite of his learning  and her grandfather was a bankrupt , you remember , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach , with an ominous shake of the head .
`` These things run in families , you know . ''
page : 127 `` Do you think , '' said Frau Scherer , looking round as if to ascertain that there were no eavesdroppers , and lowering her voice almost to a whisper , `` do you think that the girl may be writing poetry in secret ? ''
`` Heaven forbid ! ''
cried the Frau Obertribunalprocurator , emphatically  `` that would be too hard on our poor dear Frau Professorinn , after all the trouble she 's gone through already .
There 's no marrying a girl of that sort , you know  and with a family of six , too . ''
`` Well , I ca n't help thinking no good will come of that girl and her ways , '' remarked Fräulein von Griesbach , by way of a clincher .
Meanwhile the subject of these remarks , happily unconscious of what a moral stumbling-block she was to many of her female acquaintances , was on her way to Mühlbach , a small market-town about seven miles from D - - .
For , as Frau Lichtenfeld used to put it - `` If the girl 's fit for nothing else , she can at least go on errands  and she 's that fond of the open air , it 's a pity she 's a respectable burgher 's child and not a beggar 's brat , made to sell brooms in the street . ''
At any rate , Frau Lichtenfeld had this day despatched her daughter on a strictly private and confidential errand , the nature of which she kept a profound secret from even her two closest bosom-friends  yet the good widow , so far from being ashamed , might have been proud to let the whole town know what she so carefully concealed .
The fact was that the Professorinn - who rose at cockcrow - after putting her house in apple-pie order , still found herself with plenty of time left on her hands , which she made use of by turning an honest penny on page : 128 the sly .
And the way she set about it was as follows .
It used to be the fashion at one time , amongst well-to-do farmers and people of that class , to wear gaudily embroidered braces for their Sunday best  and this sort of work was perhaps better paid than any , as there was a steady demand for it in all the outlying country towns and villages .
Now Frau Lichtenfeld 's soul would have revolted from having any mercantile dealings with the shopkeepers of her native town .
Was she not the daughter of the late Medicinalrath Duttenhofer , a man looked up to by the best connected families of the town !
No , it should never be said , if she could help it , that a degenerate offspring of the great Duttenhofer was actually reduced to the point of selling her own handiwork  besides , what Would such ladies as the Frau Obertribunalprocurator Hopfengärtner , and the thrice nobly connected Fräulein von Griesbach , have whispered of her behind her back had they suspected her of such vulgar propensities ?
She had therefore hit upon a plan which had hitherto answered her purpose admirably .
Twice a year a large fair was held at Mühlbach , to which the farmers and peasants came flocking from all parts of the surrounding country .
Thither she herself , under pretence that you could buy all kinds of earthenware so much better and cheaper there , had resorted with her finely-worked braces , ever since the death of her husband some three years ago .
There was one particular booth amongst others noticeable for these attractive articles of male apparel , and the man with whom she was in the habit of transacting page : 129 her business came from a great distance and was not likely therefore to divulge the nature of her dealings with him .
But this year Frau Lichtenfeld , to her exceeding regret , was prevented from going there in person , because Lulu , who had surreptitiously possessed herself of a cold pancake , was laid up with a severe fit of indigestion , which developed into nettle-rash , and she was much too anxious to leave the pet and nestling of the family .
She determined at last , being much in want of money , on sending Mina , who had several times accompanied her on these expeditions .
`` Now mind you do n't go gadding out of your way after flowers and such trash , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld , on the landing , putting the neatly-tied parcel into a bag which also contained her daughter 's dinner .
`` It 's not likely you 'll meet any one if you take the road through the Schlossgarten and pine-wood .
I 've always found it most quiet along there  but if you should by ill-luck meet any of our friends by the way , for goodness ' sake , girl , do n't you let the cat out of the bag , if you value your old mother 's peace of mind and the respected name of your maternal grandfather .
And do n't you be wool-gathering when shrewd old Stein chinks the twenty hard , bright gulden down on the counter - that 's about what it 'll be , I reckon  he 's close with his money , but he knows what 's what when he sees such neat , fine work as mine is .
And here 's my purse to put the money in  stow it away in that pocket , it 'll be safe there  and if you are careful and do as I tell you I 'll lay out some of the money on a new dress for you - your muslins are all getting washed out again because you will stain page : 130 them so pottering about in that garden , and never think of smoothing out the skirt before sitting down .
Well , well , it 's hard work preaching to deaf ears , and there are none so deaf as those that wo n't hear  but I hope for once you 'll have your wits about you and attend to what I am telling you .
Now it 's high time you were off , instead of standing there saying , ` Yes , yes . '
My goodness , look alive , girl , and remember that you have five miles of road before you ! ''
said the Professorinn , by way of adieu to Mina , who thereupon hurried down the stairs with irreproachable speed .
It was close upon noon when Mina reached Mühlbach .
Booths and stalls of all kinds lined each side of the usually solitary streets , and through the grey clouds of dust crowds of people , whose appearance seemed more fitted for the Italian Opera than sober nature , were pressing and hustling each other eagerly where wares of the most varied and nondescript character were displayed for sale .
The costume of many of the peasant women , whose I chief aim seemed to have been the attainment of an abnormal width and bulkiness of development about the hips , would have reminded those who are old enough to remember of the extinct race of the `` Buy-a-brooms . ''
They wore short , copiously pleated woollen skirts  large aprons of varied colours and materials , some snowy white , others of gaudily flowered prints  bodices of crimson cloth , laced with silver across an embroidered stomacher , the chemise being showily puffed at the sleeves and covered at the shoulders with a cloth pelerine , fastened with green ribbons under the arms  clock-embroidered hose encased their strong legs and page : 131 ankles , and their feet were shod in thick-soled blue cloth shoes tipped with leather .
Under the coquettish little caps , turban-shaped or phrygian , which , adorned with black silk streamers , were slightly tilted on one side , their straight , heavy flaxen hair was tightly drawn backwards  and this rainbow-hued costume was further completed by a profusion of peasant jewellery , consisting for the most part of garnets and silver .
The dress of the male peasants was no less conspicuous .
Some wore short jackets resplendent with metal buttons  others , long , loose coats , slit up behind  while their scarlet waistcoats , hanging open , displayed richly embroidered braces ( such as Mina 's mother was in the habit of working ) , strapped across the chest , seemingly as much the pride of the men as the many coloured ribbons were of the women .
Leather breeches embroidered at the seams , black stockings , stout buckled shoes , and low-crowned felt hats , made up the rest of their attire .
Mina had some difficulty in making her way through this motley throng  and at one point the people were so densely packed that she had perforce to come to a standstill .
The attraction proved to be a kind of cheap-jack , and the man who was displaying his miscellaneous articles one by one happened at that moment to be flourishing a woman 's bright-coloured neck-handkerchief before the eyes of the spectators , bawling at the top of his voice - `` Here 's a bargain , lads !
Genuine , and no mistake - pure silk - all the colours of the rainbow - warranted fast - stand all the wear and tear in the world !
Lasses dying to have it , I see !
A fine young fellow shall have page : 132 it for thirty gulden - there , I ca n't say fairer than that ! ''
and looking round encouragingly he struck the wooden stand a tremendous blow with his fist .
Some of the onlookers here burst into a loud horse-laugh , but not the faintest attempt at bidding for the prize was made by any of them .
Not in the least discouraged , the huckster cried , `` Twenty-four gulden ! ''
and he struck another ringing blow .
`` Twenty gulden !
Twelve gulden !
Eight gulden !
Six gulden !
Four gulden ! ''
More and more scornful grew his glances as his prices went diminuendo - diminuendo  and with half a dozen crashing oaths he came down to `` Three gulden and seven groschen , and not a kreuzer taken off !
What , is n't there ne'er a sweetheart amongst the lot of you ?
Fie girls !
what niggards have you for lovers !
Weddings 'll be scarce this year , and yet the corn 's promising and the vines are loaded . ''
There was a deal of giggling at this , and a whispering , and a consulting , and a nodding , and one gawky young fellow cast sheep 's eyes at the gaudy trifle , but looked down again immediately as though he might forthwith be entrapped into buying it .
His glances had not escaped the salesman , who immediately swooped down on him like a hawk on its prey , crying - `` Bravo !
bravo !
you 're the only decent fellow of the lot  and I wish you a true lass , and a faithful and a fair - and there she is too , by jingo !
Well , I 'm just letting you have it dirt cheap , all for love of the bonny black eyes there ! ''
and with a knowing wink he dexterously flung the handkerchief right on the nose of the yokel .
page : 133 Thereat there was a universal titter .
The neck-handkerchief was next inspected , first on this side , then on that , held up to the light , pulled and rubbed , and tested between finger and thumb  and at last , after a long consultation , the bargain was concluded , and the man went through exactly the same performance with another piece of goods .
Some of the peasants were moving on now , so that Mina was at last at liberty to pursue her way down the narrow thoroughfare , lined on either hand with stalls , where clocks from the Black Forest , Bohemian glass , Tyrolese gloves , Nuremberg toys , Bas ` ler Leckerle , peasants ' almanacks , pictures of saints and rosaries , and pots and pans of every imaginable shape , material , and colour , brass , tin , copper , wood , earthenware , and what not , with many other goods , were displayed to the best possible advantage .
In order to reach her destination Mina had to cross a little triangular square , where the grass sprouting between the irregular paving-stones testified sufficiently to its habitual quietness , but which at this moment resounded with the deafening noise of gongs , drums , trumpets , and other , equally melodious instruments , while two large booths divided the public with their rival attractions .
On one side of the square the King of the Niggers was depicted on a garish curtain , in the blackest of skins and whitest of teeth , taming the lion of the desert , while his queen , a lady with an enormous cloud of hair and a suspiciously white complexion , testified to her savage genuineness by swallowing a live fish tail foremost  the public being informed that this rare sight page : 134 might be seen in the flesh for the small sum of one groschen .
In front of the opposition booth the superlative tightrope dancer Landrinette was at that moment exhibiting herself in somewhat dingy tights and spangles , beating a big drum with one hand while with the other she clashed the cymbals , at the same time notifying to an admiring , open-mouthed crowd that if they would only walk in they might not only see her own thrilling performances in mid-air , but also have the satisfaction of beholding a man-eater or one of the anthropophagi , who for his past sins had his head cut off every half-hour to the sound of trumpets , and carried round , like St. John 's , for the inspection of spectators , in a charger full of blood .
Mina might have felt tempted to enter one of these booths - as she still had a lively recollection of her childish pleasure in tight-rope dancing - but for the solemn nature of the duties she was entrusted with  as it was she contented herself by lingering for what appeared to her but a few instants in front of the stand where Landrinette was contorting her lithe body into the most extraordinary of attitudes .
Lost in admiration of such agility , Mina did not see that she was closely watched by two characters widely different in appearance and social rank .
One was a young lieutenant in a tightly fitting military tail-coat , with brilliantly white epaulets , his face being extremely red , as though the tightness of his stock had forced the greater part of blood in his body up into it .
This was Lieutenant Knapp , who , on duty at the guard-house of the fair , had been following the unconscious page : 135 Mina since her first appearance there , and was now engaged in alternately contemplating her lovely face , and scanning the suspicious movements of her second observer .
This was a shock-headed youth , who had been edging more and more closely to Mina 's bag , when suddenly by a dexterous movement he ripped it open without undoing the strings hanging on her arm , and was making off with Frau Lichtenfeld 's precious parcel when a vigorous cuff from the vigilant lieutenant sent him spinning ten paces off in one direction while the parcel fell down in the other .
The enamoured young man felt Mina 's charms far too much to pursue the young rogue , but seizing on the prize he restored it , not without a certain gleam of triumph , to the bewildered young lady .
All unconscious of the disaster that had threatened her , she almost fancied that the active lieutenant had been exhibiting a graceful tour of legerdemain for her private delectation .
Mina blushed with surprise , the lieutenant blushed with pleasure , and the fragmentary explanation which followed was tinged with zeal on the one side , and polite embarrassment on the other .
How long this state of things might have lasted it is difficult to say  for Mina , with her uncommenced negotiations weighing on her conscience , was longing to be off , but did not know in her diffidence how to cut short the stammering lieutenant 's speeches , when the striking of a clock reminded him that the guard had to be relieved , and so with bows interspersed with protestations he reluctantly betook himself to his military duties , to her infinite relief .
page : 136 Mina , now hugging the recovered parcel tightly in her arms , looked no more to right or to left of her , but with praiseworthy resolution bent her steps to the brace-merchant 's booth .
That worthy , when he knew whose errand she came upon , did not suffer his attention to be distracted by her clear brown eyes and glowing cheeks  but , deftly undoing the parcel , reserved his admiration for the brilliant hues which the mother 's fingers had wrought there .
After carefully inspecting each separate article , and snapping the braces more than once with a sort of triumphant experiment in test of their stability , he reluctantly balanced each bright coin between his thumb and forefinger , and counted twenty gulden into Mina 's small hand .
page : [ 137 ] CHAPTER XIII .
ELEMENTAL MATCH-MAKING .
HAVING satisfactorily concluded her business , Mina set out for home .
It was a broilingly hot day , but luckily for her her way lay through the outskirts of a pine-forest extending to the neglected old Grand Ducal Palace gardens .
The glare of sunlight , permeating air and sky , only slanted like golden rain through the sombre woof of pines in whose tops not a breeze was stirring .
The stillness was so profound that you could hear that faint undertone and susurration which , like the heart-beat of Nature herself only becomes audible when all other sounds are in abeyance .
In this complete solitude Mina had no sense of fear .
She felt like a child sheltered in her father 's house .
Her heart was overflowing with devotion and a love of this beautiful world such as she had never yet experienced .
As she was leisurely walking along over the smooth page : 138 pine-needles , her ear detected the crisp sound of footsteps some distance off .
Presently she caught sight of a man 's tall figure through the stems of the trees .
Then she started , and a vivid blush suffused her countenance .
At the same moment the man , who had been leisurely going along with his head bent , looked up , and , quickening his pace , raised his hat .
An expression of joy impossible to conceal lit up his eyes at this unexpected meeting .
`` Who would have thought of meeting you here , of all places ! ''
cried Emanuel , impulsively , stretching out both his hands to the girl in his surprise , and retaining hers for a moment as he stood looking at her downcast face .
`` But why should I be surprised , after all ?
you seem native to the woods  and sometimes I fancy - forgive me for the thought , '' he added , gaily , `` that you must be an elf 's child , and that your good mother must have been cheated of her own . ''
Mina laughed softly , and stammered that her mother , when angry with her , had often said she must be a changeling by rights .
`` But I do n't know what people mean , '' she said , opening her eyes to their widest  `` is there then anything wrong or strange in being fond of the hills and woods ?
How can one be otherwise ?
As far back as I can remember I have heard voices when the trees go nodding their heads together , and have even tried to make out what they are saying .
Sometimes , do you know , I have fancied that each kind of tree has a language of its own , in which it talks with his fellows .
The most wonderful tongue is that of the pines here , and perhaps they are chaunting - what my poor father used to tell me of - old-world secrets of fallen gods . ''
page : 139 `` Oh , '' said Emanuel , softly , `` I have heard what a great scholar your father was  and so absorbed in his studies , they say , that he had neither eyes nor ears for what was passing around him .
But he used to tell you something of his thoughts and speculations , did he ?
Why , what a mere child you must have been , though , at the time . ''
`` Oh , I liked nothing so well as stealing into father 's study , and getting him to tell me all sorts of wonderful things from the books he was poring over  and he was never cross or impatient at my interrupting him , but would let me climb on his knees , or sit beside him on the piled-up books , and tell me of a people that lived thousands of years ago , far away in the East , a race of shepherds who had no book but the heavens , but used to read strange things in the clouds and stars .
Oh , I wish - - '' she exclaimed , and stopped suddenly , getting very red .
`` What do you wish ?
Tell me !
I should wish nothing so much just now as to fulfil yours ! ''
said Emanuel , with a smile .
`` But you will think my wish too childish and impossible , I fear , '' said Mina , blushing more than before .
`` I should have liked to have been one of that people , and kept the flocks , and watched the clouds ever coming and going in the sky . ''
`` I entirely retract my wish , '' cried Emanuel , with much emphasis , `` and thank my stars that you came to life in my time , and are walking with me here at this very moment .
Do n't you think there 's something to be said for this age too ?
and you know the sky and the clouds and their ever-varying aspects are still the page : 140 same those Aryan herdsmen saw  from which they evolved that marvellous tissue of gods and demons which , in one shape or another , have ruled the world ever since .
But tell me , how would you like to go into great towns , where you would see even less of the sky and sunlight than you do here in old Germany  and yet make acquaintance with a thousand fresh emotions of life and art ? ''
`` I have often thought of that , too , '' answered Mina  `` and sometimes when I sit by my window in the dusk , from where I see the hills against the sky , I begin picturing to myself what sort of a world there is behind them , till I feel as though something mysterious were calling on me to rise and go straight across them , on and on till I came to some such place as I have read of in books , where there ate spires and steeples rising as plentifully as our trees here  and cathedrals , through which the music goes rushing and sweeping like a tempest  and palaces full of pictures  and gardens , where there are all manner of outlandish animals , brought from the desert and the northpole , and from God knows where .
I have only once seen a real live lion and tiger , and that was long ago at the fair  but , '' she added , heaving a childlike sigh , `` what chance is there of my leaving this neighbourhood ever ? ''
`` Oh , you have chances enough , '' said Emanuel , with a peculiar smile  `` but this quiet , old-world life here has a charm of its own , I confess .
Only after what you must remember of your father , I am afraid you hardly find the people as poetic as the neighbourhood , do you ? ''
`` The people are very kind , if they would only leave page : 141 me alone , but I never begin thinking of things but they fancy that I am a kilkrop , or something dreadful of that sort , I believe . ''
Emanuel laughed like a boy , but said nothing .
The trees were rustling overhead , each in their own language as Mina would have it .
They walked on in silence for some time .
The musician felt that there were a hundred things he would have liked to have asked her about , had their short acquaintance really warranted the intimacy he felt .
He would have liked to have asked her how she could tolerate the dull monotony of her mother 's household  but how could he ?
He would have liked to have asked if she ever felt any impulse to run away as he had done at her age , but this was out of the question .
He would have liked to have pressed her hands and looked deeply into her eyes , and have said , `` You are the sweetest girl that I ever met in my life , and I should like to - - '' but he only walked on in silence .
Once or twice he looked round at her countenance lingeringly and gently , as though it suddenly occurred to him that at least that right remained to him , seeing that she gazed obstinately in front of her .
But he was vastly mistaken if he thought she did not see him , for the human eye very distinctly takes in a large circumference round the mere point of vision  and Mina , though in a sort of dream , saw most clearly every motion of his face and hands .
Indeed , she seemed in a delicious trance , in which everything else except an unwonted sense of pleasure was obliterated  and for aught she knew she might have been floating along the ground instead of stepping beside him .
His silence seemed to her quite page : 142 natural , and her own did not embarrass her .
In point of fact , time had ceased existing for her  she did not think of her mother , she did not think of the hour , and least of all did she think of herself .
In this frame of mind they had left the wood behind them , and entered the palace garden itself .
The ground here broke into gentle declivities and fairy-knolls  all sorts of trees , many not indigenous to the soil , grew here in disordered order , and bushy-tailed squirrels , usually left in undisturbed possession of this green solitude , darted up the stems at the unwonted sound of footsteps , their beaded eyes curiously glinting here and there through the foliage .
All at once Emanuel was roused from his meditations by something thumping on his hat .
He looked up inquiringly , and said in astonishment - `` How dark it has grown !
It can not surely be late ! ''
Even while he was speaking there was again a heavy thump , thump , on the ground , and there came a deep rumbling noise , not unlike the rolling of huge blocks or boulders down a rocky hill-side .
`` Why , I am afraid we are in for a thunderstorm , '' cried Emanuel , looking anxiously at Mina in her thin muslin dress .
`` We must hurry on as fast as we can , and get under shelter if possible before it bursts upon us . ''
Mina had looked up too  her eyes sparkled with a child 's enjoyment .
`` Oh , I am so fond of a downright good thunderstorm ! ''
she exclaimed .
`` I have never seen one out here before . ''
`` But we have no umbrellas , no wraps , nothing - we page : 143 must make for the nearest shelter , if there is anything of the sort near , as fast as we can , '' said Emanuel .
`` Oh , the pavilion 's not far off now , '' Mina replied  `` if we turn down here we shall reach it in a few minutes . ''
Emanuel hurried along at such a pace that his companion had to fall into a little trot to keep up with him .
Big , heavy drops splashed at intervals through the slightly shivering trees , and the moment they fell the parched , thirsty earth , split by great gaps , had completely absorbed them .
Now and then one fell on Mina , but she only laughed , though Emanuel seemed deeply concerned .
It was oppressively sultry , and save for that occasional shiver of the leaves there was not a sound stirring  an unnatural darkness gathered overhead , so that the blurred lurid outlines of the clouds were but confusedly visible through the black and motionless tree-tops .
They were rushing along in silence when a sheet of livid flame lit up the darkness , and flashing along the ground seemed to dart past their very feet .
Emanuel , seizing hold of the girl 's hand , instinctively stretched out his arm above her head , as though to protect her against all the embattled forces of nature , as he tore her along with him .
Flash upon flash followed the first with bewildering rapidity  clap upon clap of thunder succeeded instantaneously  then there was a wild soughing of the wind through the trees , and the very sluices of heaven seemed opening as the rain came crashing like a cataract from the clouds .
page : [ 144 ] CHAPTER XIV .
VENUS VICTRIX .
`` THERE 'S the pavilion '' , cried Mina , as they came all at once upon a lonely little house that stood all by itself amongst the trees .
It was one of those summer-houses so much in vogue with the licentious German princes in the latter half of the eighteenth century  lying half-hidden in the wood-like park , but yet in close communication with the Grand Ducal Palace , to which an old linden avenue led straight in opposite direction to that from which Emanuel and Mina were approaching it .
Springing up the steps and saying that the door was locked , Mina beckoned to a hidden side-entrance , which opened smoothly enough on her pressing a secret spring .
Even in the minute it took to effect their entrance they had both got a thorough soaking .
`` You are dreadfully wet  I am afraid you will get ill ! ''
cried Emanuel , rushing wildly about the room in page : 145 which they now found themselves , looking for something or other with which to cover or dry her  such things , however , had long since vanished with the vanished owners .
So he eagerly whipped his silk handkerchief from his pocket , and began flicking the rain from her hair and dress and thinly-clad shoulders , with as much care as though she were one of the Dresden shepherdesses that still kept their place on the cabinets with ormolu corner-pieces , and he might break her in the process .
He was even going to divest himself of his coat next in order to put it over her , only that she protested so strongly he had to desist .
`` This is nothing , nothing indeed ! ''
cried Mina , reassuringly , giving herself a shake like a duckling , and looking as though getting wet were the most pleasing sensation in the world - as indeed it was the most becoming thing in existence , thought Emanuel .
But he did not quite give vent to his feelings  glancing round the octagonal room he only said - `` What a dear , charming old place you have suddenly raised to shelter us from the storm !
I have long suspected you of being something of a fairy , but now I am sure of it ! ''
and he threw himself on the parqueted floor at Mina 's feet , looking up at the ceiling with its cupids and nymphs à la Boucher , who , if sunken in tone and tarnished , were probably less offensive in colour than in all the garish rawness of their pristine blues and pinks .
Mina laughed softly as she answered - `` Oh , it 's only the old park-keeper who in this case plays the part of good fairy .
Once he used to frighten us children dreadfully if ever we dared to pluck flowers page : 146 off the grass in front of the palace , by telling us that bears and tigers and wolves were shut up in this lonely house here , and that we should be locked up along with them if we were disobedient .
But nothing could ever keep me from the flowers  and so once the keeper , with his bushy eyebrows and long red nose , took me in his arms and said he would take me to the bears , and then my terror became so strong that I could n't even scream , but fell back with all my senses clean gone . ''
`` Wicked , wicked monster ! ''
muttered Emanuel , clenching his fist .
`` No , he was n't wicked , '' said Mina , gently  `` only he did n't know , I suppose , how dreadful a thing fear is .
He was so sorry for what he had done afterwards , and told me there were no wild beasts there - how silly I must have been to think there were !
- only little angels with wings .
So at last he got me to go and peep in with him , and then he and I became great friends , and he showed me how I might let myself in here whenever I wished if I would keep it a strict secret  for he told me how our Grand Duke , because of something in a will , had ordered everything to be left exactly as it was in his grandfather 's time .
So I used to come here on a summer holiday and read fairy-tales , while the other children were romping in the park outside .
Oh ! ''
she cried , `` I must show you the story of the ` Sleeping Beauty , ' embroidered in the most beautiful colours , over there  '' and she tripped across the room , and drawing out one of the once gorgeous draperies or portières , displayed its needlework .
Emanuel , who had slowly risen to his feet , was following her every look and motion with a certain page : 147 brooding intensity of expression .
All this tarnished splendour around them seemed to act as a foil to that slim , girlish figure , in the green muslin gown and cape with the fluttering ribbons  to that face with the virginal lips and the delicate rose-red bloom , and to those ethereal eyes , that seemed to swim like stars in some divinely limpid ether of their own  in a word , to that immaculate youth of body and soul .
It seemed to Emanuel that , in looking at her , the freshness and dew of his own youth was coming back to him once more .
He was wishing in his heart that the thunder and lightning would continue indefinitely to flash and roar overhead  that the rain would still go on falling through the wet , shaken boughs of the trees .
But he was in truth all the time struggling hard with the strong , well-nigh overpowering emotion , which threatened every moment to overflow its bounds .
So all at once , to hide what he felt , he began drawing the gayest , most animated picture of the fine gentlemen with bag-wigs , and the noble ladies in ruffles and farthingales , who had once upon a time lounged and laughed and flirted and fanned themselves on this pale , rose-coloured furniture , with its sumptuous curves and gorgeous marquetry work .
Brilliant , witty , gay , he overbrimmed with quaint conceits and fancies , and , giving the rein to his imagination , flashed out story after story , as only a man of genius could .
For the delectation of this little unsophisticated girl , he exerted the fascinations of his intellect as he had but rarely done in the drawing-rooms of the wealthy and the great .
Mina simply listened , drifting along in an enchanted page : 148 region .
The present moment filled her so completely , that she had literally forgotten all that lay outside of it .
Nothing was lost upon her  intuitively she seized the most delicate allusion , the most fleeting play of the fancy , till Emanuel could almost have been astonished to see how fine were the perceptions of this most delicately organised creature that was a mystery to itself as yet .
As they were loitering about , now looking out at the storm , whose violence seemed to be abating , now sauntering through the rooms , Emanuel made belief that at some turning or corner they would come upon the dukes or marchionesses , or fair maidens , who had once used this retreat , looking as faded and tarnished as the pavilion itself .
But instead of this they only met themselves at every turn in the magnificent mirrors - which brought them face to face with their doubles like the lovers in the legend .
In these unexpected encounters they caught glimpses of each other which made either feel more conscious of their position  and Mina all at once , after such an encounter , became disturbed and embarrassed , and her movements grew scared , like a frightened bird 's almost , as , going to the window and looking out , she said : `` I do n't think the storm is so bad now - the thunder does n't follow the lightning nearly as fast as it did .
I ought to be going , '' and she was moving towards the door .
But Emanuel seized her hand , and said almost peremptorily - `` Going !
in this pouring rain and in these gossamer clothes !
Do you think I would let you , to catch your death of cold ? ''
then he added , with a sort of soft reproach - `` Going , indeed ! ''
page : 149 For a moment he kept her hand in his , and his eyes met hers with a long , long , yearning look , that pierced to her very heart 's core  it was only for a moment , but in that moment there was eternity .
What had come to Mina ?
She would have escaped , fled , hidden herself out of sight , had it been possible  but how could she ?
She went to the window again , ostensibly to see how the weather was - but she saw nothing  only her heart was beating so that she was glad the heavy , full-leaved trees were swaying and tossing about in the wind and rain , or she feared that its beating might have been heard all through the room .
Emanuel made no attempt to approach her .
When she went to the casement , he took a quick step forward as though to follow her , then in his sudden way veered round in the opposite direction , and said in a loud voice - `` Why , there 's a spinet too !
I must have a try at the instrument !
I wonder what sort of tone it has ? ''
And opening the instrument he began running his long elastic fingers over the disused keys  under his vivifying touch they emitted thin , faint , almost ghostly sounds .
`` Not so bad , not so bad ! ''
he murmured , as , after playing one or two bars at random , he glided into a low , silvery , rippling sort of melody , that mingled softly with the monotonous splashing of the rain on the roof .
But as he went on playing he seemed to be abandoning himself more and more to the music , which gradually swelled and deepened in scope , till on that old spinet it rang out , in its passionate intensity , like the articulate cry of a soul , as it once might have responded to the fingers of Sebastian Bach .
page : 150 Mina still stood motionless by the window .
Strange thrills swept over her frame , like the shivering eddies that crisp the surface of an unfathomed lake .
It seemed as though each note of this music were tugging at her heart-strings , drawing her as with strong cords towards the player , whose eyes waxed and darkened and glowed as he occasionally broke into snatches of song , while his body , like the trees in the wind outside , went swaying to and fro in the current of sound .
All at once the girl started as though she had been surprised in some crime .
She thought she had heard him calling her by name through the music .
She felt as though she must call aloud on his name , but her lips were tightly compressed all the time , and her fingers interlaced convulsively .
Emanuel jumped up just then , passed his hands through his hair , and left the spinet as suddenly as he had gone to it .
Mina , without looking round at him , said : `` The rain has nearly left off now .
I must go , indeed I must . ''
`` Very well , '' Emanuel answered , shortly .
His voice sounded almost harsh to Mina  she wondered whether he could be angry with her .
They left the pavilion , and went down the steps in silence .
How cool and sweet the air now was !
How fragrant the smell of the brown earth !
The rain had ceased .
Everywhere around , above and beneath , there was a glisten and shiver and sparkle where the drops of wet , hanging on leaves and flowers and blades of grass , flashed back the evening sunshine as from a myriad diminutive mirrors .
Shrill piping sounds and long mellow flutings were page : 151 blown with the whiffs of air through the foliage , and all sorts of dainty , gauzy-winged creatures , and gossamer flies and shiny beetles , buzzed and quivered and whirred through the clear air , revelling to the utmost in their fugitive day of life .
At the far end of the long linden avenue , down which the pair now walked in silent absorption , the long row of windows of the forsaken-looking rococo palace blazed red in the sunset .
But the silence of these two was of a vastly different character .
Mina was looking straight before her , down a vista melting from splendour to splendour into glories unspeakable , glories and splendours seeming but some outward visible token of something transcendently divine , which was filling her soul even to overflowing .
Emanuel , on the other hand , with his head drooped seemed hardly conscious of where he was nor whither he was going , but from his expression one might almost have fancied that the storm had left the earth only to rage in his own breast with unabated violence .
`` Oh , that 's a nightingale ! ''
sighed Mina , in a low , dreamy voice , more as if she were thinking aloud than giving utterance to her thought , at the same time putting her finger to her lip with a charming gesture .
At the sound of her voice Emanuel raised his head , looking about him like one just awakened .
There was a strange , almost savage gleam in his hollow eyes as they furtively glanced past Mina , but then there came into them a dim , misty light as of unshed tears , and he muttered something between his teeth .
It sounded like Byron 's - No more , no more , oh , never more on me The freshness of the heart shall fall in dew .
page : 152 Mina gave one quick , shy , puzzled glance upward , but it seemed easier somehow to look into the blazing lights yonder than to meet his eyes .
`` Why , here she is incarnate , the very goddess herself ! ''
cried Emanuel , as though in answer to some train of thought , of his own , abruptly standing still before a statue of Venus Victrix , that with some antiques , casts , and modern originals ( all of them statues of Venus , however ) , was placed round a pond , of which the waterworks , with their much damaged Tritons , had long ago ceased playing .
Three white swans went slowly circling over its surface .
`` We have lost the way , then , for good and all , and strayed into Venus 's land , '' said Emanuel , in a tone between jest and earnest , after gazing at that statue of the goddess where she is represented as holding an apple in her right hand , and raising it to the height of her shoulder in token of triumph .
`` Well , '' he continued , `` it is useless to resist when she , with all the powers of nature at her back  conspires against one .
I herewith yield myself up as her prisoner ! ''
So saying , he turned , in his energetic way , towards a tall hedge or thicket of roses , nearly enclosing the pond and the statues , and with his penknife began cutting quite a bunch of ruby , crimson and pink , cream-coloured and maroon roses , most fresh and fragrant after the rain .
`` Oh , please , '' cried the terrified Mina , interposing , `` you must n't gather those  what would the Grand Duke say ?
The keeper will be furious ! ''
`` There , there , do n't frighten yourself ! ''
said Emanuel tenderly , pressing the bunch into her hands and her page : 153 hands between his .
`` There are powers that I dread more than the Grand Duke or even the red-nosed keeper , awful though he be !
Perhaps if you were to cast those roses as a peace-offering at the feet of that Venus there , who knows - - Go !
I am a superstitious creature  perhaps the roses offered by those pure hands will soften that inexorable marble heart of hers .
Ah , you stare at me , my child !
You think I am going out of my mind perhaps .
Perhaps I am !
perhaps I am ! ''
He spoke vehemently , and almost pushed Mina in the direction of that Venus before mentioned , who , faintly glowing in the warm sunset tones , stood out in her immortal beauty from the background of dark green leaves and mingled red roses .
The girl hardly knew what to make of it .
She held the roses in her slightly trembling hand , looking perplexed and half frightened  she had never yet seen so strange an expression in the musician 's face - so strange that it made her shiver in spite of the warmth .
All at once she felt his breath thrill through her hair  the roses dropped from her hands at the feet of the image of Venus .
`` Surely you can not be frightened of me ? ''
he whispered .
For an answer she looked full at him for once , with her large , clear , candid eyes , revealing what was a secret to herself as yet .
Emanuel , seizing both her hands in his , and drawing her a little towards him , cried , as though the words were being wrung from him by some overmastering force - `` Mina , Mina , I lo - - '' `` Halloo ! ''
shouted a well-known voice , in unfeigned page : 154 astonishment  and the shout ended in a significant whistle as the two started apart .
Emanuel 's face wore an expression of profound annoyance , nay , anger , as Sontheim , ostensibly speaking to Mina , but looking at him , said , `` Why , Mina , my girl , what brings you here at this late hour of the day ? ''
In another instant , however , he had regained that perfect self-possession which under no circumstances long forsakes the man of the world .
`` Why , Leopold , old fellow , glad you have come back from Frankfort at last ! ''
he said gaily , linking his arm in that of his friend  `` what a time you 've been gone ! ''
`` Much may happen in a fortnight , certainly , '' said the other in an absent , constrained manner , stealing a look at Mina , who , thus unexpectedly startled , as a tide of irresistible emotion was upheaving her whole being felt unutterably helpless , speechless , and yet , in spite of all , more unutterably happy still .
`` I met Fräulein Lichtenfeld accidentally in the wood , '' said Emanuel , addressing Sontheim , `` and , being overtaken by a thunderstorm , I thought it my duty to look after her . ''
`` Look after her ! ''
repeated Sontheim , mechanically , with none of his usual hearty joviality of manner .
`` Well , now you are here to escort Fräulein Lichtenfeld home , I must be off , '' said the musician , `` as I have to keep an engagement . ''
They had reached the end of the avenue by this time .
Emanuel turned to Mina and bade her good-bye , holding her hand in a lingering pressure  then nodding to Sontheim , went off at a swinging pace .
page : [ 155 ] BOOK II .
page : [ 156 ] page : [ 157 ] BOOK II .
CHAPTER XV .
THE DANCE AMIDST THE RUINS .
LEOPOLD SONTHEIM had been more painfully disturbed by his unexpected meeting with Emanuel and Mina than he could well account for .
Trifles that he had hitherto disregarded recurred to his mind with new significance .
He remembered the gossip retailed to him by his sister on his return home , and her friends ' tittle-tattle which he had several times laughed to scorn .
Certain scandalous rumours that had reached him in Frankfort now assumed a more serious meaning  and he pondered , not without annoyance , on the congratulations which an acquaintance of his had offered him on his god-child 's supposed engagement to the great virtuoso .
`` At any rate I 'll do my duty by Lichtenfeld 's little girl , '' exclaimed the energetic Professor the next morning , on rising at a still earlier hour than usual .
After page : 158 a hasty toilet he sallied forth , determined to seek his friend , who he knew would not be able to escape him , as he should find him safely in bed .
In bed Emanuel was , and fast asleep , when the Professor entered  but he started up with an oath on the latter laying his hand gently , as he supposed , on his uncovered arm .
`` In God 's name what has happened ? ''
he muttered , staring at Sontheim .
`` Has anything - - '' then he abruptly stopped , seemed to recollect himself , and sat straight up in bed .
Sontheim , not at all flurried , drew an easy-chair to the bedside , filled his pipe afresh , and said , with great nonchalance , that as he had wanted to have a few serious words with him , he had taken this opportune moment for calling on him .
Then , without beating about the bush , he plunged straight into his subject , and after reminding Emanuel of their conversation about his dear old comrade Lichtenfeld , besought him by their friendship not to injure his innocent daughter 's reputation  as he could scarcely fail to do if , as he supposed , he had no serious intentions , and was yet seen walking with her alone in such a small neighbourhood .
Emanuel , who had at first uttered one or two exclamations with a certain angry impatience , said all at once , with infinite tenderness in his voice , `` Injure the child !
I would as soon think of hurting - - but perhaps you are right , '' he muttered , after a moment 's abstracted silence .
`` I may be to blame for allowing myself to drift on in delicious unconsciousness of consequences .
But , '' he said , turning on his side , away from Sontheim , `` I am not prepared to discuss this subject page : 159 with you just now .
My position , I own , is not a little difficult and perplexing  but if you like I will tell you the story of my life , so that you may the better judge of my actions , and be able to tender your advice , which I stand much in need of . ''
Sontheim , after expressing the utmost readiness to hear Emanuel 's story , thanked him for having tolerated his interference in so delicate a matter  and it was arranged that the latter should rejoin his friend in the evening , when they would make a night of it .
In accordance with this promise the musician was now seated in Sontheim 's garden , in the magnificent June weather , between nine and ten o'clock in the evening .
The only light they got was partly from the just risen moon on one side , partly from an oil-lamp in the kitchen , which , through a window , threw enough light on the arbour table to render the Professor 's beer and tobacco faintly visible .
In spite of the sultriness of the night , Sontheim had made himself tolerably comfortable in his old dressing-gown and slippers , and reclining in a garden arm-chair , was puffing away at his pipe .
Emanuel 's feelings were of such a kind as entirely to neutralize in him any sensations of heat , cold , or physical discomfort whatever .
With his hands tightly linked round the right knee , that crossed the other , he was straining forward with eager glance into his friend 's eyes , lit up by the lamp , as though the latter could have looked into his own , although , from the gloom enshrouding him , only an occasional glitter of them was apparent as glimpses of moonlight penetrated the dense foliage .
`` I dare say , '' Emanuel began , `` you will remember page : 160 from letters how hard were my early struggles after I had run away from home to follow the irresistible bent of my nature .
For my father , as you know , worthy Lutheran pastor that he was , thought a musician not much better than those strolling mountebanks that used to play in the streets and then came begging to the door .
` Lumpengesindel ' he dubbed them indiscriminately , in stentorian tones , who wasted God 's precious time by making a row !
- quite forgetting in his ire that one of the chief occupations in the kingdom of heaven is to consist in the singing of ` hallelujahs . '
`` Well , I will not weary you by detailing the vicissitudes I endured .
For owing to the incalculable disadvantage of not coming of a musical stock , nor of having been thoroughly trained at a sufficiently tender age , it cost me incredible efforts and incessant labour to make headway in my profession .
`` How I got a living at all , or refrained from hanging myself in my garret , to this day I can not explain !
`` I was in several towns , and played in several orchestras with more or less blundering persistency , till by hook or by crook I had worked my way to Rome , and had got admitted to the Academy there .
From that time , I believe , letters and news from me , good or bad , ceased .
`` I believe at that time , when things went well , I used to earn about five hundred francs a year by music lessons .
I had a few friends , who thought me poetic but mad , and a very few patrons , who would have liked me better if I had been better dressed .
Sometimes I know I would owe a meal to the French painter Raoul Leroux , who , some years older than myself , had already begun page : 161 attracting the eyes of picture buyers by his ` Fisher of Capri ' picture .
`` I as yet had caught the ear of no one , and one day , in a despairing mood , had taken myself off to the gardens of Tivoli and flung myself down on the grass in utter hopelessness .
In this position I suddenly heard Raoul shouting , ` There he is !
There he is , Frederic !
Morose as usual , of course .
- We are off to Naples , Emanuel !
Come along with us . ' ''
` To Naples ! '
I echoed grimly .
` Do you want to mock me ?
Do n't you know that at this moment I do n't possess a single baiocco - nay , less than nothing , as I have lots of debts ! '
and I ground my teeth .
`` Raoul and Frederic only laughed , saying , ` What of that !
As if we had not enough for all three of us .
Come along , old fellow  shake off that moody melancholy that gives you the air of gaunt sea-eagle ! '
And each seizing me by one arm they dragged me along with them . ''
` Well , ' I said , ` to confess the truth , you have saved e from a dilemma .
For the rich English spinster , whom you may have heard me mention , has gone to live at Naples for a time  and as the lessons I give her form the better part of my income , I was deliberating how to follow in the present state of my finances . ' ''
` Ah well , ' laughed Raoul , ` now we can understand the cause of your despair , and the antics you were cutting on the grass like Don Quixote for his Dulcinea .
It was the Mees Anglaise 's red corkscrew curls and blue spectacles that you were pining after . '
`` Once at Naples , the partiality of my English patroness procured me some pupils , and , therefore , after page : 162 the departure of Raoul and Frederic I determined to remain .
After I had been there about eight months I was so worn out with hard work and constant disappointments , that one day , finding I had a good deal of time on my hands , I jumped into a fisherman 's boat and let him take me to Capri .
`` I and my violin , which in those days never left me , were put on shore after paying the small fare that was bargained for , and I found myself ascending the rocky path that leads to the little inn near the Villa of Tiberius . ''
` And what next ? '
was the question I put to myself as I made my way to the latter .
My prospects seemed gloomier than ever .
In this frame of mind I found myself amidst the world-renowned ruins of Tiberius , that , not unlike certain women , might be said to look as beautiful as they are ill-famed .
`` Sounds of human mirth and laughter from somewhere among them were borne from time to time to the desolate spot I had reached .
It was a Festa day , and a number of young people were apparently enjoying their games and dances , to judge by the shouts and laughter which woke echoes of ghostly mirth in the vaults and galleries - that looked as though they had lain dumb under the pressure of centuries .
`` There was I know not what of weird contrast between this gaping ruin , with its fragments confusedly scattered about like the bleaching bones of some antediluvian monster , and the clear youthful ring of those joyous voices .
`` I had sat down on some fragment of wall directly overhanging the sea .
In my present mood it afforded me a singular kind of pleasure to take up stones or page : 163 pieces of marble , and throw them down the precipice .
From time to time I could hear them striking against the sharp projections of the rocks as they leaped down the giddy height .
Should I let my violin follow in their wake ?
`` I was in a mood of savage despair  a mood in which my heart turned at bay on what I had best loved .
Hither it had led me , this art I had worshipped !
After years of patient toil , after sacrificing to it hearth and home , and the security of a settled profession , I was not a tittle further advanced than at the commencement of my career .
For requital of my devoted service starvation stared me in the face .
My miserable subsistence was barely earned by giving lessons to females , young and old , who , while inflicting prolonged tortures on their victim , still exacted the tribute of smiles and compliments .
`` Weakened and ill , I shuddered to think of returning and bowing my neck once more to that detested yoke . ''
` No !
I 'll never go back to that ! '
I cried , jumping up .
` I 'll sooner earn a precarious livelihood by turning fisherman in this island !
Any labour will be preferable to that daily renewing torture . '
I seized my violin in a desperate clutch , and feverishly leant over the wall , where I could hear the dirge-like boom of the breakers in the hollow caves .
`` Only he who is familiar with the violin , knows the love one may bear it - a love keen as that felt for some frail human creature of exquisitely delicate mould .
Caressingly I passed my fingers over its ever-responsive strings , thinking , feeling rather , that I could endure no hand to handle it save mine !
page : 164 `` No !
rather than that it should belong to another , its strings should for ever render up the ghost of music in one prolonged wail , as it plunged shivering from this fearful height .
`` For the last time , I thought , my fingers erred over its familiar chords .
A thrill of horrid exultation possessed me , such as the fell Tiberius may have experienced when he bade his men hurl the shrinking form of a soft-limbed favourite from this precipice .
`` Possibly my shaken nerves were affected by the hideous memories clinging to these unhallowed ruins  possibly also by the oppressive heat of the day .
`` Sea and sky , indeed , looked in harmony with unnatural sensations  as though some dread burst of passion were gathering intensity under their apparently sluggish calm .
`` Though the sky overhead was of a sultry blue , yet above the coast-line of Naples , standing out with preternatural distinctness , uncouth , livid clouds straggled chaotically to the upper sky , here and there reaching lank , shadowy films , like gigantic arms , far into the zenith .
Flocks of sea-birds were uneasily flying landwards  screaming , they wheeled round the sphinx-like rocks , and disappeared by degrees in their red clefts and fissures .
`` All at once I was startled in my fitful , half-mechanical playing , by a piercing scream  this was almost immediately followed by a confused noise of sobs and cries , and a running of people to and fro , which seemed , however , to be approaching nearer .
I was just going page : 165 to hurry to the spot whence the noise proceeded , when some dozen of girls came rushing towards me .
`` But before I had time to inquire into the cause of their excitement , or to observe them more closely , a grey-haired woman , with a pale , terror-stricken face , seized hold of my hand , crying - '' ` The Madonna be praised , he has a violin !
Hasten , hasten !
Follow us or she will die ! '
`` And then the girls , beckoning and gesticulating , laid hold of my arm , my coat , my hand , some pulling , some pushing me along , all jabbering and crying together , and repeating more and more urgently the only words that I could make out - ` Musica !
Musica ! '
`` But while I stared at them in blank amazement , thinking they must all have lost their wits together , I was unconsciously being dragged and pushed along till we came to a kind of ruined marble staircase , down which they hurried me into something still resembling a spacious chamber  for though the wild fig-tree and cactus pushed their fantastic branches through gaps in the walls , these stood partly upright as yet , discovering in places the dull red glow of weather-stained wall-paintings .
`` The floor too was better preserved than any I had seen  though cracked and in part overrun by ivy , it showed portions of the original white and black tesselated work .
`` On this floor , with her head pillowed on a shattered capital , lay a prostrate figure without life or motion , and with limbs rigidly extended as in death .
`` The old woman , throwing herself on her knees before this lifeless figure , loosened the handkerchief round page : 166 her neck , and then , as though to feel whether life yet lingered , she put her hand on the heart of the unconscious girl , when , suddenly jumping up again , she ran to me panting - '' ` Oh , sir , good sir , play , play for the love of the Madonna ! '
And the others all echoed as with one voice , ` Musica !
Musica ! ' ''
` Is this a time to make music ? '
cried I , in angry bewilderment .
` The girl seems dying or dead .
Run quick for a doctor - or stay  if you will tell me where he lives I will go myself and bring him hither with all speed . '
`` For all answer the grey-haired woman , who was evidently the girl 's mother , fell at my feet , and clasping my knees , she cried in a voice broken by sobs , ` Oh , good sir , kind sir , my girl has been bitten by the tarantula !
Nothing in the world can save her but you , if with your playing you can make her rise up and dance ! '
`` Then darting back once more to the girl , who lay as motionless as before , she screamed in shrill despair , ` She 's getting as cold as ice  the death-damps will be on her if you will not play for my darling . '
`` And all the girls , pointing as with one accord to my violin , chimed in once again , crying more peremptorily than before , ` Musica !
Musica ! '
`` There was no arguing with these terror-stricken , imploring creatures , so I took the instrument that had been doomed to destruction to call the seemingly dead to life with it .
`` What possessed me then I know not : but never before or since did the music thus waken within the strings of its own demoniacal will and leap responsive to my fingers .
page : 167 `` Perhaps the charm lay in the devout belief which the listeners had in the efficacy of my playing .
They say your fool would cease to be one if nobody believed in his folly .
`` Well , I played , beginning with an andante , at the very first notes of which the seemingly lifeless girl rose to her feet as if by enchantment , and stood there , taller by the head than the ordinary Capri girls , her companions , who were breathlessly watching her .
So still she stood , that with her shut eyes and face of unearthly pallor she might have been taken for a statue , till , as I slightly quickened the tempo , a convulsive tremor passed through her rigid , exquisitely moulded limbs , and then with measured gestures of inexpressible grace she began slowly swaying herself to and fro .
Softly her eyes unclosed now , and mistily as yet their gaze dwelt upon me .
There was intoxication in their fixed stare , and almost involuntarily I struck into an impassioned allegro .
`` No sooner had the tempo changed than a spirit of new life seemingly entered the girl 's frame .
A smile , transforming her features , wavered over her countenance , kindling fitful lightnings of returning consciousness in her dark mysterious eyes .
Looking about her with an expression of wide-eyed surprise , she eagerly drank in the sounds of the violin  her graceful movements became more and more violent , till she whirled in ever-widening circles round about the roofless palace chamber , athwart which flurried bats swirled noiselessly through the gathering twilight .
Hither and thither she glided , no sooner completing the circle in one direction than , snapping her fingers with a passionate cry , she wheeled page : 168 round in an opposite course , sometimes clapping her hands together and catching up snatches of my own melody , sometimes waving aloft or pressing to her bosom the red kerchief or mucadore she had worn knotted in her hair , which , now unloosened , twined about her ivory-like neck and shoulders in a serpentine coil .
`` Fear , love , anguish , and pleasure , seemed alternately to possess her mobile countenance .
Her face indicated violent transitions of passion  her hands appeared as if struggling after articulate expression of their own  her limbs were contorted with emotion : in short , every nerve and fibre in her body seemed to translate the music into movement .
`` As I looked on a demon seemed to enter my brain and fingers , hurrying me into a bacchanalian frenzy of sound  and the faster I played the more furiously her dizzily-gliding feet flashed hither and thither in a bewildering , still-renewing maze , so that from her to me and me to her an electric impulse of rhythmical movement perpetually vibrated to and fro .
`` Ever and anon the semicircle of eagerly-watching girls , sympathetically thrilled by the spectacle , clapped their hands , shouting for joy , and , balancing themselves on tiptoe , joined in the headlong dance .
And as they glided to and fro , the wild roses and ivy and long tendrils of the vine flaunting it on the crumbling walls seemed to wave in unison and dance round the dancing girls .
`` As I went on playing the never-ending , still beginning tune , night overtook us , and we should have been in profound obscurity but for continuous brilliant flashes of lightning shooting up from the horizon like the page : 169 gleaming lances hurled as from the vanguard of an army of Titans .
`` In the absorbing interest , however , with which we watched the deliriously whirling figure , unconscious of aught but the music , we took but little note of the lightning .
Sometimes , when from some black turreted thunder-cloud a triple-pronged dart came hissing and crackling to the earth as though launched by the very hand of Jove , I saw thirteen hands suddenly lifted , thirteen fingers instinctively flying from brow to breast making the sign of the cross , and heard thirteen voices mutter as one , ` Nel nome del Padre e del Figlio e dello Spirito Santo . '
`` But the ecstatic dancer paused not nor rested in her incredible exertions  the excited girls alternately told their beads , and then joined in the dance again  while the grey-haired mother , kneeling on the marble pediment of what might have been the fragment of a temple of Bacchus , lifted her hands in prayer to a little shrine of the Madonna , placed there , strangely enough , amidst the relics of paganism .
`` All of a sudden , however , a horrific blaze , emitted from a huge focus of intolerable light , set the whole heavens aflame  As from a fresh-created baleful sun , blue and livid and golden-coloured lightnings were shivered from it on all sides  dull , however , in comparison to the central ball , which , bursting instantaneously , bathed the sky , earth , and air in one insufferable glare of phosphorescent light .
The deadly blue flame lit up everything with a livid brightness unknown today .
`` Walls and faded wall-paintings , limbs of decapitated page : 170 goddesses gleaming white through the grass and rioting weeds , tottering columns , arches and vaults , and deserted galleries receding in endless perspective , leaped out lifelike on a background of night and storm .
`` With piercing shrieks the horrified maidens scattered and fled to the remotest corner of the ruin , where they fell prone on their faces quivering in a heap .
In a voice strangled by fear the kneeling mother called for protection on the Virgin and all the saints !
The violin dropped from my nerveless grasp , and at the self-same moment the beautiful dancer , like one struck by a bullet , tottered and dropped to the ground , where she lay without sense or motion .
`` At that instant a clap of thunder so awful , so heaven-rending , rattled overhead , so roared and banged and clattered among the clouds , that I thought the shadowy ruin , tottering and rocking with the shock , would come crashing about us and bury us under its remains .
`` But as the thunder rolled on farther and farther , seemingly rebounding from cloud to cloud , I recovered my self-possession , and in mortal fear rushed to the side of the prostrate girl .
I was trembling all over like a coward as I bent down to examine her .
Had the lightning struck her when she fell so abruptly to the ground ?
Had life for ever forsaken that magnificent form , those divinest limbs ?
Would those heavy eyelashes never again be raised from those dazzling eyes ?
Breathlessly I moved aside the dusky hair covering her like a pall .
Breathlessly I placed my hand on her heart  a strange shiver and spark quivered through it to my heart .
Yet she was chill as page : 171 ice and motionless as a stone .
` She is dead , she is dead ' I moaned  and the pang for one I had never known exceeded everything I had felt in my life . ''
` You mistake , Signor , ' some one said close beside me  and on looking up I saw the mother intently gazing down on her senseless child .
` My Tolla is not hurt , ' she cried  ` she only fell when you left off playing the tarantella  she will arise as soon as you go on . '
`` Pointing to the lightning still flickering and darting overhead , I cried , ` But you are risking your lives for some fantastic whim , some wild superstition of yours .
You are mad to brave such a storm !
You expose your child to undoubted peril that you may ward off some illusory evil .
Let me bear her to the inn , and follow me thither . '
And I was going to lift the senseless form in my arms when the woman sternly prevented me .
`` In vain I argued , pleaded , reasoned with her .
She only shook her head and cried piteously , ` Give her music , more music , for the love of the dear Madonna ! '
And the girls , who by this time had plucked up courage and gathered round us , echoed again as with one voice , ` Musica !
Musica ! '
`` What was I to do ?
I could not drag them away by force , and certainly , for aught I knew , she might have been in equal danger from the poison or the storm wherever we were .
As for peril to myself I cared not .
I was in a devil of a mood , and all the pent-up , bitter passion of my soul seemed to find a vent and safety-valve in that stupendous commotion of the elements .
`` So I searched for my instrument on the ground , and now noticed , to my astonishment , that although the storm had swept away from us , the whole ruin was page : 172 nevertheless brightly illuminated .
On looking up I saw the topmost branches of a solitary stone-pine one dazzle of flames .
Rising straight on high from a gap in the wall which its roots had shattered , it looked a colossal chandelier on which the lightning had kindled a thousand tapers .
There was not a breath of air , not a drop of rain , so that the flames burned clear and steady as under cover of a mighty dome .
`` By this brilliant light , in which every object from a human form to a marble acanthus leaf cast sharp-edged shadows , I soon discovered my violin on a tangle of flowering clematis , and began tuning its strings .
`` No sooner had I struck into the same lively , impassioned tune , than the strange being rose again as by magic , and , slowly opening her intoxicating eyes , began swaying herself to and fro with the same graceful gestures and movements that I had already observed .
`` Thus I played all through the night , long after the rear-guard of the thunder-storm had disappeared below the opposite horizon whence it first arose - played indefatigably on and on like a man possessed , and still , by the torch of the burning pine , I saw the beautiful mænad-like figure whirling to and fro with miraculous endurance .
Now and then  through the deep silence , I heard a scarred pine-bough come crackling to the earth  now and then I heard the lowing of the stabled cattle in some distant part of the ruin  once and again , smiting like a cry , I heard one string snapping after another under my pitiless hands .
`` Still I played on , though a misty quiver of sparks was dancing about my eyes , till the fallow-tinted dawn gleamed faintly in the east .
page : 173 `` At last , at last , a change stole over the form and features of the indefatigable dancer .
Her companions , overcome with fatigue , had long ago sunk to the ground , where , with their little ruffled heads resting on any bit of marble , they lay sleeping calmly like little children .
Only the mother still watched and prayed for her child , the unnatural tension of whose nerves and muscles now seemed visibly to relax  for the mad light of exaltation in her eyes veiled itself in softness , her feet moved more and more slowly , and her arms , which had heretofore been in constant motion , drooped languidly to her side .
I , too , relaxed in my tempo , and the thrilling , vivacious tune melted away in a dying strain .
`` At the expiring notes , when I had but one string left , her tired eyes closed as in gentlest sleep , a smile hovered about her lips , her head sank heavily forward on her bosom , and she would have fallen had not her mother received the swooning form into her outstretched arms .
`` At the same moment my last string snapped , a swarming darkness clouded my sight , the violin fell from my wet , burning hands , and I reeled back , faint and dizzy , when I felt soft arms embracing me , and somebody sobbed and laughed , ` You have saved her , Maëstro  praise be to God and all His saints in heaven !
May the Madonna bless you for ever and ever - - ' `` I heard no more , but fell into a death-like swoon . ''
page : [ 174 ] CHAPTER XVI .
THE SIRENS ' ROCK .
LEOPOLD SONTHEIM , who had sat listening to his friend with the deepest interest , said , as he shifted his position and refilled his pipe , `` What you tell me seems to surpass the bounds of probability .
Of course I have vaguely heard of the superstition concerning the bite of the tarantula , but could never have believed that it still had such a hold on the people , or produced effects such as you have been describing . ''
`` Yes , I know that the strange facts that I have been , and shall still have to relate to you , may at the present date sound incredible  and , indeed , modern enlightenment has driven these curious manifestations into remote places of the Neapolitan kingdom .
They are nevertheless true , and were witnessed by friends of mine who happened to be present on different occasions .
The explanation given me by a clever young physician concerning the singular spectacle in which I had been page : 175 made to act the prominent part I have described , I will leave till later - if , indeed , you are interested to hear more about what is called tarantismo .
Let me hear , by all means , what rational explanation or scientific theory there is concerning the phenomena you have described , '' cried Sontheim  `` but at present I am on the tenter-hooks of expectation to know what became of the dancer among the ruins . ''
`` When I again came to consciousness , '' said the musician , resuming his narrative , `` I was lying in bed , and for some time I remained quite still , trying to piece together , as I thought , the fragments of the most astounding dream I had ever dreamed .
A heavy inexplicable languor possessed my senses  I burned as with fever , and my pulse hammered against my temples .
I thought , with a shiver , that the fever I had once had in Naples had come back , and thus accounted for what seemed mere delirious wanderings .
And with a terrible sinking of the heart I asked myself what was to become of me if I should be laid up with the fever , far from all friends , with no money , in this corner of the world .
Well , if it came to the worst , they could but send me to their asylum , and perchance turn me to some account by making me play the fiddle for the delectation of blind soldiers .
`` I was perishing with thirst  so I raised myself up in bed in order to ring the bell , but found on moving that every joint of my body ached , and that my wrists in particular were stiff and numb with pain .
`` As I was pondering on this strange fact , the door opened , and my hostess entered carrying a tray .
Looking at me with an odd mixture of curiosity and awe , she page : 176 inquired after my health with more than the habitual Italian courtesy  and without waiting for my reply said sympathetically , ` Oh , Madonna mia , but the Signor looks pale and ill after the miracle he performed last night . '
And she held a cool slice of melon to my lips in quite a motherly fashion .
`` The miracle I had worked last night !
It had not been a dream then !
And as her words dispelled the drowsy heaviness that still obscured my brain , the whole fantastic scene flashed again with startling vividness before my mind 's eye .
As I lay back on the pillow to collect my thoughts , my kind hostess , thinking I had fainted , rubbed my temples with vinegar , which considerably invigorated me .
`` I now began eagerly questioning her , but instead of answering me she insisted on my taking some of the food she had brought .
While I did so she drew a chair close to the bed-side , in which she comfortably settled herself with some needlework , prepared evidently to answer any questions or spin any yarn to my heart 's desire .
`` My first inquiries of course concerned the beautiful , mysterious creature , whose eyes , on shutting mine , I saw as plainly before me as we see the spectrum of the sun after daring to look too long at its blinding light .
`` Who was she ?
Was she alive and well ?
Did she , indeed , believe that my fiddling had saved her life ?
What were her parents ?
How came she by this dancing mania ?
Had she really been bitten by the tarantula ?
And did the bite of this spider ever imperil life , or produce the astonishing effects I had seen ?
`` My hostess took up my last question first , and page : 177 assured me , in perfect good faith , that although certain persons of an unbelieving and suspicious turn of mind might ridicule the fear of those venomous insects , their bite , if not often fatal , was yet frequently the cause of serious disorders , as she could prove to me by facts within her own experience , disorders only averted if the unfortunate tarantati were set dancing without intermission to the tune of some tarantella that took their fancy until they were overcome by resistless lassitude .
`` Some people , she fancied , were more easily put in peril by the bite of the tarantula than others .
It would take a good many tarantulas , she thought , to send her into convulsions .
But with Antonella Mansi it was quite another affair .
There was not a girl in all the island to whom the sting of this spider would have been so fatal . ''
` Ah ! '
I cried  ` how is that ? '
`` She was just going to answer me when , being loudly called for , she had to hurry away , leaving me with my unslaked curiosity .
Nor was there any chance at present of otherwise satisfying the same by getting up and finding out things for myself , for I was so stiff and exhausted that every movement gave me pain  and I soon fell fast asleep again , and actually never woke till the next morning , when , feeling thoroughly restored , I hastened to dress and leave my room .
`` My one idea was to see again , under altered conditions , the heroine of the nocturnal dance .
After having made inquiries of my hostess as to her whereabouts , I picked my way to the little mountain town of Ana-Capri , to which the ascent consists in an infinite number of steep steps roughly hewn in the rock itself .
page : 178 `` When I had got about half-way up I overtook some girls walking in front of me , carrying heavy baskets on their heads , and singing a tune that was known to me a strangely familiar tune .
In another instant it flashed upon my recollection that this was the very tarantella I had myself composed in a kind of inspired trance .
Warbled by those fresh , bird-like voices , it struck me with immense admiration  and why not , pray , simply because it happened to be by myself ?
`` As I overtook these Capri girls , stepping so buoyantly under their burdens , they looked at me curiously from under their sombre eyebrows , then with a start of recognition blushed , curtsied , and eyed me with childlike awe .
`` Turning to one of the girls who looked a little less shy than the others , I begged her to direct me to the house where Antonella Mansi lived .
So we all climbed the remaining steps together , but I could get nothing out of her or any of the others about the strange being who so perplexed and fascinated me .
To all my questions their only answer was a shake of the head , or evasive exclamation which left me more bewildered than before .
`` After a toilsome ascent , which , although it nearly left me out of breath , in no wise affected my pretty guides , we reached a platform from which there was a magnificent view of Capri and the still , dream-like expanse of the far blue sea .
But , impatient to reach my goal , I only cast a hasty glance at the prospect , as I hurried along through a scene that could not otherwise have failed to arrest my attention .
`` Presently , when we entered Ana-Capri , my timid page : 179 companions , after showing me the way , left me to myself in this most quaint , most idyllic of towns .
Coming as I did out of the burning sunshine , I can recall even now the feeling of balmy coolness which the thickets of olive and myrtetus and bay and the large-leafed fig-tree , diffused through the air .
Through these and other flowering and fruit-bearing trees and shrubs I saw small Moorish-looking houses , on whose flat white roofs there were women and girls singing to the clatter of their busy looms  others sat plaiting straw , or spinning yellow silk , before their doors in the shadow of the vine-covered pergola .
`` It was a spot beautiful enough to have been the birthplace of her I was in quest of .
`` At the other end of the little town , in which I had not as yet seen a single man , I found the house of Signora Mansi .
A vine-covered archway formed by a series of columns brought me to the door .
`` As my knocking met with no response I entered unbidden , but the sudden change from daylight to the gloom of the low , dark chamber made it impossible at first to distinguish one object from another .
I looked about me in vain for her whose life I was supposed to have saved .
But as my eyes became more accustomed to the darkness , I noticed that some one was kneeling in a corner before a shrine of the Madonna with a dim lamp burning before it  but so absorbed in prayer that my entrance had been unheeded .
`` On my coughing the suppliant looked round and rose hastily .
It was Antonella 's mother .
Her sorrowful , careworn face , in which there yet lingered traces of beauty , was lit up with an expression of devout gratitude page : 180 as she came towards me , hardly able to find words in her emotion .
She would have sought me out before , she said , to thank me for a service which she could never in this life hope to repay - but for which she would day and night entreat the Madonna to help me - had not her daughter 's peculiar state taken up all her time and attention . ''
` And how is your daughter now ? '
I cried  ` has she not yet recovered from the effects of the spider 's bite ?
or is she still suffering from the consequences of her extraordinary exertions of the other night ? ' ''
` Ah , Dio mio ! '
sighed the mother , shaking her head .
` My poor girl , Signor , is not as she should be .
I know not what ails her , but she is strange , wayward , full of caprices , and nothing will induce her to settle to her spindle or loom again .
Then she has lost her high spirits , and looks so dull , sad , and melancholy , that it makes my heart ache to see her .
I thought at first , to be sure , that it was all right  for she slept like a baby after that dance , and in the evening woke up quite gay and lively , and would go for a while and sit chatting on the top of the stairs with the other girls . ''
` But when she came back I noticed that she looked listless and dispirited , and all through the night she wept and sobbed and wrung her hands  and do what I would I could not get my unhappy child to tell me what ailed her , but she stared mutely before her just as if she had lost her speech .
So I left her a little in the morning , thinking that maybe she might be better alone , and went to my loom .
For we poor people , Signor , must still be busy whatever our burdens - and mine have been heavy  and just when I was taking page : 181 comfort in the thought that the poor child might have gone to sleep , if there was not a heavy bumping as of some piece of furniture that had fallen , and when I rushed in there was my Tolla tossing and writhing about on the floor , with her beautiful face distorted and her eyes quite wild . '' '
I could not think what to do , and sent Bice for our hermit in my fright .
But , Signor , would you believe it , when the holy man entered and knelt down to pray the good St. Anthony , she looked at him with horror and was quite beside herself .
And as the good , patient man went on praying for her soul , in spite of her unbecoming behaviour , she screamed and then fell into convulsions , till I had to ask him to go , begging pardon for my most unhappy child . '
`` I had listened to all this with deep commiseration , but was burning to know what had become of Antonella at present , and asked eagerly whether I could not perhaps do something to ease her sufferings .
But I heard then that she had again seemed much better this morning , and that nothing would satisfy her but going to look for coral on the little Marina , which had always been a favourite pursuit of hers .
Her mother had not liked to deny her anything , yet was in hourly apprehension of some harm befalling her child . '' '
I will go and look after her myself , ' I cried , rising eagerly  ` perhaps in some way or other I may again exercise a beneficial effect on her . ' ''
` But I fear we are trespassing too heavily on your kindness , ' said the anxious mother , with tears in her eyes .
` Yet if you would be so truly good , it would be a load off my mind , Signor .
Perhaps it will settle her page : 182 spirits again if you reason with her .
Bice shall show you the way  ' and she stepped down the archway , calling the girl across the road .
Almost immediately my guide of the morning came running towards us , and readily agreed to accompany me . ''
` But you must not go without having tasted a morsel of anything , ' cried the kindly woman , mindful of others even in this engrossing anxiety .
Eager to get off as I was , I had yet to submit , in order not to hurt her feelings , while she cut me some figs growing on a prickly cactus-tree , which I promised to eat on the way .
`` What a scramble that was down the rugged track , zig-zagging along the side of a castle-crowned hill , which brought us to a lonely strand , apparently blocked off from the rest of the world by a semicircle of rude , precipitous cliffs , and only open to the illimitable sea .
Black , ill-looking rocks , strewn about confusedly , littered the beach and stretched some way into the sea , where they formed a half-submerged peninsula crouching amidst the rippling flash of the languishing waves .
`` Never was desolation more magical .
On either side of this shore yawned mysterious caverns greedily sucking in the sea , and full of little sibilant noises as of stifled laughter . ''
` There she sits by the Madonna , on the rock of Sirens ! '
my companion whispered in an awe-struck tone , softly plucking me by the sleeve .
I looked eagerly up and down and round about the deserted little beach , but all the signs of human life I saw were two fishermen 's huts , so rough and rude that I had confounded page : 183 them with the boulders amidst which they were placed .
` Oh , look right up there , Signor ! '
whispered the girl , pointing on high .
`` Good heavens !
On a crag too steep and slippery to afford foothold to a goat , it seemed , I saw a solitary figure , bathed in sunlight , intently gazing seawards .
It turned me sick and giddy as I looked .
`` But my guide , picking her way like a young she-goat over the slippery stones , led me round to the foot of the crag , and there pointed out what appeared the least break-neck track to its dizzy top .
She then bade me farewell , as she had to get back to her work , and thought , besides , that in Tolla 's present strange mood it might be safest for me to accost her alone .
`` In any ordinary mood I know I could never have climbed up that slippery pathless rock , steeply overhanging the sea .
But under the present circumstances I desperately clambered and stumbled along , sometimes ignominiously getting along on all fours , sometimes clutching hold of the coarse tufts of grass growing here and there from some crevice .
When at last I reached a ridge some yards from the summit , where there was a firm hold for the feet  I had to stop and take breath for a moment .
Partly hidden myself behind a projection in the rock , I now beheld in the light of day a face and figure only seen as yet by the livid storm-light .
`` My God , how beautiful she was !
with a mysterious , strange beauty , more startling even when thus seen , with the pure pale contours of her profile outlined against the deep blue air , as she sat there holding some gorgeous cactus-flower , scarce redder than her lips , which she was pulling to pieces , so that the shredded page : 184 petals were strewn about her dark blue petticoat .
She seemed to find a sort of enjoyment in blowing bits of them on the air , where they went fluttering like the bloodied feathers of little dead birds and then dropped into the sea .
In her blue-black hair , braided closely at the back of the head , she also wore red flowers - oleander blossoms and roses of a dull crimson  and round her neck rows upon rows of coral , hanging low over the red faded handkerchief , crossed over her bosom and tied behind the waist .
`` At a glance I had taken all this in which it takes so long to describe , and a few hasty , desperate strides now brought me to the top  in another instant I stood at her side .
`` On seeing me thus unexpectedly before her , the girl , oddly enough , looked neither surprised nor startled , only her face , hardly less pale now than when I had first seen it , was suffused by an intense burning blush , that disappeared as swiftly as it came , and left her still whiter than before .
She looked up at me and smiled .
No , not smiled  only her eyes emitted a bewildering flash of light that for the moment transfigured the melancholy of her countenance .
`` Then she half rose , and bending towards me with a lowly grace , said in a low , muffled voice : ` It is you , Maëstro .
They tell me you have saved my life . '
Then letting the stripped cactus stalk drop from her hand , she muttered , with a droop of the heavy lashes , ` Why , why did you save it ? '
And she turned and looked towards the sea with a hungry wistfulness in her eyes it frightened me to see .
`` Rather taken aback by her strange manner I sat page : 185 down beside her , and expressed my surprise at her feeling no fear thus perched on the very edge of a precipice overhanging the boiling surf .
For all answer she burst into a peal of shrill , wild laughter , in weird contrast with the previous dejection of her mien and attitude .
At that instant a dim sense of repulsion passed like a shadow across my consciousness , but disappeared as quickly before the light of her triumphant beauty . ''
` Fear ! '
she repeated , in the same muffled tones , springing to her feet at a bound , and half leaning over the giddy verge with a look of exultation which sent a thrill of horror through my every nerve . ''
` You must be mad ! '
I cried , seizing her by the hand and roughly pulling her back .
` How dare you thus play fast and loose with your life - if not for your sake , for your mother 's ?
Do you forget that even now she is watching , and trembling , and praying for you ?
Have you no love , no pity on her ? '
`` I spoke quite angrily , tightly clasping her hand , which lay cold and unresisting in my own .
`` My words had a most powerful effect on her .
The dare-devil expression that had for a moment gleamed in her eyes died out immediately , and for all answer tears gathered in her eyes , like a chidden child 's , and rolled down her oval cheeks .
`` Where is the man that can withstand a woman 's tears ?
And if there is such a creature , why degrade him to the rank of the brutes !
My anger melted into something more than pity at the sight of this magnificent creature seemingly possessed by some subtle ill , perhaps by some recondite malady of the nerves , for which I of all others ought to feel sympathy .
page : 186 `` That shrinking , as from something alien that I had obscurely felt was utterly obliterated on seeing those tears  and , drawing closer to her , I could not help addressing her by some soft , endearing phrases .
`` On hearing me speak to her thus tenderly , a smile parted her lips , curved like Cupid 's bow , and disclosed her little milk-white teeth  and wiping away the tears still glistening on her long lashes , she looked at me with her moist siren-like eyes .
The perilous sweetness of that look threatened to upset my equanimity for good and all .
I felt an irresistible desire to kiss that soft , alluring mouth .
But then she had been entrusted to my care  I had made myself responsible for her safety .
She was so young , so ignorant !
I was surely in honour bound to protect her from the harm I might myself inflict , and I resolutely tried to master my rising passion .
Therefore , as a man borne along a rapid current clutches at the frailest reed to stem his headlong course , so I , swept away against my better reason by a tumultuous emotion , was anxious to snatch at the first harmless topic in order to divert the rush of dangerous feelings threatening to carry us - who knows whither ?
`` Having noticed , as she lifted her hand to her face , a ring of singular effulgence on one of her fingers , I again took her hand in my own , and asked her how she had come by so rare a trinket .
The hoop , it is true , was only of silver , but set in it was a fire-opal , flaming as only this stone will when subjected to the sun 's rays .
`` The question seemed less harmless , however , than I had imagined in my ignorance .
`` A riddling change came over the ever-shifting page : 187 countenance .
The pupils of her dark eyes dilated as though she were looking at some fearful object invisible to any one but herself  then , without a word , she rose to her full height , and pointing to the little shore below , said in a choked voice , ` Come , come , you shall know how I came by this ring , ' and with firm , unerring step she led the way down the precipitous track .
`` In my relief to get her so easily away from her break-neck haunt , I followed her as best I could to the shore . ''
page : [ 188 ] CHAPTER XVII .
THE RING .
`` IN silence we reached the little Marina , and in silence still Antonella , with her erect and queen-like carriage , walked on in front of me , over the black , uneven stones .
The beach was less deserted than when I had first seen it .
On a small strip of silver sand sat a fisherman  mending his nets , while a woman was hanging out linen to dry in the sun .
`` Presently we came to the mouth of a cave , so situated in an angle of the rock that it would have escaped my attention had not my beautiful companion led the way into it .
`` On entering , its dark gloom struck me with a chill sensation , hot with the sun as I was .
It was a lofty cavern , full of sinuosities , and the walls , glistening with moisture , were stained in places by dull red blotches not unlike congealed blood .
What unknown page : 189 crimes might not the sea have perpetrated here on the helpless bodies of shipwrecked men !
`` Slipping occasionally over the large sea-spiders and other jelly-like marine creatures , I followed Antonella to the side of the cavern , where a natural projection in the rock served us for a bench to sit down upon .
All this time her features worked with suppressed excitement , and I noticed that her hand was trembling as pointing to the dim-lit interior , she said , in a scared voice , ` There he lay - there ! '
`` It was a strange , terrible tale that was then brokenly unfolded to me by those coral lips - a tale interrupted by sighs and shudders  while I , sitting there , burned to comfort the narrator with kisses , had I dared .
`` It was Antonella 's habit , it seems , to resort to this lonely beach in search of the coral she loved , and she had thus come by the magnificent necklace round her throat .
`` Well , one morning of the preceding autumn , after a violent storm had ravaged their olive and fig trees , she had gone there very early , as she knew the sea would often throw up great pieces of it at such times .
`` On reaching the shelving beach nearly opposite the cave , she came upon the smashed portion of a fishing-boat  and presently , having entered it - for she had on previous occasions often found coral there - she saw , in the spot she had indicated , a young man lying prostrate , and seemingly in a dying condition .
`` Her first impulse was to succour him in some way , but when she tried to raise his head he cried out with pain , and begged her not to touch him , for he had been crushed by the boat  and turning his glazed eyes pite - piteously page : 190 ously upon her he begged her to fetch a priest , and yet when she was running off he convulsively clutched hold of her skirt , and seemed imploring her not to abandon him in this state .
`` A dreadful predicament this for a young girl to be in .
At last , in her helpless terror , she could do nothing but scream out wildly , and her screams luckily reached a fisherman , who was just then apparently gathering together the waifs and strays of the wrecked boat .
He was soon at her side , and in the excitement of the moment , without preparing her in any way for the shock , told her it was her father 's felucca lying outside .
`` Her father and her brother were coral fishers , constantly cruising about these seas as far as the African coast  and when Antonella was thus suddenly apprised of the fate that had probably overtaken them , she fell almost fainting , on the floor of the cavern beside the dying man .
`` He , apparently , had been attending to what was going on , for , with a groan of pain , he slightly moved his head , and looking at the girl with a sudden flaring up of life in his eyes  asked , ` Are you Tolla - Tolla Mansi ? '
`` The fisherman replied in the affirmative  but the sufferer , recalled to his situation , again called out for a priest , that he might be shriven of his sins  and the former , comprehending the paramount importance of the request , hurried off in search of one without further delay .
`` Presently Antonella , somewhat recovered , raised herself on her elbow , when she found the eyes of the stranger fixed upon her with a look of mute appeal and page : 191 entreaty .
With another groan he slightly raised his hand , making a sign to her to approach more closely . ''
` You are Tolla ? '
he then said , faintly , when her ear almost touched his livid lips . '
I am Tonino , from Girgenti in Sicily - I came to marry you - your brother described to me your - - ah !
you are more beautiful than he said - here , take this , ' he moaned , pointing to a ring on his finger .
` It was to be your - a talisman - - ' `` His voice failed him entirely here , and while feebly trying to take the ring off , a spasm of agony contracted his limbs  some internal rupture had taken place , and before the fisherman returned with a Capuchin friar , the Sicilian youth had expired .
`` When some restoratives had been administered to Antonella , she was at last able to tell the fragmentary story she had heard to the Capuchin friar , who was a hermit held in great awe by the islanders .
The ring , she explained , when they were about to remove the body , had been bequeathed her by the expiring man with his last breath .
`` The hermit , however , exhorted her to dedicate it to the service of the Madonna del Carmine , saying that the ring off a dead man 's finger was sure to bring her ill-luck .
But seeing that she had set her heart upon it he reluctantly did as she bade him , although the friar still persisted that nothing but misfortune could come of it .
`` Antonella , having told me all this with quivering lips and evident deep emotion , suddenly asked naively , with an extraordinary change of manner , as though quite relieved by her narrative - '' ` But what do you say , Maëstro ?
Do you think danger can spring from a thing so beautiful ? '
page : 192 `` Inquiringly she raised to mine dark eyes whose fire outshone that of the precious stone .
As she looked at me thus , I felt like one who drains to intoxication the wine pledged him by an enchantress . ''
` Oh , my child , ' I said , smiling , ` the more beautiful a thing is , the greater sometimes is its peril to the beholder as well as the wearer . '
`` In her insular simplicity she did not take my meaning at once , but looked at me with a puzzled air which gave an infantine charm to her ever-varying countenance .
`` Young though she was , only sixteen , her feminine instincts interpreted my meaning to her , for the wickedest smile hovered for just a moment , not so much on her parted lips as in her deep , dark eyes .
`` Now that smile of Antonella 's overthrew the last remains of prudence and forethought still left to me by her tragic narrative .
`` I never saw any other human being with a smile like hers , haunting one like an unsolved riddle  arch as a child 's , yet full of unconscious devilry .
Did she know , I wonder - did she guess even then its irresistible witchery ?
`` All this time she was shifting the ring round and round her finger , and then said , looking down - '' ` If there is danger in the ring - - ' and then she stopped again .
` Oh , Maëstro , ' she went on , in an embarrassed , broken sort of way - ` Oh , Maëstro , I wished - that is to say , I hoped - three days I sat watching for you on the stairs at Ana-Capri - they say you have saved my life - and - and - and I am not ungrateful , but I have nothing - nothing at all but this beautiful ring ' - page : 193 then with a rapid movement she drew it from her finger , and , pressing it into my hand , whispered - ` only if it should bring you peril I would not - - ' `` Colouring slightly , she trembled and hesitated  and I was no longer master of myself when I saw the quivering of her lips .
Transported by a sudden fit of passion I clasped the girl in my arms , and covered her mouth and blinded her beautiful eyes with my kisses .
`` What had I done ?
Where would this end ?
- were the questions that would obtrude themselves on my feverish exultation , when Antonella , having freed herself at last from my embrace , retreated some paces with a scared , strange look on her face .
`` Afraid to encounter her eyes , I suddenly turned away , when , uttering a startled exclamation , I looked before me in amazement .
Were we in the realm of gnomes and dwarfs - for what but a gnome was that misshapen little object crouching in a dim angle of the opposite wall ?
My scared exclamation , however , seemed to have attracted the attention of this uncanny-looking creature .
For , suddenly rising from its stooping posture , it came limping towards us , and I gradually discovered it to be an old man , whose diminutive stature , club-foot , and white beard might easily give rise to such a delusion by the weird , tawny half-light .
`` On seeing him draw near , Antonella came close to me again , and said in a frightened whisper : ` The hermit of Santa Maria del Soccorso .
Oh , I fear him ! '
`` Now , indeed , I saw , by the dark brown cowl and large peaked hood hanging down behind , that he was a squalid Capuchin friar , with a kind of wallet slung over his shoulder , in which seemed to be deposited all manner page : 194 of live creeping things , from a curious wriggling movement going on in the wet pendent ends .
`` This extraordinary creature stooped all at once and picked up the ring , which it would seem I had dropped in my excitement .
He then pressed it into my hand with a gleam of strange malignancy in his rat-like eyes  and while a hideous smile disclosed a couple of yellow , tusk-like teeth , he congratulated Antonella on her recovery - thanks , as he said , first to the Madonna , and next to the Maëstro himself , whose name was in everybody 's mouth at Capri .
`` I noticed that a furtive leer lit up his countenance as he eyed my companion , while cringingly expressing a hope that I would take the ring , which he supposed the maiden had offered me with a becoming sense of gratitude .
` Antonella , Antonella , ' he said , in a thin , grating voice , shaking his head warningly , ` beware of the devil who is weaving snares for you !
Mind me , the only cure and safeguard for a virgin against a recurrence of the attack is to dedicate herself to the service of the Madonna ! '
`` The cunning look with which he emphasized his words not only convinced me that he had seen all , but that he himself coveted the beautiful creature I had for a moment held in my arms .
`` The natural impulse which is in man prompted me to knock him down for his impertinence .
But then he was such a deformed little horror of a fellow !
Could I bear him ill-will for not being blind to those triumphant charms !
So I said , looking at him rather carelessly , ` Young girls , we know , are timid enough to start at their own shadows  but should we drive them half distracted with imaginary fears ? '
page : 195 `` The friar gave me the benefit of another malignant glance , suggestive of the evil eye  then mumbling something in his beard about the ` Ave Maria , ' he limped off with as much haste as he could .
But at the mouth of the cavern he suddenly turned his big head round , and again said warningly , ` Beware , Antonella , beware ! '
`` The girl looked greatly relieved when he had fairly gone  but I was recalled again to the perilous sweetness of my position .
I was shocked at having suffered myself to be thus carried away by my feelings  for had she not been left in my charge , so to speak , by her mother , who regarded me , however mistakenly , as her saviour .
Shame upon me if I betrayed the trust of those poor people , whose only pride was their unstained honesty !
`` I determined , therefore , to hide my feelings from Antonella - and to make her think of my conduct in the least serious light - resolved as I was to avoid ever being left alone with her in the future .
For what but disgrace could our intercourse bring to her ?
However desperately I might be in love with her , marrying any one was at present out of the question for me .
I had trouble enough to earn a miserable subsistence , and , besides , my art claimed me utterly .
So I would secure myself against further temptation by flying from Capri and its dread siren !
`` While taking this resolution , Antonella and I were walking silently towards the entrance of the cavern .
There I stopped for a minute , and taking her hand in mine , while I tried to look as unconcerned as I could , said , lingeringly slipping the ring back on her finger - '' ` Antonella , if indeed I have saved your life as they page : 196 say , you have repaid me with something far more precious than your ring , and in future you must always consider me as your debtor .
But let us go now , for I fear we have been tarrying here overlong , and your poor mother will be quite frightened . '
`` Antonella made no reply as we left the cave , and the expression of her eyes was difficult to understand .
In order to divert her own thoughts as well as my own , I kept asking the name of every rock and promontory as we scrambled over the uneven stones .
`` It was impossible , indeed , however strong one 's preoccupation might be , to remain quite insensible to the glow and glory of that sea and sky on issuing from the twilight cavern .
The aspect of nature had undergone a transfiguration .
`` Though we ourselves were in the shadow which the great rocks were casting over the shore and far across the sea , all the more striking was the contrast with the brightness of the heavens above us , where transparent zones of intense rose-colour , through which the hyacinthine sky was faintly discernible , radiated up to the zenith like the glowing streamers of an Aurora Borealis .
In the shadow where we stood everything was tinged with this ruddy glow  but in the far distance sky and sea gleamed with the tints of Antonella 's opal .
`` On our right , facing the orb of the setting sun , two inaccessible rocks rising straight out of the sea ( that Antonella called the Faraglione ) were smitten by his red level rays , while the waves breaking at their base , and some sea-falcons hovering above them , were steeped in the same dyes  but their towering peaks , ravaged page : 197 and weather-stained , loomed mystical in the brightness above and beneath them .
`` This ineffable spectacle for a moment completely absorbed me .
Then turning to Antonella , who , scarcely heeding the scene , was biting one of her coral rows , I said - '' ` What pleasure you must feel in simply living in this delicious climate , where beauty is as your daily food .
Better a peasant here than a prince in our dismal latitudes ! '
`` She looked at me dubiously , and shook her head , saying under her breath : ' I am tired of it - tired of it all but the sea .
I should like to go across the water to where the great cities are , they tell me - Rome and Firenze , with crowds of men and women - who wear silk gowns on week-days - and horses and carriages . ' ''
` Oh , Antonella , ' I said , shaking my head playfully , ` go where you may you will not match this for beauty .
See there , how the moon comes creeping up little by little over that rock , as if she were afraid she might melt away like a waxen image if exposed to the glow of this sunset . '
`` And with praiseworthy resolution I turned my eyes away from hers , and pointed up to the sky , which was visibly growing darker every instant .
But as she made no remark I looked round again , when to my utter amazement I found her gone from my side .
`` I waited a moment , then called her more and more loudly , but there was no answer save a ghostly repetition of Antonella 's name from the caverns which honeycombed the cliffs .
`` Remembering the girl 's peculiarly excitable page : 198 temperament and unaccountable moods , I grew thoroughly uneasy on seeing no sigh of her anywhere .
I retraced my steps and re-entered the cavern where I had so lately been kissing her .
After shouting and peering about in its chill , forbidding interior , I came out again , and sought for her behind every boulder , now casting long sharp shadows in the moonlight .
`` At last I caught sight of two fishermen just pushing a small boat out to sea .
Hurrying up to them , I asked whether they had seen a girl anywhere about  but they only shook their heads as they quickly leaped in after it .
I knew not what to do , but , full of fear , hurried in the direction of the Sirens ' Rock , and cast one apprehensive glance at its summit , which stood out ominously distinct in the pale luminosity .
`` Thank heaven she was not there !
Divided between fear and the hope that she might have gone home on the sudden , I plodded my way as best I could up the ill-defined track of the rocky hillside . ''
page : [ 199 ] CHAPTER XVIII .
SHADOW HUNTING .
`` WHAT a tantalizing witch of a woman ! ''
cried Sontheim rising from his chair .
`` She will lead you a pretty dance , my poor friend , to quite another tune , I see .
But then , how could you so far forget what is due to fair ladies as to see aught to admire in heaven or earth but the eyes of your charmer ?
My mind misgives me but you 'll have to pay for that leze-majesty to sovereign beauty .
Women , you know , whatever they may pretend , care nothing about scenery  and if they have the courage of their sex they are frank enough to show it .
I like your Antonella all the better for making off when you began bothering her with all that cant about landscape .
That reminds me of a charming young lady I had once the pleasure to come across in company with her friends on the top of Drachenfels .
They were one and all outvying each other in raptures about the Rhine , and Rolandseck , and the Siebengebirge , and only my Hebe-eyed page : 200 eyed damsel said never a word .
So I asked what she thought of this celebrated scene .
` This is nothing for ladies , ' she said , pouting , and turning up the little white tip of her nose .
I was so charmed with this truly feminine answer that I left Rhine and ruins to the others , and spent the rest of the day in learning how much greater is the effect of dimples on the human heart than that of castle-crowned hills , vine-covered slopes , rushing rivers , and all the rest of it .
`` But , dear me , there goes twelve o'clock !
I should have thought it would have got a little cooler by now .
What you can be made of , Emanuel , I do n't know : to go on talking , talking , and never get thirsty in such heat as this is simply abnormal  my earthy nature requires that I should now go and replenish the beer-jug , and the lamp , I think , also wants seeing to . ''
After a few minutes Sontheim returned with fresh supplies , and after taking a long , hearty draught he said - `` Go on !
What had become of the offended beauty ?
Had she gone to offer up an Aye Maria and pour forth her griefs into the Madonna 's ear ? ''
`` You will hear in good time , my friend , '' Emanuel answered .
`` At any rate I thought of nothing but Antonella , yearning and yet dreading to meet her again , as I expected to catch sight of her tall figure at every turn in the road , behind every projecting rock or clump of flowering broom .
`` While I was making up my mind to leave Capri on the morrow morning , as the only safe course under the circumstances , I hoped , with delightful inconsistency , that fate or chance would defeat my purpose by then page : 201 and there throwing Antonella in my path again .
And , strange to say , the more firmly I was resolved not to go and see the girl the fiercer grew my longing to look , if only once more , on the dark splendour of her eyes .
`` Every now and then I started violently , and then rushed after some dimly seen object , which in the mocking moonlight seemed to recall something of her form and motion , and my lips involuntarily called out , ` Antonella , Antonella ! '
`` Thus , before I knew how , I had completely lost my way in a labyrinth of moonlit vineyards .
Having not the faintest idea which way to turn , I threw myself on the ground at last , resigned to lie there till some passerby in the early morning should put me in the right road .
Utterly tired out , I was on the point of falling asleep , when a stir and rustle of leaves at a little distance caught my attention .
Looking about me drowsily I caught sight , not without certain internal qualms , of the deformed little old friar , whose big head and long white beard were strangely eerie in this moonshine .
`` He did not appear to see or hear me approach , for he was muttering what sounded like an incantation , as he plucked up by the roots an insignificant-looking herb pearled with dew .
After watching him for an instant to no purpose , I made bold to interrupt his incantations by asking him my way .
`` On hearing himself thus unexpectedly addressed , the friar jerked his huge head about , but instead of expressing surprise at seeing me there at such an hour , peered furtively about him , and then said , ` And what have you done with the maiden , Maëstro ? '
page : 202 `` I should have liked to have kicked the creature for the satanic leer with which he accompanied his question  and , not wishing to own to her sudden disappearance , said she had gone home to her mother 's after he had left , and that wandering about by myself I had lost my way in trying to get back to the Osteria . ''
` Our road lies in the same direction , in that case , Signor , ' said the Capuchin friar  ` for my cell stands on the height above the ruins of Timberio , and I 'll take you to where your path branches off from mine . '
`` While we were jogging along through a maze of marble fragments , he told me a gruesome story of a girl who had been similarly bitten by a tarantula in these ruins .
At least , he explained , the Capri folk had laid the blame of her subsequent evil ways on this fact .
`` I made little doubt that the crafty hermit had invented this tale by way of a scarecrow to fright the bird from the too-alluring grain  and he might have saved himself the pains , I thought .
At any rate , I was very glad to be rid of him when he parted from me , after impressing upon me that I could not possibly miss the inn if only I walked in a straight line towards the light which was discernible in front of me .
`` While hurrying towards it , I debated with myself whether I should still go to Ana-Capri to find out whether Antonella was in safety  but I shrank from the consequences of such a step on recollecting , not without violent agitation , to what a pass my solicitude had brought me .
`` I was abruptly roused from my preoccupation by a low cry  and , on looking up to see whence the sound had proceeded , I was shocked to find that , another page : 203 step forward , and I must infallibly have tumbled down a narrow dark fissure , seemingly ending in the sea .
I , and not my violin , might thus have gone reeling to destruction like one of Timberio 's favourites .
It was the cry that had saved me .
Like a woman 's voice it was , but must have been the Aziola 's  and I firmly believe that the villainous hermit , inflamed with impotent jealousy , had wished to send me to my destruction .
I now retraced my steps with great caution , and , striking into a side-path , regained my inn without further adventure .
`` Too excited for sleep , I seized my instrument , and after a few crisp bars I began trying over the tarantella which had come to me in so extraordinary a fashion .
As I was gradually striking into the weird trills recurring at intervals throughout this tune , I suddenly caught sight of what looked like a woman 's twirling , beautifully outlined shadow thrown across the window-curtain .
This time there could be no doubt about it .
My heart gave a bound , as , flinging the half-closed window , which was on the ground-floor , wide open , I leapt from the sill .
`` Surely a woman 's flitting shadow , seen on a wall , glided out of sight as I did so !
I rushed wildly in the direction in which it had disappeared , till I found myself on the very verge of the dizzy rock called ` Salto di Tiberio . '
`` There I stood still and looked about me .
No one was anywhere in sight  not a sound broke the stillness save the fretting of the sea far below .
A horror seized me of this delusive shadow mocking and taunting me .
I ran back to the inn as fast as I had left it , and there page : 204 flung myself on the bed , where I lay tossing about in uneasy slumbers till the break of day .
`` I then rose , put my few things together , and began debating with myself whether I should bid Antonella good-bye before going .
Passion pleaded it would be acting like a heartless brute if I left without seeing for myself what had become of her  prudence suggested that I might easily make inquiries through my good-natured hostess , and that my object in leaving the place would probably be defeated if I risked seeing her again .
`` While still undecided what to do , I nevertheless mechanically walked on towards the rock-hewn stairs of Ana-Capri .
I had already mounted a considerable number of steps when I saw Bice coming towards me with a basket on her head .
She made me a pretty curtsy , and offered me a spray of basil .
I began questioning her about Antonella with ill-concealed eagerness , and heard , to my inexpressible relief , that she was at home with her mother , and in the gayest of spirits .
`` I took my decision on the instant .
Giving Bice a few coins , which these simple girls always accept thankfully for their flowers , I told her that circumstances obliged me to leave Capri quite unexpectedly  would she therefore bid Signora Mansi and Antonella good-bye for me , and give the latter this trifle as a keepsake from me .
For happening to have by me an antique Roman cameo brooch , I gave it the girl , who looked quite taken aback , and , waving a hasty good-bye , hurried desperately down to the shore at Capri , so as to leave myself no time to alter my mind again . ''
page : [ 205 ] CHAPTER XIX .
A HIT AT LAST .
WHEN I got back to Naples , I felt strangely out of place in the bustling , noisy town .
I seemed to come from another world , to have strayed into past centuries in which things most wild , curious , and fantastic were received as common and everyday matters .
Entirely engrossed by my tarantella , which in a measure seemed to connect me still with the beauteous creature that had been its inspiration , I went back to my garret in the dilapidated old palace that was let out in cheap lodgings .
There I began noting down and elaborating the score of the Apulian Dance such as it had fashioned itself anew in my brain .
For three weeks I never left my room , trying over ever fresh combinations of the tune that seemed to possess rather than be composed by me  now playing , now noting down , now adding a fresh bar , now playing over again with still growing passion the music that as by enchantment still brought Antonella page : 206 before me in all her matchless grace of form and motion .
She was the inspiration of my theme !
I felt all at once as the deaf and dumb might feel when their tongue is loosened , and sweet speech flows in on their inner sense with ineffable harmony .
Sweet sounds , ravishing melodies , haunted the air about me like heavenly messengers .
I was in a continual transport  I had at last found the fit organ for the spirit that moved within me .
`` Ah , such days do not often come to one !
And if they did , they would soon consume to ashes the flesh and blood that can not withstand their fiery ecstasy .
But for many long years they will reverberate through a man 's inmost soul , and quicken all his best work - dare I say with immortality ?
`` In those days I took my food by snatches ( such food as the man of all work used to place once a day on the rickety table )  I slept by snatches , scarcely taking time to undress - indeed I was scarcely conscious of the needs of the body .
During that time I jotted down numbers of motives which I worked out in later compositions .
`` One day , when in the very fever of composition , I was not a little annoyed and astonished by hearing a knock at my door , for I had scrupulously avoided letting any one know of my return .
The person who entered , puffing and panting with the flight of steps he had mounted , was an utter stranger , and I could hardly refrain from saluting him with an oath .
I fear I glared with anything but friendly eyes at the little , fat , self-important personage with a hot , smirking face , and little dabs of eyes blinking perpetually , perhaps page : 207 to prevent one from finding out how shrewd they were .
`` Not at all abashed by my questionable welcome , the intruder looked calmly all over the miserable room , with its litter of scored music , books , boots , stray shirts , and slices of dry bread , rubbing his two pudgy hands with an air of satisfaction at once puzzling and irritating  until , growing impatient , I asked curtly to what I owed the honour of the gentleman 's visit .
`` Instead of answering me at once ( and looking , if anything , rather pleased at my rudeness ) , he coolly took up the sheet of music I had flung down at his entrance , and scrutinizing it with half-shut eyes , said inquiringly - '' ` Ah , ah !
a tarantella , I see !
Of your own composing , perhaps ?
Curious !
because tarantellas happen to be my hobby .
I have quite a collection of all our national dances , and shall be happy to show them you some day .
Will you think me very impertinent if I ask you as a favour to let me hear a few bars of it on the violin there ? '
`` So saying , he took out a gaudily painted snuff-box , and , on my refusing the detestable stuff , helped himself liberally , with an air of being quite at home most exasperating to me .
Who on earth could he be ?
What the devil did he want with me ?
Was he a creditor from Rome , perhaps , who had tracked me to my den ? ''
` But , sir , I presume that the errand on which you came was hardly to ask me to play you a tarantella !
Perhaps you will excuse my curiosity , ' I answered , with covert irony , for I now began suspecting that the man had come to play off some practical joke on me .
page : 208 '' ` Just so , just so , ' said the stranger , still eyeing me with imperturbable good-humour  ` by your leave I will sit down , for your domicile is just a little high up - just a little , for legs not quite so young as they were once .
I fear you may think that I have been taking too great a liberty , my dear young man .
I may as well tell you at once ' - taking out a large card and handing it to me - ` that I am Antonino Occhio d'Argento , the secretary of the Musical Society at Naples . '
`` Why could n't the fool say so at once , I thought , as I bowed with considerably more politeness , wondering what was coming next . ''
` Well , I must tell you my little story connectedly .
It was on Thursday , I think , that Mercato , the violoncellist , and myself , were going along the quay of Santa Lucia , when my attention was arrested by hearing some fishermen singing a tarantella I did not remember ever having heard , and which struck me by its originality and the fire of its movements .
Now , you must know , my dear young man , that I am as keen after a tune of this kind as a greyhound after a hare .
So I went up to one of the men and asked what he was singing there .
`` A tarantella ecco , Signor ! ''
`` Yes , fool , I know that well enough  but whose tarantella is it ?
Where did you get hold of it ?
This is not one of our old popular tunes ! ''
`` Ah , that I ca n't say , '' the idiot answered , grinning from ear to ear .
`` But at least you can tell me how you came by it , '' I persisted .
`` You did not invent it yourself , did you now , my friend ? '' ''
` The fellow scratched his head , and looked down at his bare toes as if they might refresh his memory .
At last , when I must have waited several minutes , he cried page : 209 gleefully : `` I have it , Signor !
Some of us , maybe a week ago , rowed a party of milordi Inglese to Capri , and on the Marina , by our Lady , the fishermen were all humming this tune  and when we went into the town , why there were all the pretty Capri girls singing it at their work  and when we came to the marketplace , why if two men were not playing it on the guitar and mandolin to the blind soldiers sitting on the benches in the sunshine .
So the tune got hold of us and stuck by us since that day , most likely , Signor . '' '' '
I will say for our people , my dear young man , that they are the most musical nation in the world .
They have an unerring ear for what 's got real melody , and are often better judges than we connoisseurs .
And the way they 'll catch up a new tune one from another is astonishing  they 'll do it as easily as a child catches the measles ! ' ''
` Well , my dear young friend , now we come to my next point , for on the following day , when I was taking my cup of coffee as usual in front of the Hotel of the Tre Couronne , and jotting down a few memoranda concerning our next concert , my attention was caught by some one close behind now whistling , now singing , this identical tarantella that I had been so taken with on the previous day .
This person seemed to know it more intimately , however , and hummed a greater number of variations . ''
` On shifting my position a little , I saw two young men playing dominoes at the next table .
The one who was whistling was a very hairy young man , with a keen , lively face , and when he stopped to puff away at his cigarette , I did not scruple to ask him if he would have page : 210 the goodness to tell me whose the air was I had just heard him sing .
`` Corpo di Bacco , '' he said , flinging the end of his cigar away  `` I pray every day that whosesoever it is may go to the devil with all speed . ''
`` Why so ? ''
I said  `` if it is not impertinent to ask . ''
`` Why so ? ''
he cried , jumping up and coming to my side .
`` Why so ?
Because I have the misfortune of occupying the room next to his , whoever he may be  because he is fairly driving me out of my senses with his maddening music !
Because he gives me no peace by day or night  because in bed , at meals , at my easel , I am pursued , haunted , persecuted , assailed , bewitched by that demoniacal tune .
By Jove !
I expect to see myself in a lunatic asylum ere long , for I 've got it regularly on the brain  and in my own despite I am forced to sing that devil 's tarantella myself now . ''
`` But , '' I asked  laughing at the man 's whimsical manner , `` why need you listen to it if you hate it so ? ''
`` Why ? ''
he cried , `` why ?
Do you think if I were not a poor soul of a painter , whom his landlord wo n't suffer to budge before he has paid his rent , I would have stayed for a moment in that purgatory of incessant sound . ''
`` But tell me who is this indefatigable musician , '' I said at last , eagerly .
`` Who , indeed ! ''
echoed the stranger , in a mysterious whisper .
`` No man hath ever seen him with his bodily eyes , I believe  and I misdoubt his corporeality for my own part .
Flesh could never stand it !
There is some secret , some black secret , behind it all , I 'll be sworn . ''
`` Well , I 'll fathom it , '' was my answer , `` if you give me his or your address , as you are neighbours .
A man who composes a tarantella that haunts one like that page : 211 a genius , whatever else he may be into the bargain . '' ''
` So I got the address , and took the liberty of coming straight here , you see  and I hope you will oblige me by playing this tarantella which I have taken so much trouble to unearth , and which I presume , my dear young friend , to be your own . '
`` Not without a beating heart had I listened to Occhio d'Argento 's diffuse narrative .
That first spontaneous response of a phlegmatic or apathetic outside world to the call within one , is a never-to-be-forgotten sensation .
Without further preamble I took my violin and played the piece , in its complete form as now noted down by me .
`` While I was playing the little fat secretary jumped up from his chair , and whistling snatches of the tune , he repeatedly danced and capered across the room , flinging up his hands , snapping his fingers , and puffing and screaming , till he wabbled all over with the exertion .
At last , wiping his glistening face , he sank into a chair , panting , ` Eh !
Bravo , bravissimo !
Che bella , che divina tarantella ! '
`` When I had done , Occhio d'Argento rushed up to me , and enclosing me within the circumference of his arms , almost stifled me with bear-like hugs , as imprinting moist kisses on both my cheeks he shouted , ` Splendid !
Magnificent !
A tarantella to rouse the dead on doomsday with ! '
`` To cut the matter short , he engaged me there and then to play at a concert that was to be given the ensuing week by the Musical Society of Naples .
`` At that concert I won my first laurels .
I was page : 212 enthusiastically encored .
I scarcely met with marks of more universal admiration than those which now burst upon me when at the height of my celebrity .
All Naples caught up the melody , and I heard snatches of it sung at the corner of every street .
`` I had made a hit at last , and fortune began holding out some of her dazzling rewards to me . ''
page : [ 213 ] CHAPTER XX .
LOST .
`` HAD I forgotten Antonella by this time ?
Had the excitement of my first success banished her image ?
On the contrary , much as I had striven I could not get the witch out of my head .
The rebound from despondency to brightest hope seemed to have fanned the fire of my passion into new intensity .
Her eyes haunted me at all hours of the day , in every dream of the night .
`` One night , when the time of my departure for Rome had been definitively settled for the day after the morrow , as I had been engaged for a series of concerts there , I awoke with such a craving to look once more on Antonella that I felt sick and fevered with my longing . ''
` Confound all prudence , ' I cried , ' I can stand this no longer  I must see her once , only once more , come of it what will ! '
and jumping out of bed , I dressed , page : 214 packed , and settled my few affairs so far , to shorten the time and leave my hands free .
`` The day would never dawn , seemingly  yet dawn at last it did , to my relief , and as soon as there was the smallest chance of finding a boatman astir I hurried to the beach .
`` How quiet were the streets as yet , usually so noisy and crowded  nothing stirring abroad but the goatherds and their flocks .
Here and there they stopped before the houses , and were milked into the cans which the sleepy maid-servants brought to the door .
The sight was suggestive .
I went up to one man and begged him to let me have a draught of milk , after which , feeling much refreshed , I went on my way .
`` A good many fishermen were already on the beach , so that I had no difficulty in getting a boat .
The sky wore a subdued : aspect  out at sea rose Capri , and my heart beat fast as I looked at its mystic outline , with its deep and solemn steel colour cut clearly against the light grey sky .
In my excitement I began imagining that the melancholy look of the island was a presage of evil to the girl who dwelt there .
`` I had plenty of time to indulge my fancies , for it was ten o'clock when at last we reached the island .
I hurried on through Capri , scarcely looking to right or left , though people saluted me here and there .
`` I soon reached the rocky stairs leading to Ana-Capri , and climbed the five hundred and sixty steps more quickly than I should have thought possible .
` This very day I shall see her again , face to face ' - beyond that I could think of nothing  sufficient for the day was the joy thereof .
On reaching the platform of page : 215 the mountain at last , I was forced to stand still for a moment to allay the beating of my heart  for after all I must not betray my feelings to the whole village if I wished just to see her once more - that once more being the utmost I could hope for , or expect , at the time .
`` On entering the quiet , idyllic little place again , full of women 's song and rattling looms , I felt an inordinate wish to call out loud , ` Antonella , Antonella ! '
which no doubt would have gathered all the women and girls of the mountain-town around me .
But I had still sufficient sense to repress my wish .
Instead of rushing on as I had done , I now dawdled , less perhaps through prudent simulation of indifference , than from the inexplicable feeling that impels one to defer the goal when it seems in sight .
`` Slowly as I walked , however , I could not be for ever on the way , and so , as if unawares , found myself with my head swimming round , in front of the little white house .
There was no sign of any one stirring about the place , so I walked in through the open door .
In the same dark chamber , kneeling before the same dimly-lit shrine , Antonella 's mother was absorbed in prayer , as when I had , before come upon her unexpectedly .
`` On my cheerfully calling her by name with a greeting she started violently , and then rose  or rather tottered to her feet .
As she came forward to welcome me , I noticed that she looked aged by many years , and her eyes were red and swollen with weeping .
She tried to say something about the pleasure of seeing me , but broke down in the middle , and the tears began rolling down her withered cheeks instead .
page : 216 '' ` What is it ? '
I cried , seizing her hand with a sudden sickening feeling .
` Good God , what has happened - tell me , quick , quick ! '
`` The unhappy woman seemed bewildered by my vehemence , in spite of her grief , and looked almost blankly at me  so I had impatiently to repeat my query , adding - ` Where is your daughter ?
Is it well with her ? '
with a trembling in my voice that I could not control .
`` Signora Mansi , who had by this time recovered a little composure , repeated my words in a stifled , questioning manner , absently passing one hand over another - ` Is it well with her !
Ah , is it not well with my poor child ! '
`` The sad resignation in her tone , her inexplicable manner , drove me almost frantic .
All sorts of misfortune that could possibly have happened to Antonella since I had left darted through my brain at once , with an agony of fear and self-reproach .
I tingled all over with some dread anticipation , and with futile rage I upbraided myself for I scarce knew what .
`` The poor woman , without much heeding me , went on muttering - more to the image of the Virgin and Child than addressing me - ` Yes , the dear Madonna has taken five of them , five that I nursed and suckled at the breast - three at sea , one with the fever , and the smallest of all in the cradle  and now the last , she wants the last !
O light of my life , why has thou left me lonely in my old age ? '
`` I could bear this suspense no longer .
In my wild excitement I fear I grasped her hand roughly enough , as I asked harshly , ` Why do you torture me thus ?
page : 217 Tell me the worst , if worse there is !
What has become of her ?
Speak , speak , I entreat you ! '
`` Signora Mansi , thus urgently recalled to the fact of my presence , which she had quite forgotten I believe , fixed her eyes all at once with piercing intentness on mine as though she would read my very soul  and then dropping into a chair and covering her face with her hands , she sobbed - ` Sanctimissa Madre !
Is it possible !
Ah , had my unhappy child but known , perchance she would not have gone - but I am blaspheming in my grief . ' ''
` Gone where , where ? '
I cried , in my impatience striding up and down the narrow room , and striking my hand against the lintel of the door  ` for the hundredth time I ask you - where is she ?
` But in my despair of getting any answer , I now flung open the hack door that looked on the terraces of the pillared and vine-trellised garden , and called at the top of my voice - ` Antonella !
Antonella ! '
`` At the sound of her daughter 's name , the poor mother uttered a piteous moan , and coming towards me , flung her arms round my neck and sobbed - ` Too late  she can not hear , oh she can not hear you now ! '
Then letting me go again , and laying her hand on my arm , she said with an inflection that chilled me : ` You will never see her again , my poor young man  she has gone for ever , left me for ever , to enter the Convent St. Maria del Soccorsa at Naples , and take the vows there . '
`` I gave a cry , such a cry as a wild beast may utter , and sank down as though somebody had given me a blow on the head  but in an instant I was up again , page : 218 and seizing the scared , sobbing woman by the shoulders , I hissed in her ear , ' I will get at her !
I will see her again , though all the bolts and bars of the church should enclose her ! '
`` Frightened at the blasphemy of my language , the poor mother sank on her knees again and muttered an Ave , interspersed with sobs and tears  while I , grasping my head with my hands , was trying to realize the position and collect my thoughts .
But I could not think !
I was all on fire with thwarted longing , for in these latter hours the strength of my passion had grown in proportion to the insuperable obstacles against which it lashed itself almost into madness .
`` All at once I felt my hands softly kissed , and stroked and fondled .
Antonella 's mother was standing before me , and in a voice as if she were speaking to a little child , she said , ` Be comforted , be comforted , my son .
Jesu hath lived , and hath died for us , and should we not give up our children if it be God 's will ? '
`` For a moment the pathos of that sorrowing mother 's voice made me forget my own grief and rage  her thin face , to which a great sorrow lent its dignity , might have been that of a Mater Dolorosa itself .
I could only look at , not answer her , as with an infinitely touching gesture she threw out her empty hands and cried : ` Ah , but the Madonna may be wroth with me if I am too loth - she who gave her own bambino for us sinners .
And yet she was the last that was left - the last  they were all taken from me , all the little ones to whom I had given suck , all the pretty ones that I dandled on my arms , all the babes that I sang to sleep , singing , `` Nonna , Nonna , my sweet son , oh , Nonna ! ''
She was the page : 219 last , the joy of my old eyes : for one the Holy Madonna took to herself out of the cradle , the little Lilla made of violets and jasmine buds  and one died of the fever  and three went down at sea  and she was all that was left - my last little one , my child , the warmth of my old age , and she has gone from me too .
Madonna - but I must not murmur  it is God 's will , and I shall follow soon , soon now . '
Here she sat down on a low stool , with one hand on each knee , and said ever so gently , looking up into my face : ` Tolla , my Tolla , the most beautiful child of the islands , they said !
I seem to see her no higher than that ' - and she held out her hand - ` coming up the garden walk there .
Ah , you loved her too , my son - but it 's all for the best , no doubt , ' and here she covered her face with her hands and wept .
`` Had I been less preoccupied with my selfish passion , I must have been touched even to tears by the depth of this woman 's uncomplaining sorrow  and more , I must have been struck by the heartlessness of the girl who could forsake this widowed mother and afflict her with the living entombment of her last remaining child .
But there was no room for such thoughts in me then .
`` Feeling as though every moment might for ever seal Antonella 's fate , I started up , pressed her mother 's hands hard in my own , and cried , ` You must , you shall see your Tolla again ! '
then before she could reply or remonstrate , I had rushed out of the house . ''
page : [ 220 ] CHAPTER XXI .
FOUND .
`` A THOUSAND mad schemes for liberating Antonella from the living grave in which she was going to bury herself crossed my mind on my way back to Naples .
It was almost evening when at last I again leaped ashore .
`` What was I to do ?
Now for the first time I began fully to realize what a difficult , nay , impossible undertaking it would be , in those days of police and passports , to penetrate the walls of a convent and make off with nun or novice .
`` Whilst I was meditating a reconnaissance of the situation of the convent , some one suddenly slapped me on the shoulder and called out in cheery tones : ` Why , by all that 's good , it 's you in the body at last !
Where have you been delving , old mole ?
I have been hunting for you all over Naples in vain , burning as I was to congratulate you on your success !
We are all so proud !
We always sniffed the demon in page : 221 you , of course !
- Why , confound it , what 's up now ?
you look more moody than ever , and as if you wished me at Jericho !
Are you composing a sonata to `` Melencolia ? '' '
`` In truth , though I really liked Raoul immensely , and knew him for a good fellow , I was thoroughly put out at meeting him at this inopportune moment .
I stammered some lame reply , and any one but he would have seen that there was something up , and left me to my own devices .
Not so Raoul .
With garrulous pleasantry he linked his arm within mine and dragged me along with him , pouring the while into my unwilling ears a string of congratulations , news of Roman friends , the last new scandal about Cardinal F. , and only interrupting himself to stare hard after every pretty girl that passed .
Luckily I was not called upon to reply , as certainly I did not listen .
`` In this manner , scarcely conscious where I was going , we had proceeded some little way along the quay of Santa Lucia , which at this hour was swarming with life and motion like a very ant-hill .
My friend suddenly left my side as abruptly as he had come upon me , but I was hardly aware of it , and was leaning , lost in thought , over the parapet of the quay .
I believe it must have been a gloriously beautiful evening .
Absently I was looking at the bay , at the reflected lights that dyed the sea as with rose-bloom , not consciously noticing anything , only in my mind 's eye conjuring up a gloomy prison-like pile in which a captive girl would beat out her life as a bird does against the bars of its cage .
`` I was just starting off I scarcely knew whither , page : 222 when Raoul , hopping and humming , and rolling a cigarette between his fingers and thumb , came excitedly back to my side , and gave me a shake , saying : ` Wake up , Emanuel , and do n't stop there like one of the wooden posts !
What has come over you again ?
Do look at those two ragged girls dancing there with castanets to the sound of that blind old man 's mandolin . '
`` Yes , it was my own tarantella that I heard for the thousandth time !
I was getting quite sick and tired of it by this .
As usual in Naples , all sorts of people gradually joined in the dance .
Well-dressed and handsome maidens , ragged girls , nursemaids - who calmly deposited their charges in other women 's arms - were capering away to my friend 's intense enjoyment .
For my own part , I was just starting off in an opposite direction when Raoul , plucking me by the sleeve , exclaimed excitedly : ` Superb !
magnificent !
I never saw such a walk , such a figure , such an action of the arms and hands !
No Greek statue ever showed nobler proportions , more exquisitely moulded limbs !
Why she is actually going to dance !
What a godsend ! '
At those rapid exclamations , more vehement than usual , I could do no less than stop and turn round again , not so much from curiosity as to please Raoul .
`` But , good God , the shock it gave me !
I gasped out some incoherent exclamation , and almost staggered against the wall in my surprise .
Was it Antonella - Antonella in the flesh ?
Antonella not shut up in cold , dark , convent walls , but dancing my tarantella under the sweet sky of Naples , in all the supremacy of her matchless grace !
`` Rooted to the spot I stood and stared at her  and page : 223 all the time Raoul kept up a running commentary of words , and jerked out such broken sentences as - ` Is n't she glorious ?
What modulated grace in all her motions !
This girl ought to do nothing but dance !
She is rhythm embodied in flesh !
She has actually inspired that old man , for his instrument squeaks less than heretofore  and all the other dancers have stopped still to look at her ! ''
` There , what a theme for you to work out , Emanuel !
What a model for me to paint from .
She must be got at any cost , at any cost ! '
and he was darting off again , when for all answer I turned sharp upon him , and clutching hold of his arm till he winced again , said between my teeth : ` Do n't joke about her !
She 's the girl I 'm madly in love with !
If you only knew the danger she 's in at this very moment !
Ah !
she must be out of her senses , I fear .
Those soldiers there looking on , if they guessed who she was , would clap her in prison .
But we must save her - you must help me to save her , Raoul . '
`` Raoul , at first quite dumbfoundered , soon regained his natural vivacity , and rubbing his arm exclaimed - ` Heavens !
have you poisoned the Santo Padre between you ?
I 'll help you  but first tell us all about it !
Now I observe her more closely she looks as though the dagger in her hair was n't merely for ornament . '
`` For all answer I beckoned him to follow me , and noiselessly strode up to where Antonella was by this time dancing and twirling , the centre of an enraptured crowd .
Elbowing my way through it , I placed myself in such manner that my eyes were fully fixed on hers .
Antonella for one instant stared at me wildly  then , as page : 224 though under the influence of a potent spell , she became suddenly motionless as a statue .
At an almost imperceptible sign from me she plunged into the crowd , which thereupon immediately dispersed , and along with it we three slipped away unperceived in the sudden darkening of the Italian twilight . ''
page : [ 225 ] CHAPTER XXII .
FLIGHT .
`` KEEPING tight hold of Antonella 's hand , I talked in a low voice to Raoul as we hurried through the noisy by-streets of Naples , till we came to a stand-still in front of a good-sized milliner 's shop .
`` The Frenchman whispering , ` Then we will meet as agreed upon , at the Porta Capuana at nine precisely , ' darted off round the corner , while the girl and I entered the premises .
`` Antonella fell back a step , as going to the counter I said to the shop-woman , ` Madam , I want to know whether you can oblige us immediately with every requisite of an English lady 's travelling costume - gown , scarf , bonnet , c. ? '
`` Seeing the dubious , rather suspicious expression on the woman 's face , I hastened to add , ` I 'll pay you handsomely for the order , my good woman  ' and knowing the weakness of the sex for anything in the shape of a love-affair , added , lowering my voice to a page : 226 confidential tone , ` You will be helping two lovers in distress . '
`` The woman 's face quite brightened at this , and looking slyly round at my companion who had shrunk behind me , said , ` Bé , bé , you want a regular lady 's dress , do you ? '
and she disappeared into a back room , apparently to consult with some invisible adviser as to what she had in stock : `` While she was gone Antonella came close up to me , whispering , not without awe : ` Am I to have a dress to sweep the ground , like a real lady ? '
`` Before I could answer her naive query the shop-woman returned with various articles of attire slung across her arm . '' '
I have no ready-made dress whatever to fit your lady , ' she said , looking admiringly at Antonella 's tall , beautifully-made figure .
` All I can offer as a makeshift is this black silk skirt made to order for a damigella Inglese  the bodice would not fit you , but then you can keep on your own under this black silk mantle .
Here 's also a real shawl Inglese for travelling , if you would like it .
But will Madam step this way , and try on what we have got ? '
`` So Antonella departed with the milliner , and after what seemed to my impatience an incredibly long time , reappeared in sweeping garments , a transformed character .
She seemed mightily pleased with the result , only the poke bonnet did not meet with her approval .
In spite of the peril of her situation , she actually urged on the shopkeeper to send to a neighbouring establishment for some other specimens , as she seemed childishly desirous of getting one as like as page : 227 possible to a certain Miladi who had fired her imagination at Capri with a leghorn of portentous dimensions .
`` Almost in despair I looked on as Antonella tried on bonnet after bonnet , by turns looking at the glass and me  and finally she would have chosen the largest and most conspicuous , but that , half beside myself , I peremptorily bade her take the one I selected for her .
Then I hastily threw down the sum agreed upon , in my haste giving the woman , I believe , a napoleon too much .
She obsequiously wished us good luck , as I hurried off with Antonella on my arm , who kept tripping over her unwonted length of skirt , which in our haste had been merely slipped over her other things . ''
` What have you been about , to make you so much behind the time ? '
cried Raoul , rushing forward to meet us on our reaching the appointed spot  ` but he stopped in astonishment as though he hardly knew my companion again , and with a respectful obeisance said , ` The carriage has been waiting these twenty minutes . ' ''
` Oh , it was all Antonella 's bonnet , ' said I , as , lifting her into the carriage , we jumped in after her , and the postilion cracking his whip , we rattled along the road to Rome . ''
` We might all be in peril of finding ourselves at the Castle of St. Angelo , were it not for my foresight , ' said Raoul , in French , for fear of frightening Antonella , and triumphantly waving a passport in my face .
` Mind , at the next Dogana you are Captain Jones and his spouse - that worthy Britannic officer having lent it to me in his horror of papacy .
What do you say to that for an idea ?
but in repayment I stipulate that none but I shall paint her ! '
page : 228 `` While Raoul thus rattled on , I tried to make Antonella as comfortable as I could for the long night-journey , partly with the plaid shawl , and partly with some of the things that Raoul had been careful to fetch for me from my lodging .
`` I think she began now first to realize her strange position , for the whirl and excitement of the last few hours had scarcely admitted of reflection .
`` She sat very much back in her corner of the carriage , and though by the uncertain light of the lamp the expression of her face escaped me , I could see the nervous clasping and unclasping of her hands , while her irregular breathing , broken now and then by a spasmodic sigh , filled me with concern .
But I thought it better to leave her to herself a little , partly that she might have time to calm herself , and partly that a thousand conflicting considerations were jostling themselves in my brain .
`` Certainly it was a startling predicament to be in !
Here was I , almost against my will , carrying off the daughter of poor but honest people , whose chief pride consisted in their good name .
Should I bring shame and dishonour on the grey hairs of that sorrowful mother , whose grief was as yet untainted by disgrace ?
And yet such a marriage - to a man on the threshold of his career - might be ruinous in its consequences !
`` Raoul here raising his voice , roused me from my preoccupation by remarking again in French : ' I do n't know whether you are aware , my friend , that I am positively dying of curiosity !
Here have I done everything a mortal can to help you elope with the most paintable girl in Italy , and yet you have n't deigned to page : 229 give me a word of explanation as to who she is , what mischief she 's been up to , or what you are to do with her !
If I 'm to be of any further use , it would seem at least expedient to give me some hints concerning the latter , even though , as to the former , I may be willing to believe her one of the sirens themselves that you have netted off the coast of Capri . '
`` I felt the justice of this interpellation .
Antonella had been so quiet that I might have thought her asleep for some time , but for the feeble light that showed me her eyes gazing fixedly in front of her .
I put my hand gently on her arm , and said : ` Antonella , this is Raoul , my dearest friend , almost my brother  without him we should not now be escaping as we are - he ought to know all .
I went back to Capri to see you .
I saw your poor mother this morning .
Was it indeed only this morning - it seems ever so long ago ! '
I exclaimed , in amazement .
` Well , I saw your mother , who told me , weeping , you had gone into a convent . '
`` Here Antonella drooped her head lower , and gave , I thought , a slight sort of shiver , but it was too dark to notice more . ''
` What on earth made you think of turning nun ? '
I asked , not without a smile  for now that the danger seemed receding , the idea of my bacchantic dancer transformed into a saint was too incongruous .
She drew her arm away at my question  she seemed to shrink more within herself .
`` While I was speaking to Antonella , my friend , with the instincts of a gentleman , had let down the sash and was leaning out of the window , humming softly to himself the while .
page : 230 `` All this time we had been bumping and tearing along at the rate of seven miles an hour , the landscape , with its hills , plains , and trees , shifting past us , as we saw it revealed by snatches when the moon , floating out of the grey , misty clouds , shone out triumphantly at intervals .
Now , however , the scarecrow Neapolitan post-horses , reeking and panting with their exertions , came to a dead stop in front of a forlorn-looking post-house .
Our postilion jumped from his saddle , and after several kicks , knocks , and Neapolitan oaths , on his part , at the closed door of the post-house , a surly man with a lantern came stumbling down the steps , two savage , starved-looking dogs barking furiously at his heels .
Three horses , with a man leading the foremost , came slowly clattering down a steep incline from their stable , and the three men now began an apparently interminable process of unharnessing the old and harnessing the fresh horses , which consisted chiefly of a succession of loud slaps , kicks , and objurgations .
`` Raoul , who heard my muttered exclamations of impatience , shouted ` God damn ! '
every now and then to keep up my character of English captain among the men  and , as before , I promised the postilion double drink-money , and went on shouting , ` Avanti , Avanti ! '
to hasten their movements generally .
`` At last the new horses were put in harness , the new postilion leaped into his saddle , and with a great deal of jolting and creaking , and swearing at the horses , we got under weigh , and began rolling along the grey , dusty high-road again .
`` All this time Antonella , who had drawn her green gauze veil over her face , sat perfectly still in her corner .
page : 231 I could not help thinking of a child that had broken something or done something wrong .
It was difficult to surmise what was passing in her mind , torn as she was from her accustomed surroundings , and whirled thus along to an unknown destiny .
Indeed I felt for her , and should have probably felt more , were it not that I was in such constant apprehension of the gendarmes overtaking us .
I knew very well that I had nothing to fear for myself , but the thought of her being dragged back to the convent was too terrible .
Rather than that , it seemed to me that I ought to kill her and myself too .
`` When once we were fairly started on the road , I again turned to Antonella , and said very gently , ' I would not for the world trouble you with questions on a subject that may be distressing to you  but in case of pursuit - if , as I suppose , you have indeed escaped from a convent - - ' `` A look of mingled fear and triumph flashed from her eyes in her dark corner , where the dim reflections from the moonlight had become more perceptible to me , as she exclaimed excitedly : ' I did run away from it !
I will tell you everything . '
But then her courage seemed to fail her again , and she said , in a piteous , awe-stricken whisper , ' I have been very , very wicked !
The Madonna must be very angry with me ! '
`` Had it not been for Raoul , who had thrown himself back in a listening attitude , I must have strained her to my heart , and soothed with kisses the distress of this bewitching sinner .
But as it was I contented myself with taking her hand in mine and passionately pressing it , as I said - page : 232 '' ` Well , confess yourself to me , Antonella , and let me see if I can not give you absolution .
First of all , what made you think of going into a nunnery ? '
`` She withdrew her hand abruptly , and putting it up to her brow as though she were trying to recollect , said , after a moment 's pause , in an absent manner , ' I do n't know !
I do n't know ! '
( Fool that I had been to ask !
At that instant the whole truth flashed upon me .
For love of me this magnificent creature had been going to renounce all the joys of life .
I forgot where I had found her .
The discovery of her love for me swept every other consideration from my mind , and then and there I resolved on marrying her , come of it what would . ) '' '
I wo n't ask you any more questions , my - my - - ' I stopped myself abruptly , remembering my friend 's presence .
` You shall tell me everything in your own way  and if you will only confide in me , all will come right in the end , Antonella ! ' ''
` Ah , Maestro ! '
she said , with sudden impetuosity , ` you have saved me once from the tarantula 's poison : will you save me now again from the narrow cell and the nun 's punishment ?
But this is how it happened .
Do you remember , Maëstro , that evening on L'unghia Marina , when I left you ? ' ''
` When you left me , ' I cried , ` for the sheer pleasure of tormenting me , I suppose , you wicked witch ! '
`` Antonella for the first time broke into a glad , musical laugh , which at once gained the laughter-loving Raoul 's heart , and which I could not help joining too , as , shaking my finger at her , I said , ` Yes , you left me in the flesh to drive me half crazy with your shadow , I believe . '
page : 233 `` Antonella fetched rather a long breath as she answered , '' Twas I you saw , Maëstro .
The tarantella had got into my head again ! ' ''
` How strange ! '
muttered Raoul interrogatively , in French .
` What does she mean ?
Is she a little mad , eh ? ' ''
` It is strange , indeed , ' I replied , ` but I will tell you all about it another time  ' and turning to the girl , ` But why did you fly from me then in that wild way ?
Could I not have helped you as I had done before ? '
`` But she again said in an impatient , almost angry , tone , ' I do n't know !
I do n't know ! '
then she hurried on with great volubility - '' ` The next day the hermit came to my mother , and was talking to her in whispers , during which their eyes were frequently turned on me , and I could hear him repeating the word `` Caverna , '' and that `` the devil caught such maidens , '' and `` let her dedicate herself to - - - . ''
And my mother kept weeping till I grew wroth with them both .
Upon which in came Bice with your brooch  and I do n't know how , by and by I felt the strange fit , of which you had cured me , returning , and I screamed out , and remember nothing more .
Then the neighbours were around me , saying to my mother .
`` What will you do with her ?
The musician is gone now , who might have helped her .
The holy man is right , let her take the veil . ''
`` While I heard what they were saying , I could not open my eyes nor speak to them , and a great horror came over me , for I could neither scream nor make any sign .
So I vowed myself to the Madonna 's service if I got healed  and then I sat straight up in my bed and cried , `` I am ready .
I will go ! ''
page : 234 '' ` My mother seized me in her arms and cried over me  but I did not seem to feel anything - I only remembered my vow . ''
` The hermit , whom I had always feared , said : `` There is no time like the present .
Return thanks to the blessed Mary .
Let her go  I charge myself with her . '' ''
` So the friar presently took me to Naples  and oh , I did like to see the streets so full of people .
But when he took me through the gate of the Convent of St. Maria del Soccorsa , with the gloomy walls around , and introduced me to the abbess , I was frightened , and began to repent of my vow .
In a few days the friar returned to confess me , as he had arranged with the abbess , and then in a strange way he began asking whether - - ' `` She stopped abruptly with quivering lips , and coloured , just as if in the excitement of her narration she had forgotten to whom she was talking , and had been suddenly recalled to it by what she was going to say . ''
` He asked you what , Antonella ? '
I said angrily , much regretting that I had not thrashed the wretch to within an inch of his life when I had him in my power . ''
` Oh , nothing , nothing , Maëstro , ' she said in a frightened voice  ` what passes in confession , you know , is a great crime to repeat . '
And then she continued very quickly , as though fearing further interrogation on my part , ` Thus I was a novice , and there was a great deal of praying early and late , and much weary work to do  and it was dreary between the high , dark walls , and only once I could escape to the bell-tower and get a peep at the merry streets .
And then , oh !
it was very page : 235 wicked of me , ' she sobbed , covering her face with her hands , ' I got to hate the abbess , and the sisters , and most of all the friar who had brought me to this , for I knew I must now go to hell for hating my vow to the Virgin . ' ''
` Poverina , ' muttered Raoul , sympathetically . ''
` No , no , no , Antonella ! '
cried I , pressing her hand , ` you did quite right in hating the friar : it was your good angel that bade you fly from that miserable little fiend - you will think so too , when I tell you that he did his best to put an end to me ! ' ''
` Oh , Maëstro ! '
she exclaimed , instinctively seizing hold of my arm , but letting it go again with a troubled air .
`` I then explained to her and Raoul how I had nearly - thanks to the friar - fallen down a precipice , but for an owlet 's cry .
`` To my astonishment Antonella began laughing immoderately at this , and only after gradually quieting down could she at last explain that she herself had been the owl , having however conjectured in a highly flattering way to myself that it was Falernian wine which had nearly been the death of me .
`` Well , to cut a long story short , the beautiful Antonella found conventual discipline most distasteful to her  indeed I much suspected that the deformed friar had given her a further strong cause of offence .
At any rate she fell into a terrible melancholy , which again ended in her going off into one of those curious trances having all the similitude of death .
She remained so long , however , in this particular fit , owing perhaps to the entire absence of dance music in that page : 236 holy community , that she was really supposed to be dead .
`` She actually woke up one night in a damp , dark vault , stretched on a bier between four lighted candles , and two snoring , snuffy old nuns .
`` No doubt the poor girl was horrified , but her daring did not forsake her , and she there and then made up her mind to escape at all risks .
So the beautiful creature , sliding down from the board , actually marched in her shroud , barefooted , through the chill corridors of the crypt .
Once above ground , she easily found her way to the room where her contadina 's dress had been deposited .
This she deliberately flung over the wall , and then with equal celerity she proceeded to the porter 's room , where she began to unhook the key hanging above his pallet .
In spite of her great precaution , however , he opened his eyes and stared at her .
But evidently taking her for a ghost , he remained motionless , I suppose from terror , and she let herself out unhindered .
She was just going to tell me what madness had possessed her to go curveting about in her precarious position , when she was abruptly interrupted by our carriage suddenly coming to a full stop .
The moon was still high in the heavens , from which the clouds had cleared off , as we were creaking and jolting up the very steep main street of a place whose name I have forgotten , but which for lugubriousness of aspect might have outdone any of the wretched hamlets with high-sounding names that Southern Italy boasts of .
To judge of it by this light , it might have been a collection of banditti 's haunts recently sacked by the Papal gendarmerie .
Half the large pale tiles that should page : 237 have been on the roofs lay smashed in the thoroughfare beneath .
Eight or ten most villainous-looking men , with faces partly overshadowed by their huge felt hats - who had been leaning with their backs against a white wall , apparently in expectation of some casualty - surrounded us in a minute , screaming out , ` Scendete , scendete , Signori ! '
`` Said Raoul : ` Now we are making our own subjects !
Here 's a picture for me , and a new Fra Diavolo for you !
Blest if these vagabonds are not going to carry us off .
This is retribution with a vengeance , and the spoilers spoiled . '
`` I confess that I did not myself see the comic side of it as Raoul did  the idea of Antonella captured by these ruffians was too intolerable .
They were more clamorous than ever , ominously staring in at us and vociferating in their unknown patois , though we saw no weapons .
To put a good face upon it I leaped out amongst them , saying : ` What do you want ?
Why do you stop us ? '
Half a dozen hands now pointed in explanation to the near hind-wheel , and the postilion appeared to be in consultation with a man who was evidently a blacksmith .
Any anxiety which we had entertained on the score of brigands , was now changed into dismal impatience , but there was no help for it .
A lever prop was inserted under the axle , the defective wheel taken off , and a dozen dark hands bore it to the blacksmith 's shed .
I had my strong suspicions that the innkeeper of Naples who supplied the vehicle , and these suspicious-looking characters , were in league together .
But bribery and bullying seemed equally unavailing .
Something was wrong with the nave , or page : 238 the tire , or the felly of the wheel - I am sure I do n't know which  certainly it had creaked enough before these pleasant villagers arrested us .
The blacksmith set to at blowing up his fire , and the Fra Diavolesque villagers continued to vociferate in their dialect .
Antonella kept quiet in her corner .
Raoul and I walked up and down impatiently between the carriage and the smithy  he at times whispering to me , ` Give a good `` God damn ! ''
or two now you are near them . '
So every time our walk brought us back to the group of vagabonds I ejaculated ` God damn ! '
as we nervously looked down the moonlit street scanning the distant misty road for signs of pursuit  when suddenly , clattering from the opposite direction , the horses of three real papal gendarmes came in sight .
`` Raoul squeezed my arm , and I thought for the moment it was all up with us .
They drew rein in front of the blacksmith 's for an instant .
I heard the word ` Milordi ' uttered  they then came towards us and asked us for our passports .
Raoul felt in his pocket  I haughtily gave them a scudo and a ` God damn ! '
and wishing us a prosperous journey , they clattered off again in the direction from whence we had come .
`` I breathed once more , and approaching the smithy again , inquired authoritatively of the blacksmith when he would have done .
To little purpose , however , as for a full hour afterwards he went on hammering at his bits of iron .
Every minute we expected to see the gendarmes return with others from Naples .
The peaceful night , however , was undisturbed except for the ringing of the anvil , and the jabber and occasional laughter of the wild-looking villagers .
At length , to page : 239 our inexpressible relief , the wheel , upborne by the same dark hands , emerged from out the recesses of the Cyclopean smithy , whose furnace every now and then glowed like a demon 's eye as the bellows intensified it , bringing out in lurid lines the sinister countenances otherwise overshadowed by their broad brims .
The blacksmith 's claim of a napoleon for his hour 's hammering was discharged .
Numerous small coins appeased the clamours of the grinning peasants , and with a tremendous cracking of whip we recommenced our flight with renewed vigour . ''
THE END OF VOL .
I .


CHAPTER XXIII .
WED IN HASTE .
`` I NEED N'T detain you over the number of times we changed horses and postillions , all the bribes I gave and the scudi I disbursed .
Poor Antonella was sound asleep in her plaid shawl and green veil , as , towards four o'clock of the second morning of our flight , we drove through the gates of Rome .
Without further accident we reached Raoul 's studio on the Piazza Barberini , where we had decided for the present to locate our fair charge .
She woke up with a start , and to all intents and purposes her sleep seemed to have sufficed for a night 's rest .
At any rate , no signs of lassitude impaired her complexion or the wonderful brilliancy of her eyes , as with a kind page : 2 of childish awe she surveyed the weird surroundings of Leroux 's studio .
`` Everything was new , strange , and astounding , to the Ana-Capri maiden : the numberless canvases that leant against the lower part of the walls , the worm-eaten tapestries that covered their upper portions , the yataghans , the shields , the chain-mail that hung on them , the pictures on the easel , the casts , the masks , the anatomical écorchés that filled all spaces , the hollow suit of armour that shone in one dark corner , the skeleton with a pipe in its mouth that filled another  and , more horrific than all , the lay-figure which , in its silk dress and ringlets , she mistook for the lady of the house , and which elicited a little scream from her as she noticed its vacant stare and oddly twisted fingers .
Then there was the portrait of the Cardinal that would stare at her , move to which side she would  the gorgeous Persian cat that sprang loudly purring on its master 's shoulders  the brilliant and clamorous macaw , and the dreadful little black monkey , that , shocking to relate , had caught her by the silk train , for which it received a caning .
All this , and much more , filled her with speechless amazement .
`` But before she had time to grow a little more accustomed to these wonders , she was hurried off by Margutta ?
, Raoul 's factotum and housekeeper , to the room that for the present was allotted her .
During her absence , ever more anxiously did Raoul and myself discuss the problem of what was to be done with her .
I had given my friend a hasty sketch of all that you know already , and though demurring at first to the resolution I had taken , he was quite willing to help me page : 3 on finding me fixed in my resolution .
After a few minutes he exclaimed : ' I have it !
There 's a priest I know , who has often sat to me , he frequents a café not far from here  many 's the bottle we 've emptied and the song we 've sung together .
He is a little rakish , I wo n't deny , too fond of double-entendres and good living : still a priest is a priest  I 'll ask him how to set about this marriage business .
We 'll keep him in the dark about that convent escapade of your bella donna  but as long as we 're fairly married according to the rules of the Church , I suppose we need have no further apprehension of pursuit or detection , as Mademoiselle Antonella had taken no vows , and was therefore free to leave .
However , I do n't think the Signor Curato will ask many questions .
But tell us , mon vieux - for I can hardly make you out - are you in bitter earnest ?
Do you love her - I mean head over ears ? ' ''
` By all means seek out the priest at once , ' I cried  ' I am in earnest .
I know I am doing what is wild and reckless  I know that this is but a simple contadina of Capri , but I love her - I love her as madly as though she were Queen of Naples .
Between her and me there exist occult , magnetic affinities  for me she has got into this strait  she has entered a convent , and run away from it , and I could no more abandon her now , or be her ruin , than I could at this moment abandon the hopes of life itself , with all its prospects of gratified ambition .
I do n't understand the laws of this singular , unprogressive country , but I will marry her this hour , if they will permit it , and , arrange all else afterwards . '
`` Raoul slightly raised his eyebrows , and rolled up a cigarette .
His cat pricked up her ears as the rustling page : 4 of a silk dress was again heard along the corridor , and Antonella , refreshed and resplendent , with her black , lustrous plaits newly arranged , came sweeping into the room in her long black skirt , whose dark lines brought into strong relief her embroidered chemise , her ` mat ' ivory shoulders , and grandly moulded arms .
Raoul , assiduously placing a chair for her at the breakfast-table , which had been laid out by this time , whispered in French : ` How maddeningly those corals on the faded red handkerchief bring out her flesh-tints .
I already see her hung in next year 's `` Salon , '' with a crowd of my despairing rivals beneath her ! ' ''
` Softly , softly , friend , ' I answered in the same tongue  ` you have to catch the Signor Curato first . ' '' '
I will , I will ! '
cried Raoul , jumping up enthusiastically , as he hastily gulped down the remainder of his chocolate  then smilingly kissing his hand to Antonella , he skipped out of the room .
`` He returned ere long bursting with his good news  for he entered into his friends ' affairs with about the same zest with which he would begin a new picture .
Taking me aside , he informed me that the priest whom he had consulted was ready to marry us himself this very morning if I liked , although it would be a disciplinary offence on his part - a consideration which he waived on hearing he would be well rewarded for it . '
I dare say , ' he went on , ` twenty-five scudi will appear ample payment to him .
If your finances are exhausted I have the money all ready for you  at least you 'll be at no expense for a wedding garment or banquet . '
`` When the priest arrived , we accordingly received the nuptial benediction in the studio , after very scant page : 5 ceremony , Raoul and his housekeeper being the witnesses .
`` After discussion with my friend , it was decided that it would be positively ruinous to my prospects to acknowledge the peasant girl Antonella openly as my wife for the present  and that my best plan would be to place her with some lady who might help in forming her manners and developing her mind .
`` Such a person I remembered my former landlady to be , the widow of an impoverished Cavaliere , who had left her for sole property a small palazzo in the ` Trastevere . '
There in some top rooms she lived and held state by herself , the rest being let out in apartments , mostly to hard-up characters such as I had been myself .
`` This lady - for lady she was in every sense of the word - I thought might be willing to carry out my views with respect to Antonella .
She was fairly well educated , spoke French , and yet was poor enough to make it likely that she would gladly avail herself of such an addition to her income .
Moreover , I judged that my visits would not attract attention in the quiet , out-of-the-way neighbourhood where she lived .
`` As I expected , Signora di Volterra readily fell in with my views .
` Your wife shall be as safe with me as in her mother 's lap , ' she said  ` and as to education , I flatter myself that though my poor dear Cavaliere was only third under-secretary to the Santo Padre 's confessor , yet the Di Volterras have ever known the business and duties of the nobility . '
`` When Antonella was introduced to her , she seized her fervidly in her arms , said she was the daughter page : 6 that she and the Cavaliere had always longed for  and with a look at me , observed that with such eyes she would not be long without admirers when I introduced her into society  ending by inviting her to put away her bonnet and things in the room allotted to her .
My wife turned round , pouted her lips at me , and disappeared with her chaperon . ''
page : [ 7 ] CHAPTER XXIV .
FALLINGS OUT .
LEOPOLD SONTHEIM had uttered a startled exclamation on hearing of Emanuel 's marriage with Antonella .
`` Good God !
you are a married man , then ! ''
he exclaimed as his , friend made a pause in his story , looking at him with knitted brows  and then he began whistling as though to relieve his mind .
Just then the watchman passed down the street , droning out in a monotonous voice - `` Good folk , the Minster bell strikes two , May Christ the Lord watch over you . ''
Sontheim , seeing that his friend still remained silent , remarked more calmly : `` Well , I suppose there 's more behind it than meets the eye !
No one that I know of has ever heard of this wife of yours .
From what I can make out , she 'd the spirit of twenty unbroken fillies in her , and you ca n't surely have kept her in page : 8 durance vile with that old Di Volterra up to the present hour ! ''
Emanuel laughed rather sardonically  then he said , shrugging his shoulders , `` You shall hear in due time how well I kept her shut up there , and what a docile wife I found her !
In the meantime she did not show much docility as a pupil , though she possessed all sorts of natural talents , but she was incorrigibly lazy and pleasure loving .
Some things , it is true , she learned at once and as by instinct , such as to drape and wear a shawl in the last new fashion , to speak pure Roman , and to behave like a lady .
On discovering , for example , that finely shaped aid trimmed nails were considered a sign of high breeding , she actually devoted three hours every morning to paring and polishing hers  and in spite of my teazing , persevered till she had eradicated all traces of plebeian origin from her long , shapely hands .
`` Reading , writing , and arithmetic , however , were profoundly distasteful to her  but as soon as she found them to be necessary accomplishments to a person in society , she arduously prosecuted their study by original processes of her own .
For instance , I have known her secrete notes from fashionable ladies , and use them as models for her own caligraphy , despising the more rounded commonplace characters of her instructress  by this means , with the aid of gilt-edged , scented notepaper and golden sand , she used to send me billets-doux that would in no wise have been a disgrace to me if left lying about .
`` For some time after we were married her great delight was to go out walking with me through the streets of Rome , and I indulged her in this fancy as page : 9 much as I could and dared .
I soon discovered , however , that the grand monuments of antiquity and the historical associations of the Eternal City possessed no attractions for her .
How should they ?
you will perhaps say , considering she knew next to nothing of their past history .
Still , in many of the Italians , quite as uncultivated as herself , there seems a kind of inborn , hereditary instinct for these things .
`` No  what she liked was going to the Corso , and the evening walks on the Pincio , decked out in her finest clothes , and watching the people of wealth and title drive by in their carriages , who stared at her in turn .
But , afraid of the notice she attracted , I was forced to check a taste which , though harmless enough in itself , incurred too much risk under the circumstances .
`` Our first memorable quarrel , I remember , arose when I told her that I was not a Marchese or Milord , as she seemed to think , with nothing to do but waste his time in showing off his wife to the world on the Corso  but a hard-worked musician , bound to strain every nerve for some years to come to place her in the position he wished to see her in .
`` You will remember that Raoul had stipulated that he should be allowed to paint Antonella , and under the circumstances I could of course refuse him nothing .
He had set his heart on painting a picture of the dance amidst the ruins - had actually gone to Capri to make some studies on the spot itself , and was now all on fire to begin his subject with such a splendid model for his central figure .
`` Antonella 's delight on finding that she was to be painted knew no bounds  Signora di Volterra , on the page : 10 other hand , looked , or pretended to look , scandalized .
But the impetuous girl paid small heed to what she called her owlish humours , and began trying on all her dresses by turns before she was ready to start .
`` She always naturally fell into the most graceful attitudes , and Raoul 's only difficulty , on our reaching the studio , was which selection he should make from among this wealth of posture .
She put up with this troublesome and apparently interminable trial with the utmost complacency , but grew restive when he had at last fixed on the right position and she found that she was henceforth expected to remain motionless .
`` Raoul , like a skilled veteran , did not at first inform her of the many hours she would be required to sit , and she kept continually turning her head the wrong way , and inquiring if he did not think that a better view of it , or if he had not yet done .
But by degrees , what with sweetmeats , and blandishments , and his amusing stories , she got , as it were , surprised into sitting properly  perhaps also philosophically making up her mind that one must suffer for the privilege of future greatness as a beauty .
`` Later on , when I found the sittings so much more numerous than I had expected - for these great artists often work out their conceptions at immense toil to themselves - I would play to them on my violin , and we would pass our time in a sort of blissful intoxication of blended art , friendship , and love .
This would only be interrupted at moments when things went wrong with Raoul 's painting , when , after rushing back to look at his work from a distance , he would curse himself for a fool , and tear his wild locks , and fiercely wipe out what he had page : 11 done with his paint rag .
At such times my wife would stare at him as though he were mad , and then burst into peals of laughter , and I would fiddle away with desperate energy to drown his exclamations , and rail at him for his wastefulness  or , again , when the mood seized me I would pull out my roll of music-paper and begin composing , when we all three became as silent as mice .
But frequently I had to go off to concerts , or to give lessons , which were now , however , chiefly to marchionesses and bankers ' wives , leaving Raoul and my wife together in a fervour of confidence in their affection and honour .
`` Antonella had the faculty of getting her own way with everybody .
With the Signora di Volterra , who was , I feared , a lazy instructress , she did as she liked  me , of course , she twisted round her little finger  and now came Raoul 's turn .
He had promised me not to let her be seen by any one , but on the many occasions when he was called into the adjoining room to speak to important visitors she had managed in one way or another to bring herself to their notice .
It seems that one or two of Raoul 's rich patrons , connoisseurs of art and men of fashion , had caught glimpses of Antonella in the corridor of the house , opportunities which I now imagine she must herself have sought for .
These now began whispering amongst each other of the magnificent beauty of this artist 's mysterious model .
`` To my no small annoyance , I myself heard the Princess Tortonia rallying my friend at her house about the model he so sedulously kept all to himself - so all unlike the beings they saw grouped on the steps of the Trinity di Monte .
I had found out , indeed , that page : 12 one morning when Raoul had been unexpectedly called away , she had been discovered amiably chatting with several of his male friends on his return .
`` The picture for which she had been sitting was now finished , and attracted a great deal of attention  and although my wife herself had now begun dabbling in colours and babbling of turning artist , I insisted for many reasons on her discontinuance of her visits to the studio , and resuming her prearranged mode of life and occupations .
`` Although she apparently acquiesced in this decision , I began to notice a great change in her temper and manner to myself .
We had now been married over a year .
The season had been a very unhealthy one  my chief supporters had left Rome in a panic , there were no concerts going on , and financially speaking I was anything but flourishing .
`` It is true I was beginning to make a great name , but a large income does not invariably keep pace with that .
`` Antonella , already irritated at the imposed restrictions , would evince by degrees considerable impatience , nay , contempt , on my refusing her certain expensive trifles or expeditions that she had set her heart on .
`` On one occasion , indeed , she was so exceedingly unreasonable , that , forgetting my wonted forbearance , I roundly taxed her with her extravagance and love of amusement  when , to my astonishment , she poured out on me such a torrent of invective , mingled with complaints and accusations , that for the moment I was utterly taken aback .
`` Feverishly pacing up and down the room she cried : page : 13 ` You wish to keep me hidden away , I see  to deny me all the privileges of my station , my position as your wife .
Ah , how do I know that I am your wife at all !
What could a poor girl like me do to protect herself from treachery and shame ?
Unhappy me !
I see it all now  the holy hermit was right when he said you were luring me to destruction - it was a mock marriage into which you entrapped me !
Fool !
Idiot !
I see it all !
That is why I am stowed away with the old dolt on this top-floor  that is why you tell me you have no money , and go to all the grand people alone , so that no one should hear of my miserable , miserable story !
Oh , my poor mother , God was good to you to take you to Himself before you knew what had become of your wretched Tolla .
We were honest people always , and now they would point their finger at me in Ana-Capri  the girls would titter and turn their backs upon me .
He is ashamed of you , they would say  would he be ashamed of his lawful wife ?
No , no , I will not stand it  I was an honest girl .
I will go to the Santo Padre and tell him of the foul trick played upon me  he will see me righted , he will not let me be ground down to the dust ! ''
` Ah me , but he will know that I ran away from the convent , wretched girl that I am , and punish me perhaps !
It was wicked , oh , very wicked of me  but it was your fault , yes , your fault - you have been my ruin !
My soul will go to perdition , and all through you !
you !
you ! '
`` The last words came half-stifled through her clenched teeth , while she was pointing her finger at me .
Her features worked more and more convulsively , and then , with a succession of gurgling moans , she page : 14 suddenly , before I could catch her , fell backwards like a log , and , to my horror , remained quite rigid and deathlike .
`` I lifted her on to the sofa , called her by a thousand tender names , rushed into the next room for a jug of cold water , bathed her face and rubbed her temples - but all to no purpose  and at last , thoroughly frightened , I rang the bell furiously , and on the Signora 's appearance bade her watch by my wife 's side while I rushed out for a doctor .
`` Though half beside myself , I remembered the address of a rising young medical man , whom I found in , and brought back with me .
On the way , I informed him of the death-like state in which I had left my wife , and of the extraordinary circumstances under which I had first seen her .
`` By this time we had reached our destination , and in another moment the doctor was feeling Tolla 's pulse , and examining the pupils of her eyes .
She lay in the same awful immobility in which I had left her .
But my worst fears were allayed by the cool , business-like manner in which he ordered her head to be laid low , and her clothes to be loosened , saying : ` Do n't be alarmed !
You must leave her perfectly quiet  she will come to herself presently .
She has one of those nervous temperaments that would be specially affected by such an accident as you have described .
I remember that similar cases often came within my father 's cognizance while in practice at Taranto .
I have it on his authority that this affection is not merely the superstition ordinarily represented , but that for some occult reason the inhabitants of those parts are liable to this hysterical page : 15 disorder on being bitten by the tarantula  and he attributed the beneficial effect produced by the tarantella music to the perspiration incident to the violent dancing , a view he found corroborated when in Russia with the Grande Armée , where the peasants use their vapour-bath as a cure for hydrophobia .
But I should not advise your playing to her again in this manner , as it will only tend to renew the impression produced on the nerves  and you must try to make her forget it . '
`` Then surveying her beautiful countenance with about as much animation as though she were a wax figure , he added that , with her highly excitable nature , I must try by all means to keep her amused , and then took his leave .
`` When Antonella at last came to herself , everything was forgotten in the joy of seeing her well again .
She appeared unconscious of the scene that had led to her trance .
She was more captivating than ever  and to celebrate our reconciliation I took her to Tivoli , and we spent the day there in all manner of lover-like follies and playful pranks .
`` For a little while everything went charmingly .
She now resumed her visits to the studio , which I was henceforth afraid to interfere with  and there , while sitting or painting under his direction , she now often met patrons and visitors of Raoul 's .
`` By and by I noticed that she began to alternate more than hitherto between fits of strange excitability and utter languor , which again gave place to the wildest caprices .
She coquetted , with the men that came to see my friend , took to smoking cigarettes at times , and in certain moods ignored me altogether .
But if on such page : 16 occasions I flew into a violent rage , and gave vent to spurts of jealousy , all at once , by a curious revulsion , she would manifest the most extravagant love for me  and no matter how angry I felt , if she looked at me with that seductive smile of hers , showing the milk-white teeth , it was all up with me again . ''
page : [ 17 ] CHAPTER XXV .
IN THE STUDIO .
`` RAOUL 'S pupil , the beautiful ` Tolla , ' had now become quite an institution in the former 's studio .
The model had gradually been merged in the artist .
She had made herself a marvellously coquettish blouse , and she used to set her palette , and rub out her work with a piece of rag , with the most ravishing airs .
If any visitors made their appearance , she would throw back her head , and survey her work from under her long , drooping eyelashes , with an art far surpassing that on her easel .
Of the latter I do not think that many people could have been enamoured , nevertheless several of her admirers seemed pleased with it , and bought fancy portraits of herself .
`` One afternoon , towards the end of March , I had come in , and was twanging the mandolin , as was my wont , while Raoul and Tolla worked away with most meritorious seriousness .
page : 18 `` One by one three gentlemen had dropped in to take leave , as it happened , for after a winter residence at Rome they were all going back to their respective countries .
There was the French banker , Raoul 's intimate and self-constituted agent  a Russian Count Ogotshki , reputed of immense wealth - a grey-haired , pale-eyed , paternal sort of man - with high cheek-bones , weak chin , and of exceedingly courtly manners  and an English M.P. , in a grey tweed suit of irreproachable cut , who spoke the most wonderful Anglo-French , only seasoned rather too plentifully with ` Oh uee ! '
`` Tolla , in some occult fashion of her own , had by this time picked up French , in which she rattled on with most commendable self-assurance and facility . ''
` You should have seen the crowd round you in the salon , ' said the French banker , M. G - - , looking benignantly at Tolla .
` Had you been there yourself , you would have been the toast of all Paris , and the lioness of the Bois de Boulogne .
I heard Madame Agadeau say , if that girl were her daughter she should be covered with diamonds  as she considered these Italian peasants of a higher and nobler race than us Gauls . ' '' '
I have a picture of an Italian peasant-woman by Williams , ' remarked the M.P. sententiously  ' a woman of Sorrento with a goat .
But what is singular is that both are precisely similar to a woman with a goat that a friend of mine had of him thirty years before  and yet a goat will not live thirty years though the woman might .
But I say to him , if you would only borrow some of Robert 's , and your splendid models to - - ' '' ` Mr. Williams is too polite to wish to interfere page : 19 with our models  and , moreover , after painting a goat for twenty years he may well do it de chic . ' '' '
I know what that is , ' said the M.P. , ` it is what our sailors put in their cheeks . ' ''
` Yes , ' retorted Raoul , ` and is usually associated with blague  and he began shouting out in operatic tones - ` Debit de tabac des manufa ... Des manufa ... Debit de tabac des manufa ... Des manufa ... Tures royales Tures royaux . '
... `` All this time the Count said little or nothing , but sat smoking his cigarette and watching Tolla painting .
Suddenly turning to Raoul , he pointed to the picture of ` The Dance among the Ruins , ' and said - '' ` So the Duchess of D - - has been beforehand with me in that .
It seems my destiny always to play second fiddle .
I was born a day too late , and have never been able to make it up since .
You dislike making replicas , I believe ? ' ''
` Ah , we have no time for that now , ' said the banker , pompously  ` but there 's the `` Silk-spinner of Ana-Capri , '' mademoiselle is in that also . '
`` All this time Raoul uttered not a word , but went on with his ` Debit de tabac . ' ''
` But of course that is mine , ' exclaimed the Count , eagerly  ' I always looked upon it as such - and as many others of yours as you will let me take back to Russia , for the matter of that . '
( The banker looked slightly astonished . ) '
I am sure England has had more than her share already of mademoiselle 's effigies - but page : 20 that was not exactly what I meant , ' he said , tugging at his grey moustache and smoking more vigorously than before . ''
` In truth , for the last year our M. Leroux has painted no one else , ' here put in the Englishman  ` as indeed who would , who had once beheld this enchanting profile .
You should paint her as Circe , M. Leroux  I for one should be proud to figure as one of her pigs ! '
`` While he was speaking Antonella had looked about her once or twice , and there was something strangely intoxicating in the glance of her eye and the smile on her lips , as she cried , ` Oh , I would rather paint you as St. Anthony  our hermit at Ana-Capri had a picture of the saint - but now that I think of it , it was not unlike the Count here .
I will paint you , Count , ' she said , as if the idea had just struck her  then casting down her eyes with a charming air of modesty , ` that is , if you will sit to such a tyro as myself , when you might have great artists like M. Raoul to do justice to your air de grand seigneur . '
`` One might almost have fancied that the Count , elderly and case-hardened though he was , blushed a little at this  but before he could muster his wits to do justice to this offer , our English M.P. broke in with - ` And will you not deign to paint me , too , fair artist ?
if not as the saint , why stick me in as the demon tempting him . '
`` Antonella laughed gaily , and looking from one to the other of the three elderly gentlemen , said : ` Messieurs , you all look so extremely amiable that I , as a good Catholic , should consider it sacrilege to invest the devil with your attribute  but yonder sits M. Sturm , whose page : 21 scowl would not ill-become the arch-fiend himself ! '
and with a low , provoking laugh , she pointed her brush at me , who , sick of this vain chatter , had sat far back in the embrasure of the huge studio window , dividing my time between teazing the monkey and twanging the mandolin  but now , losing all patience , I began violently striking it , shouting out the jeering carnival tune , ` Au clair de la lune . '
`` Raoul , who , while painting away , had occasionally joined the conversation with a laugh or witticism here quickly put in with an air of mock-injury - '' ` Every one of the present company , I see , is to have the distinction of sitting to the most peerless of painters - saint or devil matters little - only I have proved such a bore of a teacher that I am to be cut out altogether it seems .
Wo n't you , at least , let me play second demon in your `` Temptation of St. Anthony ? ''
or stay , rather let me put you in myself , for I am sure the arch-tempter could never devise a bait more fatal than those eyes ! '
How they sparkled at that moment !
There was something almost insolently triumphant about her person just then , which seemed to radiate beauty as a star does light .
All the men present succumbed more or less to its influence  I only felt it as an insult to me in the jealous rage that gripped me within . ''
` No , no !
the temptation would be too irresistible , ' here interposed the gallant Frenchman  ` St. Anthony never was so sorely tried . '
`` The Count , who seemed to have been following up a train of thoughts of his own , now remarked : ` I 'd sooner be painted as St. Nicholas - he is my country 's page : 22 patron saint  and I would be represented as showering gifts on a fair maiden . '
`` Their conversation appeared to me to be growing more and more insipid , and while twanging loudly on the mandolin , I remarked : ` For the matter of that , Antonella , you 'll make us what you 'll make us  but I , for my part , have little ambition to sit for either pig or devil . ' ''
` No , you had better sit for a bear in your present mood , ' said Tolla , smiling  ` and the monkey , to whom so much of your attention is devoted , shall play the fiddle to you - sha 'n' t you , Jacko ? '
`` Raoul , slightly raising his eyebrows , looked at his watch , and put down his palette  and the three gentlemen , with smiles and sweet parting speeches to Antonella , now bowed themselves out .
`` Raoul , who had an engagement , departed immediately afterwards  and left alone with Antonella , I said brutally , ` What devil has seized you , to go on tormenting me as you have been doing ?
Do n't you know that I hate those foolish banterings with stolid bankers and thick-sculled Russians ? '
`` Antonella , for all answer , broke into a defiant laugh , that stung me beyond endurance . ''
` What is the meaning of this ? '
I cried , going close up to her , and looking fixedly in her eyes .
` Do you take me for a fool , your humble servant , madame ? '
`` She twirled herself round on her heel , and again broke into her unendurable laugh .
` Tut , tut , fool or not , ' she said , insolently , ` at least you shall not befool me . '
`` For the moment I felt an almost overpowering page : 23 inclination to seize and shake the devil out of her  but I mastered myself with a strong effort , and said in a cold , significant voice , ` Antonella , this is a strange tone to adopt towards your husband .
Do you consider that I fail towards you in aught ? ' ''
` Husband ! '
she sneered . '
A fine husband !
who keeps his wife in a top-floor , and lets her want for half the necessaries of life ! ' ''
` Are you mad , or what ? '
I cried .
` Have I not explained my position to you from the beginning ?
Did you not acquiesce in my decision ?
If you want me to provide those luxuries for you which madame now calls the necessaries of life , suffer me to act in a manner which will be conducive to that end .
To acknowledge you openly now , before my position is more firmly secured , will retard what you so ardently desire .
We are both , it seems , ambitious  but , ' I added , bitterly , ` in what different ways !
In another year or two , if I - - ' '' ` Another year or two ! '
exclaimed Antonella , stamping on the floor  ` that 's what you said at the first , and I 'm already tired of - - ' but she stopped abruptly . ''
` Tired of what ? '
- I snapped her up now , in a concentrated rage - ` tired of my love , I suppose  because , forsooth , my lady ca n't ride in her carriage , and be smothered in diamonds as those drivelling bankers propose !
Tired , indeed !
Is it so long since you had to spin the silk just good enough now for you to trail in the dust !
You surely ought to know what toil means .
And do I not toil for you ?
While dressing yourself , or coquetting with half a dozen men at a time , page : 24 now forms your one occupation , am I not slaving away for you day and night ? ' ''
` Fiddling and dancing attendance on the great , you mean !
Toiling you call that !
Why can not you make money like your friend Raoul , if you are as clever as you would have me think ? '
she asked , contemptuously .
` But it 's all castles in the air with you , and promises - with that endless music-writing which never brings in anything that I can see , but prevents you ever taking me out , of course . '
`` A sort of numb despair was creeping over me at her words : an impassable gulf seemed yawning between us .
What could ever heal speech such as this ? ''
` They tell me , ' she went on , scarcely heeding me , but looking at herself in the glass and arranging her hair , ` that a woman like me ought to have the wealth of Golconda at her feet ! ' ''
` Who tells you ? '
I hissed , half beside myself , seizing her by the wrist .
` You shall tell me who tells you ! '
`` Jealousy , love , anger , despair , were almost turning my brain . ''
` Why , every man who sees me ! '
she laughed out , but her colour deepened , and there was a defiant flash in her eyes . ''
` You shall tell me ! '
I repeated , and there must have been something in the tone of my voice , in the look of my eyes , that terrified her , for suddenly , without previous warning , she burst into wild tears and sobs , and hiding her face between her hands , dropped down on the nearest sofa .
But for once I did not heed her tears .
I had let go her wrist again , and was pacing up page : 25 and down the studio , muttering to myself , and feeling as though we were divided for ever .
Was there then anything in common between this woman and myself ?
And the anger I felt against her so worked within me , that I was tempted to dash my brains out on the wall I was leaning against .
`` Louder and louder grew the sobs , and finding I paid no attention to them , Tolla , to my utter amazement , suddenly flung herself at my feet , and seizing my hand she moaned plaintively - '' ` How hard you are on a poor girl who loves you , Emanuele !
Do not look so strangely at me .
I am your Tolla !
What did I say just now ?
I have forgotten .
Will you not forgive me ? '
And looking at me with a beseeching grace which swept away all sense of alienation , she sighed softly - ` Did I not risk my here and hereafter because I loved you so ? '
`` Strange inconsistency !
she was not lying when she spoke thus .
And there was delirium in the passion this behaviour inspired me with .
I pressed her to my heart  I covered her with kisses  I promised she should star it yet in all the capitals of Europe with me !
I painted our future to her in the most glowing colours , and this picture so enchanted me that , putting my arm round her waist , I waltzed her madly round the room , almost lifting her off the floor at times , till we sank down at last , quite giddy and out of breath , on the first seat that came in our way  where , laughing like the veriest children , and pelting each other with his sofa cushions , Raoul found us on his return .
In the wildest of spirits we all went out together into the glorious Roman sunlight and balmy air . ''
page : [ 26 ] CHAPTER XXVI .
DESERTED .
`` YES that was on a Friday evening !
The minutest incident of that day is indelibly fixed on my memory , for it was a turning-point of my fate .
`` On the following afternoon , more light-hearted than usual , having recently finished the composition of a particularly difficult piece for the violin , I made my way to the Signora di Volterra .
On the previous evening Tolla , under the influence of our reconciliation , had said of her own accord , and with many caresses , that she would not frequent Raoul 's studio as constantly as heretofore , but paint in her own room .
`` She had long coveted a certain exquisite necklace of pink coral cameos , which , had belonged to a Russian princess , and which happened to be on sale at a certain dealer 's .
In my present elated state , and having made a good sum by the copyright of my new work , I spent the whole of my gains on this truly artistic trinket .
page : 27 As I hurried along , I pictured to myself Tolla 's delight and her smile , and the look of her glorious eyes , and her cajoling words , when I should clasp the necklace round her throat .
`` I reflected that , all things considered , it would be better , shortly , to make the fact of our marriage public  and though , like a dark shadow , the thought swept over me that it was wealth that she seemed to crave above everything , I put the thought aside again as being in all likelihood probably only a childish whim of hers . ''
` Tolla , Tolla ! '
I cried , as I ran up the stairs , expecting to see her come to meet me .
I opened the door of her sitting-room .
` Tolla , are you making yourself fine for a walk on the Pincio ? '
said I , in a bantering tone  going towards her bedroom .
` Look , here 's something towards beautifying the beautiful - something that you 've long wished for  ' and I looked behind the window-curtains , seeing that once or twice before she had playfully hidden herself on hearing my footsteps , and enjoyed my mystification .
`` But no , she was not there .
She must be sitting with Signora di Volterra , though such of late had not been her habit , and I knocked at the latter 's door . ''
` Come in , ' called the Signora , in a drowsy voice  and on entering I saw that she was alone , and that I had just disturbed her in a nap . '' '
I had thought to find my wife with you , as she is not in her own rooms , ' I said . '
I am afraid I have disturbed you . ' ''
` Your wife ! '
said the Signora , rubbing her eyes in drowsy astonishment  ` your wife with me ! '
page : 28 '' ` Well , ' I said , with an impatient laugh , ` considering she lives with you , is there anything astonishing in that ?
Has she gone out on some errand or other , and do you know in what direction ?
because I will go to meet her . ' ''
` Eh , Dio mio , ' cried the woman , now thoroughly roused , and opening her sleepy eyes to the widest  ` why , she went out quite early this morning to go with you , Signor , on a little expedition to Albano .
She did n't think she 'd be home till to-morrow . ' ''
` Gone to Albano !
- ' I repeated , blankly .
` Gone with me to Albano . ' ''
` Did n't she say Albano , Concetta ? '
she called out to the servant in the kitchen , who thereupon showed her frowsy head at the half-opened door . ''
` Yes , yes , Signora , ' she replied , ' I heard her saying she was going to meet the Signor , her husband  and I watched her as she went down the street and stepped into a carriage at the left-hand corner , Signora . '
`` I felt a chill creep from my heart through the marrow of my bones , but I only said quite calmly in a matter-of-fact tone , ` Thanks , that will do  ' and muttering , ` Gone to Albano !
- ' again retreated to Tolla 's room .
I shut the door very softly , as though there was some one somewhere who might be disturbed by it .
Then I stood quite still , gazing vacantly about me , with the same icy sensations running through me .
I heard the ticking of the clock , loud and fast , loud and fast  I heard the clatter of horses ' hoofs drawing near and nearer from a long way off , and then again faint and fainter in the distance  I heard a Hebrew clothesman crying over and over again , in a nasal voice , ` Roba , page : 29 roba vecch ! '
- and I could not have told whether minutes or hours rolled by as those sounds , still repeating themselves , struck upon my ear with preternatural distinctness , and I listened as if there were nothing to do in the world but to stand there listening to them .
But suddenly I became conscious of a burning , consuming thirst .
Mechanically I walked to the table , poured myself out a tumbler of water , and emptied it at a draught .
Then I looked about me as though I had just awakened from a deep sleep , and with a noiseless step , as though it were I that had committed some crime , hurried from one room to the other .
`` I tossed all her dresses about as though she might be in one of them  tore open the wardrobe , pulled out the drawers , tumbled everything upside down in savage haste .
All at once I came upon an old faded red handkerchief , the same she had worn over her bosom when I had known her first  it seemed to melt the heart within me , and I pressed it to my lips and kissed it , as though it could feel my kisses .
Then with a great cry flinging myself on the bed , I wept - wept as I hope I may never weep again .
`` Those tears brought no relief  each one seemed to sear me as it fell .
Suddenly , as I tossed about in my anguish , I felt a scrap of paper under my face on the pillow  and there , pinned to it , was a note in my wife 's handwriting .
With avidity I tore it off , and with eyes blinded with tears , and almost frantic in my impatience , I painfully deciphered the hurried scrawl - page : 30 `` That was all !
Clenching the paper in my hand as though it were a sentient thing I could crush and annihilate , I threw myself off the bed with an imprecation  rushing swiftly down the stairs , out of the house , along the streets , on and on , as though I were following in some shadowy track , till I was far out of Rome .
A storm of conflicting passions tore me asunder .
I would dog them to the ends of the earth , wherever they might be , shoot both , and myself after !
Nothing should deter , nothing stop me , till I had been avenged on them .
Then suddenly , as in a kind of vision , I seemed to see her whom I had loved clasp my knees - then reel back , with blood , red blood , staining the grass , staining my hands , staining everything between me and heaven  and the voice of her mother smote me like a sword as she wailed , ` Murderer , give me back my child ! '
`` I stopped , shivering , in my headlong course , with a horrible fear in my veins  indeed , the agony which I now endured through my own imagination , went a long way to deaden my feelings .
I was humbled and impotent , as unfit to act as to forgive  and I looked about me scared , dazed , bewildered .
Whither was I going ?
what would I do ?
Slowly I retraced my steps again , with a great change at my heart .
`` Quite late at night I got to Raoul 's studio , and , utterly worn out , dropped into a chair , muttering ` Antonella . '
It was doubtful whether I was trying to ask a question , or impart information . ''
` Antonella ? '
repeated Raoul , looking at me with deep concern .
`` I could get no other word out of my parched throat , but silently held out her note to him , and remained page : 31 motionless , staring on the floor , He went pacing up and down the room with the paper in his hand , muttering and swearing .
Neither of us spoke again for a long time . ''
` What is the meaning of it ?
I thought she was madly attached to you , ' said Raoul , at length , topping still in front of me  and then , as I made no sign , he asked , ` Shall I go after her ?
Shall I make inquiries ?
What can I do for you ? '
`` This I only negatived by signs , and my head and hands dropped as if they had no power left in them .
`` After a long interval , Raoul said , ` Have you any notion who it is she 's gone off with ? '
Then , as I made no answer , he added - ` Perhaps it 's as well she is gone .
Luckily no one knows you were married , and if you take my advice you will let her go in silence  depend upon it you never could have done anything with that girl . ' ''
` I 'll do with her in such fashion that I 'll kill her and her paramour , ' I cried , starting up as about to rush off , being again stung to madness by Raoul 's mention of our marriage .
But Raoul interposed , and gently slipping his arm round my heck said , ` There now , do n't excite yourself , mon vieux  fellows with a mission like you and me do n't go mad about a woman . '
`` I seemed to acquiesce , and seated myself again , but began sobbing like a child .
No one unless he has experienced this kind of desertion can perhaps ever know the deep sense of humiliation it carries with it to a man .
`` Raoul had seated himself opposite to me in a helpless way , as though he were quite at the end of his page : 32 eloquence .
At last he said very tenderly , ` You suffer very much . ' ''
` To be betrayed by her I loved so dearly , ' I murmured , amid unmanly sobs . ''
` If it 's from this house she was led astray , the man shall have to do with me , cried Raoul , striking his breast .
` But who can it be ?
So many of them have been leaving these last few days .
Fool that I was to have her to paint !
Can you ever forgive me for my share in this sad business , Emanuel ? '
`` But here I broke in : ` Whoever 's to blame I know that thou art the soul of honour , and would ` st never in ought have acquiesced in this dire treachery .
` But it is enough .
I have wept tears that disgrace me .
Could she come back now the past could never be replaced .
Bitter as it is , it must be borne in silence . ' ''
page : [ 33 ] CHAPTER XXVII .
VICTORY AND DEFEAT .
`` I TOOK Raoul 's advice .
Though the iron had entered my soul I made no sign .
And by tacit consent we never mentioned her name again  nor did I find out what had .
become of her , nor with whom she had gone off , till long afterwards .
* * * * * `` Soon after this I left Rome .
The place had become hateful to me .
I had besides got my first regular engagement at Vienna .
It was then that I began to be popular in Germany , which for musical culture is , of course , far ahead of other countries .
I did not stay long , however , in my native country , although two cities , Carlsruhe and Weimar , offered me engagements for the season .
`` A demon of restlessness possessed me .
I hurried from country to country .
Wherever I went my stay page : 34 was a triumph .
Germany , England , Russia , America , were visited in turn .
Money poured in , fame increased , but where was the happiness that should have accompanied them !
The one being for whom I craved , and for whom I had chiefly craved this great success , was lost to me  and what was worse , had deserted , basely and cruelly deserted me .
It was torture to think of .
For to lose what we love by death sanctifies grief - then we may find some consolation even in our tears  but in such a loss as mine our very sorrow turns to shame , and the tears that should relieve seem to disgrace us .
Thus the envenomed grief rankled in me  and yet , strange to say , the more it rankled , the greater my agony , the higher the spirit of music raised me on her wings , and my very torture seemed a cause of endless delight to the public . ''
* * * * * `` Hark ! ''
said Sontheim , `` there 's the Minster bell actually striking three o'clock !
How the night is passing  but your story is so engrossing that one loses all count of time .
What an experience to have undergone , my poor friend .
But as Racine has it , ` Aucun chemin de fleurs ne conduit à la gloire ' - and glory you certainly have achieved  no doubt those great emotions serve to fertilize the imagination . ''
Emanuel seemed hardly to hear him  he had buried his head in his hands , and appeared to be silently absorbed in the past .
The moon had long since set , but there was now a faint tinge of dawn , making the stars look more remote as though slowly departing .
A little breeze had sprung page : 35 up , and went shivering and rustling through the leaves  and had the summer not been at its height this might have been chilling instead of delightfully refreshing .
Suddenly on the stillness there broke the twitter of a bird - then all was quiet again .
Sontheim , who had left off smoking for the last few minutes , said reflectively : `` I verily believe that one enjoys existence more and more as one gets older .
This morning now makes me feel quite lyrical , and as glad as the little songster we have just heard .
For the life of me I can not help quoting a poem though it is of my own manufacture - `` Now God be praised for my delight In His creation 's goodly shows  Meseems its beauty on my sight With each revolving season grows .
This joy , which old age can not tame , May still burn clear for many a day , Unless a gust put out the flame Long ere the taper 's burnt away . ''
This poem still producing no response from his friend , the philosophic professor once more withdrew , and reappeared with fresh bottles , one of which he uncorked .
Emanuel still refused everything but a glass of water .
`` You are like one of the gods themselves , '' said Sontheim , filling his pipe afresh , and resettling himself in his chair : `` you seem above our common wants .
But pray go on now , I should like to hear about some of your triumphs .
Your music is so new that it was not likely to become popular all at once . ''
page : 36 `` Well , as to that , '' said Emanuel , `` it would be too long a story , but certainly if I met with enthusiasm there was also no want of the most virulent opposition , especially in Paris , where I now arrived after about seven year of this erratic existence .
The French capital , of course , is the goal of a musician 's career .
It is there alone we can now receive that cachet which ensures us a permanent European reputation . ''
`` Yes , unfortunately it is so at present , '' sighed Sontheim  `` but wait till we are a united Germany - then it is we who shall dispense the laurel crown as well as supply the wearers of it .
But now I must not interrupt you again . ''
`` Well , I had been about a month in Paris , and was preparing to give a great concert .
I was more than usually excited and agitated .
Life there , with its brilliant society , its grand entertainments , its convivialities , luxuries , and dissipations of all kinds , is something so swift and tumultuous that you are swept along by it as on a resistless current .
`` I was divided between this social whirl - which even had I so wished I could not dare neglect - and the thousand and one preparations which were necessary for the success of my undertaking .
`` The new or German school , it is true , idolized me  but there was a strong cabal against me formed by the old French faction .
I was reviled , not only as artist , but in my private character .
My name was trailed in the mud  outrageous stories were bruited about , and in some of the comic papers I was held up to public ridicule .
The most absurd rumour invented by these infernal Parisians was , that having strangled my wife page : 37 in her own hair I had been incarcerated for years - whence all my skill as a virtuoso .
`` You may imagine how all this served to exasperate my naturally irritable temperament .
I seemed to have lost the faculty of sleep , and after passing half my nights at assemblies or with boon companions , I used to spend the other half pacing the streets of the capital to appease my excitement .
`` At last arrived the day of the concert , which was to be given at the Salle Hertz .
No pains had been spared by my adherents to make it an unquestionable success  still I knew that my enemies were busily working against me in secret , and , the public is like a woman , you know - it is impossible to predict what turn it is going to take next .
`` The Salle Hertz was crowded when I arrived  but whether with friends or detractors I knew not .
Cries proceeded from the entrance lobbies , owing to the pushing and crushing of the throng .
The best places had been all taken for weeks beforehand .
People sat in the narrow passages leading to the different parts of the hall , many having even managed to perch themselves on the steps of the platform .
It was frightfully hot when I took my place there .
`` Never since the beginning of my career had I felt so nervously excited .
One side of me was burning hot , while the other was cold as ice .
My throat and mouth were parched as with fever .
All those faces swayed in front of me in a blurred , indistinct cloud alive with a thousand eyes  and all those thousand eyes focussed upon me emitted curious magnetic vibrations like little arrows flying in my direction .
page : 38 `` In this feverish condition I took up my instrument , and in the short interval before my bow fell on the strings with that first thrilling energy of sound which rivets our audience , the silence was so intense that the motion of a fan , even a sigh , might have been heard .
`` The orchestra hung upon the movements of my bow with an enthusiasm of obedience  for a time they and I seemed to move with the unity of one existence .
We were giving my fifth Concerto , since so celebrated in the first part , which is vivace in D minor - but , by-the-bye , you do n't understand this .
`` The public listened with the most absorbed and edifying attention  but at the first short break in my own individual part , as soon as they saw my bow drop when the orchestra were carrying on the motive , the inimical clique began their preconcerted efforts to annihilate me .
Owing , however , to defection in their own ranks through changes of opinion , or to the formidable opposition displayed by the general public , this attempt became indistinguishable in the general enthusiasm .
In despite of all etiquette murmurs of approbation were heard , which soon grew into a perfect storm of clapping and applause .
The orchestra played the louder , and laughed at each other in their efforts to drown the roar of applause by a still louder instrumental roar .
`` I now felt at home again , as with my dear Viennese or my enthusiastic Russian audiences .
The rest of the piece went off in a sort of rhythmic balance of mutual confidence between public and musicians .
`` Further details about the progress of this concert , important as they were to me , would not interest you .
page : 39 Enough that it carried everything before it , quelled all opposition  it was an unparalleled success , in short .
`` I now came on for the final piece , which was my Tarantella , of course .
For this , though not really one of my best considered from a musician 's point of view , always remained the popular favourite .
It has all the freshness and go of a first work , and certainly bears the impress of the fantastic circumstances to which it owed its birth .
`` Well , I had got to that part in the piece where , as the tempo quickened - the whole scene always lived before me as I played - Antonella of old had begun her swift convulsive movements , when the profound stillness that reigned in the Salle Hertz was broken by a low , convulsive sobbing .
`` I had noticed that this particular tarantella of mine sometimes wrought upon women of highly nervous organizations to this pitch , and therefore thought nothing of it , but went on with my playing .
But the sobbing , which had ceased for awhile , seemed to grow louder and more irrepressible  there was an unusual stir and hubbub in the orchestra stalls to the left , and looking up I saw - with an indescribable pang I saw - the woman who had betrayed and forsaken me , magnificent in beauty and wealth , the centre of anxious attentions , her head thrown back , her dark , mysterious eyes fixed upon me .
`` The turbulent emotions which leaped to life in me again at sight of this vision , it would be impossible to describe .
To fling down my bow , jump from the platform , rush towards her - what for I knew not - was my first distinct impulse .
page : 40 `` But a virtuoso on the boards is like a general at the head of his troops - he dare no more desert his post than the latter could .
My heart gave a kind of bound like a caged tiger , but I remained immovable , and my arm went on playing as though nothing had happened .
All this time I acutely saw , felt , and suffered - I might say - the presence of the woman whose heart had once , and never again might beat against my own .
`` Her sobs had ceased now , and she was turning to livid pallor  her white hands , glittering with rings , clutched at the air  and once or twice I fancied she showed an impulse to break from the restraint that encircled her , and launch forth into her old dancing frenzy .
But as compassionate hands were fanning and sprinkling her with scent , she now went into one of those death-like trances that I remembered only too well .
Still I went on playing vivace vivacissimo , the glee of my music sounding perfectly diabolical to me as I saw them carrying her , like a dead and rigid body , through the dense throng which , awe-stricken , made way for the bearers .
`` For all that I played on to the end - the end that was never coming , it seemed to my tortured feelings .
When it did come I almost flung down my beloved old Stradivarius , as I automatically bowed to the audience , that clapped , shouted , stamped , wept , laughed , seeming indeed to have gone clean mad with delight , and burst into such a clamour that , much against my will , I had to turn back as I was hastening away , when they rose to their feet like one man .
Then I felt arms embracing me , and hands shaking me by the hand , and some one kissing me on the cheek , while a torrent of congratulations page : 41 were poured into my ear .
Vainly trying to get free , I cried out in desperation at last , ` Pray , pray let me go  I have a friend who 's dying , I tell you ! '
`` Released at length , I hurried through a passage , and , I do n't exactly know how , found my way to the door through which she had disappeared into a small kind of waiting-room , with its unavoidable red velvet sofa .
On it , with closed eyes and a face of unearthly pallor , the demon-angel of my existence lay stretched like a corpse , in the long , stiff folds of her white brocade dress  with the mass of her long black , now disordered , hair shed all about her .
Seeing her in this state , my heart yearned relentingly as towards one dead .
Could I turn and fly from her presence , and leave her thus ?
- and , yet , should I not !
`` Only a few of the puzzled and frightened concert-room attendants , having exhausted all sorts of remedies , were still standing about her now .
They believed some one had gone for a doctor , but no one of them seemed to consider himself responsible .
Thereupon I told them that I knew this lady  that she did not want the doctor  that they should go and call her carriage .
Although they assured me that there was none , I bade them go and look for it again .
`` In the impulse of the moment everything was forgotten but that she lay there seemingly lifeless , alone and forsaken for aught I knew , left to the care of mercenary attendants , with no hand to succour , no eye to watch over her .
I could not deliberate - deliberation , I fear , is not my forte - but when the attendants returned after a fruitless search , I ordered a voiture de place  and then taking the insensible woman in my arms , I carried page : 42 her into it , telling the man to drive to my apartment in the Rue de Rivoli .
`` On reaching home , with the assistance of my servant I carried her , still unconscious , to my rooms on the entresol  and hardly knowing how to act , or what to do next , I bade my valet to keep himself in readiness if wanted .
`` Who was she ?
What was she ?
She who had been my wife , and the life of my life at one time - now here , an unknown stranger to me !
`` The unmistakable perfection of her Parisian attire , which had none of the garishness of hastily acquired meretricious wealth , seemed indicative of rank and high station  yet here she lay , to all appearances quite forlorn and unattended .
`` While I stood there , looking at her beautiful figure in its helpless abandonment , with a sudden return of the old passionate feeling warring with my sense of self-respect and outraged honour , I confess to you that I wished she might never waken again from her deathlike trance .
`` Had she expired then , expired seemingly from the poignancy of emotion which my playing had called up in her , must I not have forgotten , forgiven all !
Had she not come there perchance drawn as by some magnetic , overmastering force ?
At these thoughts my heart relented within me .
And while gazing on her pallid features , oblivious of everything , my eyes grew wet with unaccustomed tears .
Yes , had she died then , the mute majesty of death would have wiped out her guilt from my memory , to have left there alone the image of my incomparable Capri maiden .
page : 43 `` But all at once , even as I thought thus , there passed a slight tremor over her whole frame , like the sudden ruffling of a wind-swept lake .
Slowly she opened her eyes , and mistily as yet their gaze dwelt upon me .
Then her lips quivered , and softly , scarcely audibly , she sighed , 'Em anuele . '
`` The well-known sound of my name thus pronounced by her gave me a kind of electric commotion .
I started to my feet and away from her . ''
'Em anuele , ' she sighed , a little louder than before , 'Em anuele , dove sono ?
Was it all a dream ?
Are you with me still ? '
`` I approached a step nearer , and our eyes met .
With her returning life , returned upon me the full consciousness of her treachery  then I vehemently put out my hand as though to thrust her far , far away from me .
` No , not a dream , ' I said , in a strangled voice  ` you must be dreaming now , Madame - - ? ' ''
` Oh , not that - not that from you ! '
she cried .
`` But seeing me move to the door , as I said in a voice I tried to render as hard as possible , ` Now that Madame has recovered , perhaps she will say where it is she wishes to be conveyed to , ' she suddenly sprang to her feet , and with my hand already on the door handle I felt two soft arms clasping me round the neck , and a warm cheek laid against mine and her kisses on my lips as she murmured - '' ` Through all , through everything , I was yet true to you . '
`` Heigho , my friend , '' sighed Emanuel , after a considerable pause - abruptly breaking into a jaunty laugh  then in a blasé tone he added , `` Let us laugh and love page : 44 while we may , for the night cometh when no man can do so !
To escape the Sirens we should keep well out of arm 's reach of their enchantments .
`` Was it not shameful to fall in love with one 's own wife over again ? ''
`` I never heard so extraordinary a story , '' cried Sontheim , excitedly .
`` Go on !
Who on earth was she ? ''
The clock of the Minster here struck four .
Emanuel 's face looked strangely haggard in the pure , clear morning light .
He tossed off a tumbler of water , and then said - page : [ 45 ] CHAPTER XXVIII .
SPELL-BOUND .
`` WHO was she ?
That was the question I asked myself as soon as I left her that night .
From vague hints which she subsequently gave me , I fancied that she had either been left by her supposed husband , or that he was dead or - what cared I !
To judge by appearances he had evidently settled considerable property on her .
But you can imagine that I was not in an inquiring mood , nor inclined to discover what could naturally be but of the most painful nature .
All I cared to know was that she was beautiful as ever , that she was free to love me and apparently did love me !
`` I went to see her again next day .
Five minutes before the time appointed I stood in front of the Porte Cochère of the hotel Mortemar .
- Despise me , Sontheim , I give you leave !
`` A sedate-looking powdered footman answered the bell , and I handed him my card in silence , as I did not know under what name to ask for her .
But he merely said ` Madame la Comtesse would receive me , ' as he page : 46 led the way to the compact , elegant house standing between courtyard and garden .
`` Somewhat surprised I followed the domestic , and was ushered into a dim , richly-scented , heavily-draped boudoir .
`` With the consummate grace of a lady of the highest ` ton , ' Madame , la Comtesse half rose from the causeuse on which she was languidly reclining , and held out the tips of her fingers , glittering with rings , as the domestic retired . ''
` Not my Capri girl , ' I half muttered , ` but her double perhaps ! '
And I sat down , almost embarrassed , I swear . ''
` All the world is talking about you and nothing else ! '
said she , with perfect self-possession , playing with one of her rings .
` Do you know that all the ladies are dying to make your acquaintance ?
Indeed it is a privilege to have you coming here in this way , sans fa `` on . '
`` I was utterly aghast !
The calm assurance of her manner literally took my breath away .
If she had forgotten all our antecedents , nay , the very meeting last night , she could not have looked or spoken more unconcernedly .
I grew furious , but kept my countenance .
She should not fool me to the top of her bent ! ''
` How well you act ! '
I said , clapping my hands and bowing admiringly .
` Had Madame vouchsafed to go on the stage , I make no doubt her fame would completely have eclipsed mine .
But pardon my rudeness .
There is no need for Madame to become famous in order that all the men should be dying to make her acquaintance . ''
page : 47 '' ` How charming it is not to be taken au grand sérieux , she cried , and her dazzling eyes laughed out more than her mouth did .
` But Monsieur is spoilt with all his triumphs , I see , and expects us to bow down to his genus .
Allow me to throw my modicum of homage at your feet as I could not clap you yesterday , ' she said , with her enigmatic smile  and taking a half-blown rose from some she wore fastened in a knot on her white dress , she for an instant put it to her lips , then with a sudden indescribable look that seemed to mount to my brain like a sweet narcotic , she flung it at my feet .
`` I stooped and picked up the rose , but that was all . ''
` You do not prize what others would go mad after , ' she said , pouting and pulling another of her roses to pieces .
You are - - ' '' ` What ? '
I exclaimed savagely .
`` She looked into my eyes , and then all at once , as though struck with dismay , clasped her hands , crying - ` Ah , you will not betray me !
Say you will not betray me , Emanuele ! '' ''
` Not take a leaf out of your book , in fact , Madame ! '
I rejoined , in the same bitter tone .
`` Did I love , did I hate this woman ?
It was difficult to tell , so strange a conflict raged within me . ''
` You know I have always loved you , none but you ! '
she exclaimed passionately , with all her languor gone , as she rose and made a step towards me . ''
` That is why you left me some four years ago or so , ' I remarked  ` but Madame la Comtesse has no doubt forgotten that little episode .
She sees in me now the great virtuoso - then , it is true , I was but a struggling fiddler . '
page : 48 `` Rage and contempt were violently struggling with the unreasoning passion that again threatened to master my better self . ''
` Ah , I was a fool , though I meant for the best , ' she cried , impatiently  and then with glowing emotion - ` You do not know , you can never know , Emanuele , how bitterly I have repented it , ' and she again advanced a little nearer . ''
` Not a fool , though this may be a fool 's paradise , at any rate for me ! '
I remarked , looking around me significantly . ''
` Ah , you were always hard , and cruel , and cold , ' she cried  ` but if I am the unfeeling thing you would make me out , say why , why did your music almost kill me yesterday ? '
she asked , tremulously . ''
` Oh , Antonella !
Antonella ! '
burst from me almost in despite of myself  ' I should like to kill us both and have done with this shameful situation ! '
and had there been a knife or dagger about just then , I think I should have verified some of the dreadful stories that were afloat about me . '' '
I would rather be killed than despised by you , ' she sobbed , pointing to her throat , and looking at me with swimming eyes .
`` She had once again triumphed over me !
She had broken through the artificial barriers I had vainly tried to erect between us .
Indeed , she had grown in all the secrets of allurement , in all the sorceries of love .
And I - I - got still more entangled with the woman who was my wife , but bore some other man 's name . ''
page : [ 49 ] CHAPTER XXIX .
A STRANGE ENCOUNTER .
`` WHOSE , I did not find out immediately , for I kept apart from every one , and Antonella took care only to see me alone .
`` She had beguiled me into believing that if she were no longer mine , at least she was free from other ties .
How she had come by her Countess-ship I did not care to inquire .
I quaffed the poisoned cup of pleasure she held to my lips and drained it feverishly  but I was not happy - I never was so miserable in all my life , I believe .
From some innate perversity of nature she now developed an ardour of passion for me far different from her feelings when she might have loved me innocently .
When I , in my excess of self-disgust , at times tried to be brutal to her - for my feelings , too , had undergone a complete revolution - she seemed to love me all the more .
`` It is true I was now a celebrity  great people page : 50 prized my greatness  fair ladies vied with each other for my presence , and lavished their smiles and what not upon me , Forgive me - this sounds like foppery , but it is not  one soon gets to prize these things at their true value .
`` None of these ` Grandes Dames ' ever felt the soul of music as that dreamy , heavenly god-child of yours !
She herself is music , indeed !
But I beg her pardon for mentioning her dear name in such company as this !
`` It was neither the musician nor his music - it was the musician 's fame that Antonella adored .
`` Sometimes I could hardly believe her the same the ` Tolla ' of Rome and Capri : the same with the petted model of Raoul 's studio , or the short-skirted peasant girl dancing in the ruins of Tiberius .
`` She had certainly developed since then , if not in actual beauty , at least in grace , and in all those indefinable witcheries and mysteries of dress and manner that charm us men even more .
In my own despite I felt all that charm only too acutely , and yet hated myself for feeling it .
There was something of provocation in the way she would wear her laces , or a sprig of damask roses  and the scents about her resembled subtle combinations of harmony .
`` And then how brilliantly had she not learned to discourse - on all the topics of the day , or of nothings , which often amounts to the same ?
From the picture of the year at the ` Salon , ' to the latest attempt upon Louis Philippe , or some new-fledged socialistic Utopia of Cabet or Proudhon - nothing came amiss to her  and all subjects possessed about equal advantages in showing off to admiring listeners .
page : 51 `` I confess I often forgot to listen to what she was saying , lost in admiration , as in the old times , of the delicious curves of her lips while speaking .
I had thus passed rather more than a week , seeing her daily , in a frame of mind which possibly resembled that of an opium-eater 's dreams .
All action of the will held in abeyance , all recollection of the past or forethought for the future annulled .
Held by the magic darkness of her eyes , the world with its imperative claims and duties was expunged , obliterated .
`` This state of things could not last , of course .
But it happened to be the beginning of June , a time when the fashionable world of Paris disperses to the country or the sea-side .
`` One afternoon when I went at the usual hour to see Antonella , I noticed an unwonted stir and commotion about the place .
On being admitted , I was told that Madame la Comtesse was on the point of leaving Paris , but would see me for a few minutes , if I would wait for her , in her boudoir .
`` I was quite taken by surprise .
She had not hinted at a journey yesterday .
`` Moodily I threw myself into a chair .
Five minutes passed .
` Will she never come ! '
I muttered impatiently , and I began tossing the knick-knacks on the table about .
`` The door opened abruptly , and the Countess , with a certain white look , almost as though she had seen a ghost , glided swiftly towards me , and , putting her hands on my shoulders , said in her most caressing tones - '' ` We must part for a little while , my love , for I go out of town for a few days , but will write to you immediately on my return . '
page : 52 `` Why , you look , my dear , as though you had just had a visit from the defunct Count - that soi-disant husband of yours , ' I said , ironically . '
I hope he did not indulge in useless recriminations ! ' ''
` Hush , hush ! '
she cried , quite taken aback  ` what do you mean by defunct ? ' ''
` Alive , then ! '
I cried .
` Your - - ' `` For a moment I felt as though I could rush upon the man that instant and fight him to the death .
Then I burst into a long , immoderate fit of laughter . ''
` It is stifling here , ' I cried , and then I threw open the window and the persienne .
`` Why should I fight that unhappy man , thought I , the next instant .
He certainly had the worst of it  and there was something too ridiculous in the situation .
God forbid I should make it public !
`` Antonella , seeing that I remained doggedly at the window - having , indeed , come to the conclusion that the sudden journey was all a hoax - cried imperiously - '' ` Go !
go !
Do you wish to - to - - ' '' ' I have no objection whatever to meeting Monsieur le Comte - perhaps you will kindly acquaint me now with his name as well as your own . '
`` There was a loud ringing of bells , and the sound of a heavy travelling equipage was heard rumbling across the courtyard .
I was still standing by the window .
Suddenly I felt myself pulled backwards with the energy of desperation .
Antonella was in a towering rage  but it became her superbly . ''
` Do not put yourself out so ! '
said I , quietly , shrugging my shoulders  ' I shall be charmed to make the Count 's acquaintance . '
page : 53 '' ` But it is - it is - Ogotshki ! '
she gasped . '
I only heard from him this - you - he will - - ' '' ` Be delighted , no doubt , as you yourself were , to renew his acquaintance with a person now so celebrated as myself . ' ''
` You will not - - ' she cried , and there was a dangerous gleam in her eyes . ''
` Calm yourself !
I will not compromise Madame la Comtesse Ogotshki , ' I said , with great composure .
`` She now , by a consummate effort of will , regained an almost unnatural calm .
Without looking at me she left the room .
She met the Count below , and remained absent about five minutes .
Presently she returned , hanging on his arm in the most natural manner while gaily talking to him . ''
` Wenceslaw , here is an old friend of ours , ' she said graciously , introducing us  ` you remember him , no doubt , as one of the little coterie that used to assemble in M. Leroux 's studio .
He happened to call in just before your arrival , and I begged him to stay a minute , and see you .
I daresay the furore which his concert created here may even have reached your idyllic retreat at Ems . '
`` There was an imperceptible movement of the Count 's eyebrows , which no one but myself would probably have noticed  then he held out his hand most affably to me and said - '' ` Very glad to see you - very charmed indeed , M. Sturm !
Are you making a long stay in Paris ?
And how is your friend , M. Leroux ?
He does not often brighten our Paris with his presence ! '
`` The Count , I thought , had aged very much since I page : 54 had last seen him that memorable , never-to-be-forgotten day .
`` And here was I face to face with the man that had done me the greatest injury that they say , in ordinary parlance , one man can do to another .
It is true that perhaps from his point of view he might say as much of me  but here we sat amicably together , and for some ten minutes kept up a trivial kind of conversation , during which I learnt that the Count had been taking the waters at Ems for some chronic disease or other , but had found his nerves so irritated by the cure that he came away without stopping the full term fixed upon .
`` Having discussed the Ems waters , music , the threatening aspect of the political horizon , I took my leave , after accepting an invitation to dine there on the following Tuesday .
The state of mind in which I left the house is indescribable .
But I determined to go back , for the sake of appearances .
The daring of this woman in ever having permitted us two to meet was stupendous !
But now I feared nothing so much as the ridicule of a disclosure . ''
page : [ 55 ] CHAPTER XXX .
A NEW VERSION OF AN OLD STORY .
`` HERE goes five o'clock , '' said Sontheim  `` what a glorious morning !
I hear the maid stirring  I must go and order the breakfast to be brought out here , '' and he disappeared into the kitchen .
From the arbour close by the house where Emanuel was sitting , he dreamily surveyed the stretch of neighbouring gardens , all lit up and sparkling in the dew and early sunlight .
An unwonted sensation of well-being crept over him as little puffs of air , smelling of sweetbriar and honeysuckle , played about his temples .
The leaves and grass , slightly shivering now and then , looked as though they had just risen from a bath .
Here and there from the fresh-lit fires of neighbouring chimneys blue smoke began to rise straight up to the cloudless sky : two white-winged pigeons darted across it , while from a dove-cot near , the loud yet mellow `` rooke-te-koo '' of others was heard .
A cock was crowing page : 56 his loudest in honour of his majesty the Sun , and another somewhere in the distance responded to it like an echo .
The glad singing of birds all together filled the air with an indistinct musical murmur , and now and then some human voices , such as the milkmaid 's cry , blended not unpleasantly with these rural sounds .
Sontheim now returned and resumed his old seat .
A neighbour , as round as an egg , with a long china pipe hanging from his mouth , gave them a husky `` good morning '' as he toddled down his garden path to dig at his potatoes .
`` Do n't let us lose any more time , '' said Sontheim , eagerly , for Emanuel , lost in thought , was tracing all manner of figures in the sand with a light cane  `` you had just accepted an invitation to dinner , and I want to hear what came of it . ''
`` Oh , nothing came of that , '' said Emanuel  plucking a spray of honeysuckle , smelling at it , and sticking it in his button-hole .
`` I do n't know whether any one had got wind of the affair by this time  but at any rate these things do not usually get reported to the husband , especially in Paris .
`` The dinner was a grand affair  everybody who was somebody had been raked together at this the beginning of the dull time of year .
`` I was lionized .
Antonella outdid even herself - all cobweb laces and rubies : nothing could surpass the fascinating elegance of this woman at the head of her table  and the Count followed suit in this three-handed game . '' '
I am so glad ' - said the latter , coming up to me in page : 57 the drawing-room , now that the imperious conversationalists of his dinner-table allowed him to edge in a word - ` that I at last have an opportunity of thanking you , M. Sturm , for the kindness you showed my wife at Rome . '
`` I bowed silent acquiescence . ''
` She told me all about it long ago , ' he went on , in his courteously drawling tones : ` how she , an orphan , was forced into a convent by hard-hearted relatives , and half driven out of her mind there  how gallantly M. Leroux , who had made her acquaintance while painting at Capri , and you , M. Sturm , rescued her at great peril to yourselves .
How you both placed her with a poor but well-connected Roman lady , and paid for her education there  when your friend , discovering her turn for painting , set about making an artist of her , only unfortunately that my own appearance at this juncture diverted the fair pupil 's gifts into another channel . '
`` He laughed rather feebly at what I suppose was meant for a joke .
I wondered whether the poor old man was credulous enough to be taken in by so palpable an untruth , or whether he merely wished to make me believe that he believed it .
`` However , I do n't think he was deep enough for that .
Unlike most of the Russian nobles I have come across , usually so full of cunning , dissimulation , and astuteness , he seemed to be curiously gullible , while in a certain slackness of moral fibre he again bore a strong resemblance to them .
`` But it was easy to see that he was completely subjugated by Antonella 's beauty and subtle fascination .
page : 58 I think , had she chosen , she might at last have made him believe that the moon was made of cream cheese .
`` You see she had so many arrows in her quiver .
If her charms for once missed their aim , she could always , in extremity , resort to that extraordinary hysterical condition , so nearly resembling death , that no man with the slighest slightest feeling for her in his heart could possibly resist the mute appeal .
`` But I am wandering from the point .
Well , the Count further complimented me on what he was pleased to term such noble conduct on the part of two young men  while I , quite overcome by this new version of my story , could only murmur some words in deprecation .
`` The Count , apparently in perfect good faith , went on to say : ` Perhaps you may have thought my conduct , on the other hand , less commendable at the time .
But the fact is ' - he hesitated for a moment - ' I was so taken with her that I thought it best to carry her off , quite out of reach of two such attractive young men ! '
he smiled with self-satisfaction at his own acuteness .
` In fact my wife had hinted at the state of M. Leroux 's feelings towards her , and considering the excitability of his temper I thought it best to take her for a time to some outlying estate of mine in Russia .
She wrote to you both from there , but we were never honoured with a reply from either of you gentlemen . ' ''
` Oh , I believe we both left Rome almost immediately after you did , Count , ' I hastened to put in . ''
` Ah , that accounts for your silence , ' he replied . '
I hope M. Leroux has long ago forgiven me  ' then , with a rather vacuous smile , ` You know , M. Sturm , you artists are all so wrapt in your art that you can not page : 59 possibly care for a woman as we ordinary mortals do . '
He was moving away , but turning round again , said blandly , ` While you are staying in Paris , I hope that you will make yourself quite at home here . '
`` Indeed I was making myself quite at home !
Presently , to oblige my hosts , I played some trifles on the violin .
Whilst I did so , Antonella was leaning with her back against a glass-door leading into the conservatory .
I could only see her in profile .
She was exceedingly pale , and her dark eyes , full of smouldering passion , were gazing straight in front of her .
Her pose was superb  she held a cactus flower in her clasped hands , but now and then , with a nervous action , pulled out one of its petals .
`` When I had ceased  she came up to me for the first time that evening , and , after a few words , said , with that strange , subtle smiling of hers , ` The Count was talking to you for a long time  may one know , sir , what it was all about ? '
`` I quite understood her , however .
She knew perfectly what effect she had produced upon me just now  even the cactus flower had not been there by mere accident .
She thought she would wind me round her little finger again . ''
` It was all about your powers of original invention , Madame , which ought certainly to have secured you a foremost place among - - ' '' ` Among - among whom , sir , pray ? '
she asked , looking tauntingly at me . ''
` That I must allow Madame to find out at her leisure , ' I said , and abruptly took my leave .
page : 60 `` My leave for good , I vowed , as I threw myself back in the carriage .
It was too intolerable - too disintegrating to one 's whole moral nature !
This coil of deceit and the ignoble figure I played in it filled me with loathing .
Now that I knew that the weak-minded , uxorious Count was really amongst the living , I would not set my foot in the house again , since I had saved appearances by my visit .
In order to keep my resolution , I avoided all the streets that led near the Count 's hotel , as though in my own despite I might get within the radius of the siren 's attraction and be drawn afresh within its irresistible current .
I was occupied in the meanwhile in winding up my affairs in Paris , previous to my starting for New York . ''
page : [ 61 ] CHAPTER XXXI .
A STORM IN A BOUDOIR .
`` I WAS not to get off so easily , however .
As my evil genius would have it , I was sauntering late one afternoon in the Bois de Bologne , when in one of its avenues I came unexpectedly upon the Countess Ogotshki walking with another lady .
`` She caught sight of me before I could make my escape , had I had the will as well as the wish . ''
` Here is the very man we were speaking of , ' she said , coming towards me with her long , swaying walk that , like everything else about her , had an indescribable grace .
She was all sweetness , all amiability .
` Madame de G - - was just telling me how much she wished to make your acquaintance , M. Sturm .
She raves about your Concerto in D minor , which I unfortunately missed the other evening at your concert , coming in late as I did  for I happened to be at the soirée of some friends with whom I had come up from the page : 62 country that day , But when I heard of your concert , nothing could stay me , and in spite of my friends ' assurances of the impossibility of procuring a seat , I came off all by myself , and fortunately for me golden arguments prevailed , and one of the attendants made a place for me . ' ''
` What charming enthusiasm ! '
cried the other lady . '
I remember now seeing you come in - - ' '' ` Ah , yes , ' said Antonella , looking at me significantly , ` but you did not see me carried out again fainting , all owing to M. Sturm 's Tarantella - for the heat had nothing to do with it .
But here comes the carriage  let us drive you back to Paris , Monsieur . ' '
`` I could not summon resolution enough to refuse .
` Suddenly turning round , she cried , with the most taunting of little smiles : ` Succès !
Succès ! '
`` I looked at her in astonishment  did she so cynically proclaim her triumph !
But I found the subject of her exclamation was a small Maltese poodle , who now scrambled into the carriage . ''
` Having followed her friend into the carriage , the Countess motioned to me to take the seat opposite , and placed the little brute in her lap . ''
` Poor little Succès , ' she said , looking at me while pressing her red lips on its fluffy white head . ''
` Succès , Succès ! '
- it echoed mockingly in my ears .
But I inwardly set my teeth against the enchantress .
I felt sullen as a captive dragged along in an Imperator 's triumphal procession .
`` Madame de G - - was put down at her door , after profuse invitations to me to her town and country house thenceforth and for ever .
page : 63 '' ` Home , ' said the Countess to the bearded chasseur , as he put his head in at the door .
`` I let myself drift with the tide - which means that I allowed Antonella to carry me off at her will .
`` Again the huge chasseur stood by the door , and I found myself handing the Countess out of her carriage .
We entered the house together , and went into her boudoir . ''
'Em anuele , ' she said , when we were alone , lightly laying her hand on mine , ` what makes you look so sad ?
Why are you so silent ?
Is it because it 's so long since you have been to see me ? '
and she looked at me languidly and sighed .
`` For some reason or other the look , the tone , brought vividly before me the hour at Capri when , sitting on the Sirens ' rock , she had looked at me with her dark eyes swimming in tears .
No other woman 's beauty ever thrilled my senses as hers did  but my heart had no longer any part in it . ''
` It is , ' I said slowly , making a strong effort to master my unmanly weakness , for I felt all my resotion resolution melting again like snow before her glance - ` it is , that I am where I am . '
`` For a minute or two she was , or else affected to be , struck dumb by this sudden new light thrown on my feelings .
Indignation seemed contending with another passion - I hardly know what name to give it  then with trembling lips she said : ` You - you - you are - - ' but suddenly , with a rapid change of tone and manner quite astonishing , she continued mockingly - ' a German , Emanuele , a German !
And Germans , we know , are not exactly pre-eminent for tact . '
page : 64 `` It was bewitchingly coquettish .
These swift transitions from one emotion to another were of the highest effect .
But I was becoming inured to them , and the enjoyment they afforded me resembled that inspired by a great actress 's oft-repeated part . ''
` Madame la Comtesse speaks truly , ' I replied .
Politeness is not our forte .
The virtue we Germans prize above all others is - faithfulness . '
`` Antonella simply ignored my answer with most unmistakable tact . ''
` This dark frown between the eyebrows does not become you , Emanuele , ' she said archly , and leaning over to me she passed the tips of her fingers across my forehead .
` Let me smooth out your naughty wrinkles and make you happy , spoilt child that you are  for the Count is gone to a dinner at the `` Trois Frères , '' and will be home late . '
`` She poured out a glass of iced punch , sipped a few drops and held it to my lips  then putting it down , she began softly humming my Tarantella , and twirling round and round me in that old , swift , fantastic way .
`` I sat looking at her under a sort of spell .
Her eyes were glittering under her dark , heavy hair , her heart palpitating wildly , when suddenly , as though spent with her exertions , she alighted on my knees . ''
` Maëstro , ' she murmured , in the old Capri voice and dialect .
`` I believe there are certain impressions that stamp themselves on the brain till they become part of its very tissue .
This old word spoken in the old voice brought all the old feelings back with a rush like a torrent .
page : 65 '' ` Oh , Tolla ! '
I sighed , as she began kissing my hair and my eyes .
Suddenly I pushed her far from me , sprang to my feet , and cried with an ungovernable outburst of pent-up disgust , ` Away , away !
This must not , shall not go on !
Never again will I enter this house to become a party to such treachery and the fool of your caprices .
A deceived deceiver !
What a position , ye gods !
What a depth to have sunk to !
What shame to be inflicting and to endure !
Rest satisfied with yourself , Madame !
You have destroyed all self-respect in me .
I hate myself for having loved you !
In bitterness I still loved you when you had basely deserted me .
It was an unreasoning , despicable love  but it is over , all over now !
Save your blandishments for others  they have lost their effect on me .
If you must deceive , do so , but with me you shall not !
Be content that you have nothing to fear from me , and let me go .
I will be silent as the dead about the past  but in the future our paths must cross never again .
Let me go . '
`` I struggled to the door , for she had thrown her arms round me exclaiming - '' ` No , no !
You shall not ! '
`` The demon of vanity that possessed her could not abide , I believe , that any man should defy her fascinations . '' '
I am your wife , after all , ' she said , with rising anger , then getting quite beside herself in her passion when she saw me remaining unmoved .
` You shall not !
I will leave the Count - rank - station - the world - all - all - and come with you !
You are mine , Emanuele .
I will not let you go !
I will not let you go ! '
page : 66 '' ` My wife ! '
I sneered - ` my wife , you say !
Beware how you let Count Ogotshki hear that . ' '' '
I do n't care who hears it , ' she panted , in a livid rage . '
I will tell him myself !
You shall not defy me ! ' ''
` Take care , for God 's sake take care ! '
I said .
` Some one may overhear you .
Do you wish to be ruined ? '
`` I saw she was working herself up to such a pitch that she was utterly reckless .
She no longer looked the bewitching creature of a few instants before  a demon of vindictiveness seemed to shoot from her eyes  hatred , not love , now glistened there  even her beautiful mouth was deformed by it .
I did not know what to do .
The only thing was to soothe her , if possible , and get off as quickly as I could . ''
` Antonella , ' I said , ` listen to me , Antonella . ' '' '
I will not let you go !
I will not let you go !
You are mine , Emanuele ! '
she reiterated fiercely , seizing me by the hands as though she would retain me by force .
`` I was perfectly cool , my pulse was calm  henceforth she could never move me again .
But I determined to simulate a certain remains of the love that was dead in order to get off for the present .
So I turned away from the door as if yielding to her . ''
` Antonella , ' I again said , as tenderly as I could , ` dear Antonella , calm yourself .
Is it safe for me to be seen here at this hour , when the Count may surprise us at any moment ? ' ''
` The Count !
A nullity ! '
said Antonella , contemptuously .
page : 67 '' ` Has just had the pleasure of overhearing some words probably not intended for him , ' said the grey-headed man , suddenly confronting us , in a veiled , quavering voice , and with a curiously blank look in his eyes .
`` Antonella stared at him , turned deathly white , and fell back heavily as if she had been shot .
Those fits of hers were certainly exceedingly convenient at times .
I almost envied her . ''
` Madame la Comtesse is sometimes scarcely herself , ' I remarked coolly , wondering within myself how much the old man had overheard , and what he must think of the scene , if not cognizant of the whole situation .
He could hardly regard me in the light of a very ardent lover . '' '
I know not what you may think , ' I continued , seeing he still remained silent  ` but I am ready to give you explanations whenever you may desire it . ' ''
` This is not the moment for explanations , ' said the Count , vaguely waving his hand in the direction of the door as he went towards the Countess himself . '' '
I shall remain in Paris some days longer than was my intention in order that Monsieur le Comte may know where to write to me , ' I said , with that controlled utterance which seizes every man by the throat when he finds himself face to face with a deadly quarrel .
`` Then I left the room without another look at the woman who had blighted my existence .
`` I waited a whole week , but no letter or message arriving from the Count , I started on my voyage to New York . ''
page : [ 68 ] CHAPTER XXXII .
A DIRE DAWNING .
`` WHAT an incomprehensible woman ! ''
exclaimed Sontheim , shifting restlessly about on his seat .
`` Did you really break with her for good ? ''
`` Oh yes ! ''
said Emanuel , getting up and stretching his arms  `` I assure you not doomsday itself could have resuscitated my love . ''
`` Did you ever heat anything more about her ? ''
asked the Professor , with a certain anxiety in his tone .
`` Such a creature is a psychological puzzle  one would like to pursue her career to its close . ''
`` Such a creature , '' said Emanuel , `` is a mixture of morbid passion , caprice , and boundless vanity , and what may be its ultimate fate concerns me not at all , I confess . ''
`` Ah well , '' said Sontheim , `` your feelings were too deeply involved , of course , to be a dispassionate judge  page : 69 but I consider her a very curious problem .
An arrested development somewhere , no doubt .
The rudimentary conscience of a child , with a woman 's full-blown perfections . ''
`` You are a lenient judge , Leopold , at any rate where the fair sex are concerned .
For my own part I look at it differently .
But here comes breakfast .
I am famishing , I perceive , and the scent of the coffee ascends gratefully to my nostrils . ''
When the tray had been set down on the table , Emanuel threw himself on the victuals , and began ravenously demolishing everything he could lay his hands on .
Leopold , for once , did not develop an appetite equal to that of his friend .
His habitual joviality seemed considerably abated .
`` Well , you must see , '' cried Emanuel , eagerly , when his hunger was somewhat appeased , `` that I am not really a married man - no one ought strictly to consider me as such  perhaps it was not even a legal union , from things that I have heard since .
But , morally speaking , there can be no doubt that I am free as air ! ''
`` Hm , hm ! ''
said Sontheim , `` there 's such a thing as imprisoned air ! ''
`` What is more , '' interposed Emanuel , impatiently , `` I have good reasons for supposing Antonella dead ! ''
`` Ah ! ''
exclaimed the Professor , with an air of relief , `` really dead !
I wish you would tell me exactly all that you still know or have heard concerning her . ''
`` Certainly , '' replied his friend  `` the remainder is quickly told .
After about nine months or so I found myself again giving concerts in Paris , during the page : 70 winter and spring of the present year .
There I came across my dear old friend Raoul again .
Men of his stamp always worm out everything that is to be known in a place , and a good deal more too .
At any rate , I found that a great deal of what I have been telling you was not only no secret to him , but that , on the contrary , he was able to give me a good deal of fresh information regarding the Count and Countess Ogotshki .
`` The former , it appears , had had a slight stroke of paralysis after the scene of which he had been a partial witness .
On his recovery  Antonella impressed her husband with an idea that her own conduct , on that occasion was pure hysteria induced by my music , and that for virtue I was a worthy rival of Joseph of Egypt himself .
`` However , it seems , in spite of all her subtle arts , the memory of the words he had heard rankled in the old man 's mind , and he once or twice reproached her with them .
`` Whereupon Antonella , incredible as it may sound , informed the Count , in a fit of ungovernable temper , of her previous marriage with me .
Then terrified , I suppose , at what she had done , she , as Raoul put it , took the bit in her teeth , and ran off with her diamonds , and her securities and all , leaving the old man , older and more broken down than ever , to take refuge on his estates in Russia .
`` My friend had these details from the herculean chasseur , who had turned model at this time .
But with all his inquisitiveness even Raoul had failed in tracing the Countess 's hiding-place .
She had completely disappeared . ''
page : 71 `` Completely disappeared ! ''
muttered Sontheim , owning deeply .
`` Strange , strange ! ''
`` Well , nothing that this unaccountable creature could do would ever take me by surprise .
But enough of her !
Indeed , after the inquiries I have set on foot , I have every reason to think that she must be dead !
She was not a woman to give up wealth , station , and all the luxuries of life , for a whim of love or remorse  she would have sought a reconciliation with her husband , and he , like the foolish old man he was , would no doubt have granted it .
I think , therefore , that she must be dead  and under the circumstances , I should be a hypocrite if I did not feel it a relief .
For if so , I am free once more  my life 's incubus is gone , and I may love Mina .
I do love Mina !
she will be the better angel of my life .
Say , what do you think of it , Leopold ? ''
As he uttered these words a sort of boyish radiance lit up his features , different , indeed , from the sombre and impatient expression his countenance had hitherto worn .
Sontheim made no reply , but sat looking before him with an air of profound perplexity .
After a pause Emanuel said again , with almost pathetic gentleness - `` Well , Leopold , you do not seem to give me much encouragement .
I know nothing for certain , of course .
Are you afraid for your sweet god-child ? ''
Sontheim , however , seemed hardly to hear him .
He was now pacing up and down in front of the arbour , looking unusually perturbed .
The slatternly servant at this moment came from the page : 72 house with a letter in her hand , and gave it to her master .
He opened it quickly , perused its contents , and flushed with evident delight .
`` It is from the Countess , '' he said after a while to Emanuel , and began reading his letter over again .
`` The Countess !
what Countess ? ''
cried his friend , in a wondering tone .
`` My Countess , not yours this time ! ''
said Sontheim , with a smirk .
`` I forgot for the moment that there was another in the world .
Look !
does she not write a charming letter ? ''
Emanuel took the letter , looked at it , stared at it , stared at his friend , then looked at the letter again .
`` This is Antonella 's writing , '' he gasped .
Sontheim gave a kind of cry , reeled as a bullock might struck with an axe  then calling out `` Oh , oh ! ''
smote the table heavily with his elbows , and with his face hidden by his hands sobbed like a woman .
Emanuel had started up and seized his friend by the shoulders .
At last the latter looked up with heavy red eyes , and a countenance which showed what havoc these few moments had wrought in him .
For a space the two men remained eyeing each other in silence .
Of speech there was no further need .
What could they say ?
Nothing .
Each felt the impossibility of the situation .
The coil that seemed to entwine them equally must be broken asunder somehow .
Emanuel , grasping his friend 's hands , wrung them violently , and saying , `` I am off - you will hear from me , '' dashed out of the garden .
page : [ 73 ] BOOK III page : [ 74 ] page : [ 75 ] BOOK III .
CHAPTER XXXIII .
THE LOST RING .
`` Behind the hedge on yonder lea Stands a goodly apple-tree  A finch sits singing on a bough , Singing , sweetly singing - '' `` MINA , Mina , give over that singing , will you , and come and lend a hand here , '' cried Frau Lichtenfeld , in shrill tones resounding through the whole length of the garden .
She had been toiling in the sweat of her brow ever since three o'clock that morning , it being her quarterly washing-day - a day of dread to the whole household  for if the weather misbehaved itself by any chance , the storm overhead was as nothing to that which raged in the circle of the Lichtenfelds .
But the sun was in a glorious humour this bright September page : 76 morning , and only playing at hide-and-seek with the clouds , in which it hid itself every now and then to burst forth with a more triumphant splendour .
Therefore the Professorinn was bustling about with redoubled activity in a huge apron , tied over her tucked-up skirts  now scolding the servant , who , standing over an enormous tub in the corner , fed by the spout from the roof , was rinsing out the clothes  now pouncing unexpectedly on the hired washerwoman , who ever since yesterday had been at work in boiling , beating , and scrubbing the same .
Mina came forward languidly , and began assisting her mother in hanging some of the wet clothes on the lines , while others  half dried , had to make way for them , as the boys tumultuously haled them off in baskets to the bleaching field behind the garden .
There they not only dutifully obeyed their mother 's behest of spreading them out on the green grass in the sun , but so zealous were they that they fought over one of the sheets , which , disfigured with bootmarks , was at last carried off by the incorrigible Hans , who , waving it like a triumphal flag , came tearing down the garden with it , Otto and Conrad dashing after him like hounds after a hare .
`` Mother , mother , I did n't do it ! ''
shouted Hans , displaying the sheet before her .
`` Nor I '' - `` Nor I , '' panted Conrad and Otto , simultaneously  for whatever his elder said , the other was sure to repeat like an echo .
`` Oh , these boys will be the death of me ! ''
cried Frau Lichtenfeld , snatching the sheet from Hans and giving him a sounding box on the ear , which made him page : 77 take to his heels  and he and Wolf - who had been skulking behind the hedge in order to see how to shape his further course - disappeared for the rest of the day .
`` What 's the matter with the girl - you 're as limp as a wet rag ? ''
suddenly cried Frau Lichtenfield in an injured tone , facing round upon Mina .
`` You 're every bit as bad as those boys , only worse  they 're merry at least , but you look like a cat in a thunderstorm .
Oh , goodness me , there 's Lulu at it again  she will kill herself one of these days , I know she will , with eating all the windfalls littering about the grass .
Do go , for heaven 's sake , girl , and keep her and those two mischievous ne'er - do-weel out of harm 's way , while I see to the linen  for you 're no more good at it than they are , I declare .
I am sick of teaching you ! ''
Mina had already run off to where Lulu , standing up to her knees in the long rank grass under their one apple-tree , was digging her little teeth lustily into a large green apple , and tightly clutching another still bigger one with her disengaged hand .
When Mina gently but firmly forced her to yield up her treasures , she set up a loud howl , and it was only after much patient coaxing that the elder sister at last got her and the boys to settle down on the grass under the tree , by a promise to sing their favourite songs .
But as each of them immediately clamoured to have his own favourite , Mina now hit upon the device of plucking three blades of grass of differing lengths , and told them that whoever drew the longest should have his choice first , and so on .
Otto gained the prize , but as he always went by what his brother said , he was rather puzzled .
page : 78 `` Sing , sing ! ''
he said , gleefully  and then stopped short , till Conrad , coming to the rescue , suggested the `` Cuckoo song . ''
`` The Cuckoo song ! ''
said Otto , quite unabashed , as though it had just occurred to him .
Mina , in a low , sweet voice that had an indefinably plaintive ring , began singing - `` The cuckoo flies to the green grass , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
And when it rains he 's wet , alas , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
The cuckoo has two golden feet , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
That 's why forbidden love 's so sweet , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
The cuckoo flies to the dark grove , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
Why art so proud to-day , my love ?
Cuckoo , cuckoo !
The cuckoo through thy window flies , Cuckoo , cuckoo !
Oh love , take pity on my sighs , Let me come too ! ''
They formed a picture which , for grouping , colour , and background , was ready composed to an artist 's hand .
Mina , in a pink-and-white cotton gown , with her curly head slightly thrown back , and soft young face a little paler than its wont , was leaning back against the crabbed trunk of the old apple-tree - a low , forked branch of which formed her seat - with her hands idly crossed in her lap and a wistful , far-off look page : 79 in her clear brown eyes .
Lulu , resting against her sister 's knee , was looking intently up in her face , blue-eyed and open-mouthed , trying to follow the song with her babyish tones .
The red-cheeked Otto , stretched full-length on the grass , with his chin propped by his two hands and his legs kicking the air behind him , listened in placid enjoyment to the song of his choice  while Conrad , sitting cross-legged like a tailor , divided his attention between whistling an accompaniment , and making a ladder of reeds for his beloved frog , which he kept by way of barometer .
Mina had no sooner done , than Conrad , whose turn it was , shouted , `` I want the song about the nun , Mimi . ''
`` What nun ? ''
asked Mina .
`` Oh , you know , you know - the one who wo n't drink the red wine , '' said Conrad , eagerly .
`` The one who wo n't drink the red wine , '' echoed Otto .
`` But that 's such a long one , '' said Mina  `` you 'll get tired of it before I 've done . ''
`` No , no , '' cried they all three  `` begin , do begin ! ''
And Mina began half singing , half reciting that quaint old ballad - `` I stood high on the mountains , The vale lay deep below , A little boat came gliding , Wherein three earls I saw .
And of these three , the youngest That therein did recline , He bade me drink , and gave me once A goblet of red wine .
page : 80 ' O say why wouldst thou have me drink Red wine from out thy glass ?
Thou art a mighty earl , and I Am but a lonely lass .
And though I am not rich , forsooth , I hold mine honour dear , And I will guard it till one come Who is mine equal here . '
What drew he from his finger then ?
A little golden ring  `` Let this to thee our token be Thou sweet , thou bonnie thing ! '
` What should I with this ring ?
- a lord Ne'er weds with a poor lass ! ' '
O say that thou hast found it Lost in the long green grass .
And art thou a poor maiden , Hast neither goods nor gear  Bethink thee of the true love That is between us , dear . '
` Nought know I of any true love , Nor yet of any man - - '' `` Now , Lulu , you must listen  she 's going to be a nun , and he 's going to ride all over the world to find her , '' cried Conrad , who wished the superior merits of his own particular poem to be appreciated .
`` The world is round ! ''
put in Otto  tentatively .
`` And is he going to ride all round it , Mimi ? ''
`` How round is it ? ''
lisped Lulu .
`` As round as your eyes , '' said Conrad , impatiently  `` ca n't you wait till Mina 's done before you begin chattering , you little chatterbox ? ''
page : 81 `` Is 't as round as this apple , Mina ? ''
asked Otto , thinking this a fair opportunity to pounce on one of the forbidden fruit , and holding it in rather closer proximity to his mouth than was necessary for purposes of demonstration .
`` Well , it 's something that shape , '' said Mina , `` but more flattened at the poles  and it 's green , too , mostly with the fields and forests - - '' `` Oh , that is n't fair  that 's like a geography lesson , '' said Conrad , discontentedly , `` and other 's given us a holiday . ''
`` Very well , '' said Mina , gently , `` I 'll go on , Conrad  but I 've forgotten where I left off . ''
`` Where she 's going to be a nun , you know ! ''
cried Conrad .
`` What is a nun ? ''
put in the irrepressible Lulu .
`` Be quiet , Lulu , and you will hear  your turn will come next .
Do go on , Mina  we shall never get to the end . '' ''
` Nought know I of any true love , Nor yet of any man  I 'll go into a cloister , And there become a nun . '
` And goest thou to a cloister , There to become a nun , I 'll fare the wide world over , Until to thee I come . '
And scarce three months were over , The earl 's stout heart did quail - He dreamed that his own sweetheart , His love , had ta'en the veil page : 82 Then spake he to his squire , ` Up , up , to horse and away !
We 'll fare throughout the wide world , There 's much to see by the way . '
And when he to the cloister came , So softly did he sing : ` Give me the youngest of the nuns , The one you last let in ! '
` No nun has been let in of late , Nor out may any fare . '
` Then I will set your house on fire , The Lord 's fair house of prayer . '
Then forth she stepped towards him , Clad in a snow-white gown - They had cut off her long hair , She was become a nun .
She bade the earl be welcome , All in the strange countree : ` Who asked ye to come hither ?
Who hath sent ye unto me ? '
The earl felt sore ashamed  Her speech aggrieved his soul , Till many hot tears gathered , And down his cheeks did roll .
She bade him drink , and offered him Red wine out of a glass  The glass it burst asunder , And his heart it broke , alas !
With her sweet lips like harpsichords , She tolled the funeral bell  And from her nut-brown eyes the tears The holy water fell . ''
page : 83 `` Mina , Mina , you 're like the nun - why two tears are running down your cheeks , and your eyes are brown too ! ''
cried Conrad , excitedly .
Mina gave a start as though suddenly recalled to herself and surroundings .
Six clear young eyes were peering inquisitively into her face .
She hastily brushed her hand across her burning cheeks and smiled  but the smile was a sorrier sight than the tears had been .
Where then had her thoughts been while her lips were repeating that queer but touching old ballad ?
Like the maiden in the song , she felt poor and forsaken , while he was a great and mighty man who had the whole world at his feet .
Where was he now ?
So near he had seemed who was now so far !
She knew not even what country he now abode in , but felt she would have gone the wide world over , in sooth , only to see his face once more  and then she felt ashamed of the idea , and wondered whether she too might not enter a convent .
People still went into cloisters , and why not she ?
But would she be able to pray all day as people did when they became nuns ?
and she raised her eyes to the sky .
There across the blue , blue sky the clouds , like shining puffed-out sails , went merrily drifting before the wind  and as she looked up her whole soul seemed to go out in the longing to be up and away - get away from this dull , monotonous round which all at once seemed to stifle her .
It seemed to her that if she could only go on , on , on , always on , that this strange new something - pain was it , or what ?
she hardly knew - would leave off hurting so .
But to stay there , to see the same things continually , things she had once loved - these trees that were like old playfellows , these hills page : 84 that knew her most secret thoughts , this brook that had sung to her ever since she could remember , it was somehow as though she must hide from them , as though they must know how estranged she had become from all and everything here .
Ah !
if her beautiful friend the Countess were only still here , Mina thought , she would understand , and perhaps - perhaps - ( her heart beat fast at the thought ) - perhaps find out where he now was in the world , and what he was doing  for that was all she really wanted , of course .
But , then , where was her friend ?
She did not know that either .
Was that the way of the world , then - that people crossed your path who spoke and looked as though they held you dear as the very apple of their eye , and then passed out of sight again and became mere phantoms ?
Mina 's sweet lips quivered and her head drooped low at the thought .
Yes , she had only once heard from the Countess since her departure , and that was very , very long ago now .
To Mina , who was still half a child at heart , a year seemed something interminably long , and the Countess had already been gone half that time .
It is true that so many new emotions had crowded in upon Mina of late that the image of her friend had been pushed into the background  but not forgotten - it was not in her nature to forget .
In her little chamber under the roof she had stored away hidden treasures that other people would have thrown away as rubbish .
All sorts of things that she had cared for once upon a time were religiously preserved there .
Here she kept an old pair of list slippers , very shabby , very much down at heels  but that somehow , together with a long pipe that page : 85 she had managed to regain , reminded her more than anything else of her father as he lived and moved among them  here , laid between two pressed vine-leaves , was a yellow , wavy lock of Elfrida 's hair  and a worm-eaten framed sampler worked by her grandmother in her youth , hung with other similar trifles amidst the ivy leaves .
`` Oh , Mina , Mina ! ''
cried Lulu , who had been running about during the last few minutes , picking dandelion puffs  `` Mina , I 've found the ring in the grass ! ''
and she came bounding towards her sister , holding something in her little fat fingers that seemed to emit sparks and flashes of light as she ran .
Mina started to her feet .
The boys gathered round , crying in a sceptical tone , `` A ring , Lulu ? ''
But when Conrad fairly caught sight of the thing , he said in rather an awestruck tone , `` Why it 's the earl 's ring ! ''
`` The earl 's ring ! ''
repeated Otto , and was going to snatch it , but that Mina put him gently aside , saying in a coaxing voice , `` Lulu will give it to sister , wo n't she ? ''
Lulu did not seem at all sure of that , however .
She resolutely kept hold of the ring , saying , `` Lulu 's ring now she found it . ''
`` But I will give you two great big rings of real gingerbread for this which you ca n't eat , '' said Mina .
Lulu pricked up her ears at this .
The temptation was great .
This ring could clearly not be eaten , she saw , as she inspected it with her head on one side considering the offer . ''
'T is only gold , Mina , '' she said  `` I like gingerbread best !
And she gave her sister the ring , who took it page : 86 wondering How could it have come there ?
To whom did it belong ?
And as she asked herself the question her thoughts at once reverted to the magnificent woman of whom all things bright , costly , and beautiful , had seemed but an appendage .
`` Fräulein Mina , here 's a letter for you from foreign parts , here is , '' cried the servant , holding a thin , blue-looking one with a large black seal in her sodden hands .
Mina 's heart fairly seemed to leap in her bosom and then to be dead still .
She turned red , and then white as chalk , and her hand trembled so she could hardly reach it out for the letter .
`` Mina 's sick ! ''
cried Conrad .
`` Perhaps it 's a witch 's ring , Mina , and will make you die as Schneewittchen does , you know .
I 'll go and tell mother of it . ''
`` Foolish boy ! ''
said Mina , making a strong effort to recover her usual manner , and smiling at him  `` I 'm quite well , and if you 'll go and play quietly by the hedge there till dinner-time , you shall have rings of gingerbread all three to-morrow . ''
They skipped off joyously , and Mina was at last left alone with her letter .
But she had to steady herself against the trunk of the tree  she seemed to have grown so weak all of a sudden .
When she was sufficiently recovered to look steadily at the handwriting , a curious change took place in her manner .
She seemed to be both relieved and disappointed , pleased and sorry , as she carefully undid the letter .
Glancing hastily over its contents , she murmured , `` How foolish I was to think she had forgotten me , and she in such trouble , nursing her dying husband .
Oh how sorry I am !
If I could only go to her and page : 87 comfort her a little , now that she is in such grief , my poor beautiful friend !
Perhaps she will come back again by and by , but she does n't say so .
At any rate I can send back this ring , now that I know her address .
I am sure it must be hers , and I will tell her - - '' `` Mina , Mina , the dinner 's ready and mother 's angry ! ''
shouted the children , as they tore down the garden path towards the house , followed by their sister , who , by way of keeping it safe for the present , put the ring on her finger .
page : [ 88 ] CHAPTER XXXIV .
REJECTED AND ACCEPTED .
`` WELL , child , if you feel that you 'll be better at home , you may stay , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld , in a gentler voice than usual , as she arranged a pillow for Mina on the hard damask sofa ( a luxury she would have sternly reprobated on ordinary occasions ) , `` for I will say you do look quite poorly to-day , and so I must tell our good Frau Obertribunalprocurator , for she will be sadly disappointed at your not coming - such a favourite as you are of hers .
But still , I will say , though you do n't look yourself , and had better go to sleep this afternoon , that I disapprove of these moping ways , these hangings of the head , this drooping and languishing just like a doll with half the sawdust dropped out of her .
There 's ways and ways , as I 've told you over and over again , Mina , and though you do what you 're bid , you do it in a contrary spirit  and I believe , I do , that it 's all wilfulness makes you get so white and thin of late - page : 89 wilfulness and that way you have of sitting up of nights ( I know your tricks ) , star-gazing or what not , for I take good care you have no more candle to waste than is enough to undress by . ''
Frau Lichtenfeld had by this time worked herself up to such a pitch that her voice had risen to its normal shrillness again as she continued in aggrieved tones : `` And as I was saying only yesterday to Frau Scherer at the marketing - and a better market-woman than myself that worthy lady said she would take her oath upon never yet drew breath , for my whole winter 's supply of cabbages for pickling and preserving just cost me - what do you think now ?
But I forget , you care about the price of cabbages no more than the babe unborn , though what you are to do when you have a house of your own and lots of children , with little money and less discretion , is quite past my comprehension .
All I know is , when it 's too late you 'll begin to think of your poor mother 's words - Elise Lichtenfeld ` geborene ' Duttenhofer , late widow of the highly respected , universally lamented , Professor Lichtenfeld , as good a wife , mother , and Hausfrau as it ever pleased God to remove from the bosom of a bereaved family - which I hope may be put on my tombstone , for I like things done decently , though without extravagance .
But as I was saying - yes , let me see , as I was saying to Frau Scherer , not enough that a poor widow like me has six children to look after and settle in life  but you , the eldest , must now take to ailing and pale cheeks ( just when everybody , too , had taken to praising the fine colour you had ) , as if I did n't provide you with plenty of wholesome food and wholesome advice page : 90 into the bargain .
Ah , if only my father , the Medicinalrath ( peace be with his memory ) , had not been removed to a better world , he would have set you to rights whether you liked it or not  and now that I think of it , he would no doubt have prescribed your rising at five every morning and walking to Mülhheim 's Farm to drink molken .
That 's what you 'd better do - though perhaps it 's rather too late in the year .
Well , we 'll see  I 'll ask the Frau Obertribunalprocurator 's advice .
Why , dear me , child , if that is n't four o'clock striking  but that 's always the way - you will keep me talking , Mina , just when you know I ought to be going out . ''
With this final home-thrust the Frau Professorinn wound up her eloquent monologue one afternoon about a fortnight since the finding of the opal ring had thrown the whole family Lichtenfeld into a state of wild commotion .
This had only been allayed when , after much anxious consultation and precautions innumerable , it had been despatched to the Countess , together with a letter from Mina in answer to the one recently received by her .
Poor Mina , who had patiently waited till the irresistible flow of words should have spent itself , nevertheless expressed her concern at the delay she had occasioned her mother , who , kissing her brow , bade her , with renewed gentleness of tone , get a little colour in her cheeks by her return , and then went off hunting for Lulu , who had spent a happy half-hour peering and prying into all the pots and pans in the kitchen .
It was a wild , cloudy afternoon on which Mina was thus left alone , and in her honour a fire had been lit for the first time in the huge white porcelain stove page : 91 which occupied a large part of one side of the room , and where , if the flames Were unseen , you could now hear them crackling and sputtering amidst the damp wood .
It was unusually quiet in the house , and yet Mina could not go to sleep , but lay restlessly twisting and tossing about , when a knock at the door made her suddenly start to her feet .
Before she had even time to smooth her ruffled hair a little , Sabina , with a broad grin , announced Lieutenant Knapp , who , in his smart blue uniform with white facings , halted midway in the room - as though waiting for the word of command - and looked the picture of blushing misery , as he stammered something about `` Very sorry - Frau Professorinn - hoped to have the felicity - - '' and then collapsed entirely  and for all that he was a soldier , looked uncommonly as though he would like to turn tail and beat a retreat .
`` What could he want with her ? ''
thought the astonished Mina , as , taking pity on his evident embarrassment , she begged him to be seated .
And then , as he persistently went on getting redder and redder in the face , and did not hazard a single remark , while his eyes seemed rooted to the floor , she kindly asked after his family with a view to putting him at his ease .
The poor lieutenant , who was afflicted with a slight stutter when anything made him nervous , now said something in rather disjointed fashion about having come to invite her mother and herself and the rest of the family to the vintage festivities that were to be held at his aunt 's vineyard that day week , when a grand display of fireworks and a dance were to wind up the proceedings .
page : 92 While enumerating these manifold attractions the the young man - in his eagerness to put everything in the rosiest light - gradually regained some portion of his soldierly self-possession , and at last , ending with quite a flourish , he ventured to raise his round , rather prominent blue eyes to Mina 's face , as he expressed a hope that she would grace the festival with her presence .
But Mina , who felt in no mood for any gaieties whatever , replied that she could of course make no engagements in her mother 's absence .
`` Oh , my dear Fräulein Mina , I hope you will persuade your honoured Frau Mamma to come to us , '' cried the lieutenant , who , now that he had once faced the enemy , was losing his nervousness .
`` Indeed , I will call again myself and convince her that we can not possibly do without you , Fräulein Mina - indeed we can not !
Why , it would go off as flat as - as - champagne without the foam to it , if we were to miss your clear laugh and - - '' He was going to say `` your bright eyes , '' but the idea of daring to speak of her eyes to her so overcame him that he felt a sensation like pins and needles all over him  and when he further reflected that here was his chance now - the chance he had so often and so ardently desired , it was like being rubbed over with pepper into the bargain .
For although possibly - as the German song has it - neither fire nor coals burn half as fiercely as secret love of which no one knows aught , yet what was that in comparison to boldly facing the fire in the shape of a maiden sitting before one with two clear , shining eyes , the look of which went straight to a fellow 's heart somehow !
page : 93 And so his secret popped out of him , just as a gun will go off when a man 's hand shakes a bit in its handling .
Something in the droop of the rosebud mouth did it before he well knew what he was about .
He had risen to his feet now , and was standing in front of her , his left hand nervously fumbling with the sword handle .
There was no mistaking his honest , manly tones as he told the love he had long felt for her in secret , and offering her his hand and heart asked beseechingly if she could love him a little , ever so little , in return .
Mina was as startled as if a loaded gun had indeed gone off close to her ear .
She said piteously : `` No , no , pray do n't !
I ca n't help it , indeed I ca n't - but I do n't - - '' and she looked as wretched as if he had taxed her with some dreadful crime in declaring his love for her .
`` But will you not think of it a little while before you answer me ? ''
pleaded the poor lover .
`` You are still so young , Fräulein Mina  I have startled you , like a fool , with my brusque proposal .
Take time , take time - only say , '' continued he , emphasizing the only , `` you will take time to consider it . ''
Mina shook her head sorrowfully , but only too decisively , and holding out her hand to her rejected suitor , said , in a voice as if she were trying to exculpate herself : `` I am so sorry - so sorry .
What can I ever have done to make you care for me , Lieutenant Knapp  but forgive me if I have , for I - I can not - - '' and although the word `` love you '' stuck in her throat , there could be no mistaking the distinct meaning her tone conveyed this time .
The young lieutenant , looking at her yearningly , said : page : 94 `` Tell me , tell me , is there some one else more fortunate whom I can never hope to take the place of ? ''
Mina , startled at the question , coloured violently , and made some gesture of denial  but though she seemed to be saying something , her voice now was so faint that it was impossible for her suitor to guess at her meaning .
Although this could scarcely be called an answer , even the leaden-witted young lieutenant comprehended with a lover 's intuitive perception that there was some insuperable obstacle in the girl 's mind to the realization of his dearest wish  and turning very white , he seemed to be trying to swallow something which his military stock prevented from going down .
Then pressing Mina 's hand with an air of the most submissive respect , he merely added , `` Ah , please do n't grieve for me , '' and went off like a criminal just sentenced .
Mina , when she heard the outer door shut , burst into tears .
She did not at all plume herself on her conquest , or feel any of that glow of satisfied vanity so natural to the feminine breast .
What troubled her was the idea that she might , and yet she knew not how , be in some way responsible for his having fallen in love with her  and then , as she pictured to herself this man 's hopes and dreams all shattered in an instant like a child 's house of cards , she felt a subtle pang , perhaps not entirely due to sympathy with his disappointment .
By and by she dried her eyes and walked to the window , which was at the back looking on to the garden , and pressed her forehead against the cold panes of glass , as though it were hot and aching .
As she moved across the room she seemed to have grown taller within these last few months  her very eyes seemed to page : 95 have increased in size , that being due to her face having grown so much thinner and paler than it used to be  its expression too had greatly altered .
She stood there for a long time , with a strained yearning in her eyes , looking out towards the dim horizon .
The autumnal wind , fitfully rising and ebbing amongst the many-folded windings of the hills - moaned now far off with sounds as piteous as the bleating of strayed lambs , then again with howls as of a pack of wolves - went rushing across country , smiting the fruit-tree tops till their lashed and tossing branches seemed to yell again .
Mina , in a half-conscious sort of way , felt an answering thrill to these forlorn , plaintive sounds , though scarcely distinctly realizing what was passing in the depths of her pure , yet passionate nature .
A look - a tone - a kindling smile - a broken sentence or two - a pressure of the hand - things transitory as the tints of a sunset that glorify the heavens and then vanish as though they had never been !
Ephemeral nothings if you try to fix them in language , but which by anticipation , may constitute a universe of subtle joy , or throw a whole innocent existence into confusion and entanglement .
Mina , in a wistful kind of abstraction , stood watching the yellow and rust-coloured leaves , scampering in all directions whenever a windy gust , flapping down among the creaking boughs , stripped them and rocked them to and fro .
Myriads of leaves , as if endowed with a ghostly life of their own , went fluttering from their stems , soaring away high and yet higher , and circled in the currents of upper air , till they abruptly dropped with a dry , sepulchral sound , and lay on the discoloured page : 96 grass in melancholy heaps and patches , like blighted hopes and joys turned to pain .
What !
were her hopes and joys already withered ere youth itself was gone ?
Or what meant that clinging sense of desolation and loss - that something that had taken the joy out of her joys , and planted a sting there instead - so that she never felt glad in the morning that a new day had begun  but did what she had to do in a spiritless , perfunctory fashion , wishing all the while for night and sleep .
All at once , as she stood there alone and comfortless - looking out on this drear , autumnal scene , her heart gave a great bound and then seemed to cease beating .
Whose was the step , that footstep with the music in it , that had struck on her ear ?
Fool that she was , she could scarcely bear to turn round for fear of destroying this illusion .
Very slowly , almost like one afraid , she turned her head just a little .
No , it was no illusion !
It was he indeed who had just entered the room  and what a contrast to the awkward , stuttering , florid-looking young lieutenant who had stood on almost the identical spot scarcely an hour ago , was this tall , self-possessed man , with the spiritual yet piercing glance , the sensitive , expressive hands , and that undefinable enchantment of look and manner sometimes an attribute of genius .
For a moment Emanuel lingered on the threshold , then impulsively stretching out both his arms , he strode towards her - for she seemed rooted to the spot  and while his pale , keen features were suffused and kindling with delight , he sighed rather than said , `` My child , my sweet child , '' as he gently took her hands in his .
page : 97 Mina for the moment had lost all power of speech .
Instinctively she recoiled a step or two , and tried to disengage her hands .
There was something scared , almost frightened , in her expression , as of a stag at bay .
For the tumultuous throbbing of her heart at sight of this man , who disappeared , reappeared , and might disappear again ignis fatuus like , flashed on her the full truth of her utterly helpless love so forcibly , that she , poor child , could almost have gasped for breath , like an inexperienced swimmer who , for the first time out of his depth , feels that he must now float or sink irretrievably .
This scared look , this altered expression of her pale face , the imperceptible shrinking when he had seized her hands in his , did not escape Emanuel , who felt a cold shudder run through him as he thought that she might have heard all .
But no , it could not be that Sontheim had been false to his word , and betrayed his secret .
He looked at her silently , with a yearning tenderness that Mina felt even to the tips of her fingers  then he said very , very softly , `` Mina !
ah , do you know , do you guess how I love you , Mina ? ''
Then pressing her hands against his breast , he continued in a more and more eager and impassioned voice , `` Do you know that I have loved you since the day I saw you in the wood , with those dear hands outstretched as in supplication .
Yes , Mina , dearest girl , I shall always associate you in my thoughts with that delicious day in April , full of the blossoming of flowers and the singing of birds , when , after many years of wandering , I revisited my birthplace , and found there what I seemed to have searched for in vain throughout the page : 98 world .
Ah , beloved !
since that day you have never been absent from my heart .
Say , say , why do you look so wistfully at me ? ''
cried he , as with anxious fondness he gazed down into her limpid eyes , where tears and smiles seemed contending for mastery .
`` Many times the avowal of my love for you trembled on my lips , but - but - - '' He broke off abruptly , and after a pause almost humbly continued , `` Ah , you do not know yourself as I know you  you do not know in your innocence what a jewel beyond price is a heart like yours  but I , Mina , I who know , feel like a thief almost in that I seek it !
Yet without it , without you , this world , with all it can give of praise and pleasure , and fame and fortune , is but as a barren waste and a wilderness of thorns to me .
Oh , I was so old , my child , old , and sick , and weary , till your sacred youth renewed my spirit as with the very dew of dawn .
Yes , when I looked into your sunny eyes all the evil spirits by which I was once possessed seemed to be exorcised .
You have given me a new life , a life that shall be devoted to your service , if you will let me .
But oh , speak , tell me my sweet joy , do you love me a little too ?
Will you be mine , my very own , my dear love , my wife , Mina ? ''
Was it not well to have suffered those pangs of heartsickness , that aching void , to be thus warmed and penetrated through and through with such deep , sweet , unutterable bliss !
Mina could make no answer  weeping for joy , she fell upon his breast and hid her glowing face there .
And when she gently freed herself from his arms , they stood almost breathless , holding each other 's hands , and looked at each other , minutes , hours , ages , it might have been - for the heart dates by emotions , not years .
page : [ 99 ] CHAPTER XXXV .
FRAU LICHTENFELD ON MATRIMONY .
THAT was a proud day for Frau Professorinn Lichtenfeld when , arrayed in her brown brocade and best bonnet , she paid a series of informal calls on every neighbour , gossip , and acquaintance , that lived at all within walking distance , to inform them first in a loud whisper - as if imparting a state secret , of the engagement of her daughter Mina to the great virtuoso , Emanuel Sturm  and immediately afterwards , without further reticence or mystery whatever , giving a long history of every minutest occurrence that had led thereto from the very beginning of the acquaintanceship .
Nor did she fail on any of these occasions to wind up her account with a description of this great man carrying Lulu home pick-a-back fashion , the first day that she had ever set eyes on him  and how from that minute she had foreseen the whole case , and what would come to pass , as clearly as if she had been a born fortune-teller .
page : 100 These private and particular confidences in the ears of some dozen or so of women , were , indeed , the sole outlet for the good woman 's bursting sensations on this occasion .
For say what she would she found her future son-in-law sternly opposed to the German custom of a betrothal ceremony , to which relatives and friends are officially invited , and liberally supplied with wine and every description of fancy-cake .
When Mina 's mother proposed the performance of this rite to Emanuel , on the first occasion of his dining there en famille after his engagement , he fairly jumped off his seat , and cried with whimsical horror - `` No , no , my dear , kind , good lady , ask anything in the world of me for the gift of such a daughter , but not that - that would drive me distracted ! ''
Then turning to Mina , with an infusion of sly mischief in his tone , he said : `` Unless , indeed , my lady fair should expressly state that such were her gracious wishes and commands : for should I not have to let myself be flayed alive if she so ordered it ? ''
Mina blushed - she had a terrible trick of blushing , especially when as now so many pairs of inquisitive eyes were all fixed on her  the very servant even , as she cleared away the soup-tureen and put the hot roast goose , stuffed with chesnuts , on the table , giving her a wink on the sly , as much as to say that she knew all about it , bless her heart .
Luckily for her self-possession , the carving of that succulent bird just then began to engross all Frau Lichtenfeld 's attention  and the boys , too , while intently watching that cunning operation , were for the moment diverted from their efforts at fathoming in what the manners and customs of an page : 101 engaged sister differed from one not engaged .
Indeed , Wolfgang seemed to expect some outward visible transformation to take place in a person under such circumstances , and to be eagerly on the watch for it .
But at any rate , Mina , relieved for the moment from so much oppressive attention , ventured to look at Emanuel as she replied in so low a voice that it escaped her mother 's notice - `` Indeed , I would so much rather not have any one invited - it makes me tremble to think of it .
But you .
will come with me to grandmother 's very soon , wo n't you ?
I want so much to tell her myself , and you to be there too , for I know how fond she is of you .
Often and often has she talked to me about you , and the strange things you said and did as a boy , when I never thought that - - '' but here she faltered in embarrassment , for although she could talk fluently enough when at her ease , her position was still so new , so overwhelmingly new , happy and wonderful , that it was only when left alone with her lover that she occasionally became her genuine self , and forgetting her shyness , broke into spontaneous confidences , affording sudden glimpses into her exquisite nature .
Presently all that remained of the substantial goose - which for some weeks past had been assiduously fed and fattened by Frau Lichtenfeld 's own hands - was a little heap of picked and polished bones  and these being removed made way for a smoking pile of `` Dampfnudeln '' and stewed pears , which elicited a simultaneous `` Oh '' of admiration from Lulu and Otto .
For the good widow , although a strict economist , was by no means miserly , but prided herself on the excellence of page : 102 her fare - superintended and often prepared by her own hands - especially when as now she entertained a guest at her table .
After having liberally helped every one all round , and aimed a sly dart at her eldest daughter to the effect that , for her part , she did not see why people should slight good victuals , when they had only the trouble to lift the knife and fork to their lips and swallow them , she once more began her attack on her future son-in-law : first of all , however , complimenting him on his splendid appetite , which she averred she had seldom seen equalled - she having three times helped him to goose .
`` Why , such fare as you have placed before me , '' said Emanuel , laughingly , `` would make a dying man 's mouth water  and you have just hit on one of my favourite dishes , too .
The goose is a glorious bird , and I think , considering its manifold services to mankind - from saving the Capitol , to furnishing him with the means of immortality - he deserves to have his praises chanted as well as any nightingale or lark amongst them .
For the matter of that , dear Frau Lichtenfeld , I must really , after partaking of this goose of yours , exhale my satisfaction in a Rondo or Caprice , or something of that sort . ''
The widow , highly gratified with the compliment to her cookery , now suggested that something neat in the way of cards should at once be printed and sent to their acquaintances , by way of informing them of the engagement .
But to this Emanuel showed himself equally averse  indeed , if he could he would have kept his engagement a family secret till the wedding-day itself , but with such a tongue as Frau Lichtenfeld 's that was page : 103 a simple impossibility .
And he had to submit with such stoicism as he could muster to the infliction of furnishing for the present the most exciting topic of conversation to the inhabitants of the town .
However , Frau Lichtenfeld found some compensation in reflecting that the wedding-day had been fixed for some day before the close of the old year  and the delicious preoccupation with Mina 's outfit , from the ribbons of her best Sunday bonnet , to the buckles on her house-shoes , threw all less-engrossing subjects of consideration into the background .
Even her daughter 's somewhat lukewarm interest in a matter so weighty as the trimming of her black silk dress with gimp , or frills of its own material , did not damp her enthusiasm .
With a huge bunch of keys jingling at her side , and Lulu as usual hanging on to her apron-strings , she stood one morning before the old worm-eaten walnut press on the landing - a solid piece of furniture , and her particular pride , as having been in the family of the Duttenhofers long before the Lichtenfelds had probably either a local habitation or a name .
This press ( not devoid of a certain mustiness of smell , as became a very venerable piece of furniture ) she now unlocked , and as she pulled out shelf after shelf , the goodly stores of sheets , towels , table-cloths , napkins , and underclothing of every description , seemed to indicate an unexpected degree of wealth .
For Frau Lichtenfeld 's weak side - the one extravagance which she secretly indulged in - was to have a great store of fine linen , enough to last the whole family for a good three months at least without so much as the need of a pocket handkerchief having to be washed .
Here now were a dozen chemises , tied together with page : 104 a narrow pink silk ribbon , which she had put by for Mina 's trousseau when the latter was still toddling about in short frocks .
But her chief subject of pride were half a dozen batiste handkerchiefs - now of a deep yellow tone from age - with a delicate embroidery of flowers for a border , which she had had for her own outfit , but always shirked using as being altogether too exquisite in texture for her station in life .
As she fingered them now , however , she was revolving in her mind whether they would not be the very thing for the wife of such a very great musician - one who was actually going to a reception at the Grand Duke 's , and seemed hail-brother-well-met with his highness 's whole family .
Yes , that thought decided her , and she took the handkerchiefs but of their covering of soft tissue paper , resolving , not without some natural regrets , to pick out her own initials and substitute her daughter 's instead .
While thus busily overhauling her treasures of linen , the door of the landing opened with a ring , and Frau Scherer and Fräulein von Griesbach - burning for further details of everything concerning the grand match her daughter was about to make - came unannounced on Frau Lichtenfeld .
`` Ah , my dear Frau Professorinn , '' cried Frau Scherer , looking admiringly at the well-filled press , `` we can imagine why you are pulling out this goodly store of linen !
And pray where is your sweet child - I am dying to congratulate her and to see how the ` brautstand ' becomes her . ''
`` Yes , '' Fräulein von Griesbach chimed in , `` I confess to a little curiosity on that point myself , though I am page : 105 not given to curiosity as a rule  but indeed it seems but yesterday , honoured Frau Professorinn - does it not ?
- that our Mina might almost have been considered as somewhat of a hoyden - if I might venture to say so - hardly quite mature , quite discreet enough , for the serious responsibilities involved by married life . ''
`` Ah , my dear high-born Fräulein , to be sure Mina is scarcely yet out of the tadpole stage , but that 's a fault will mend with time , never fear  and men are so odd in their notions , you know , that they take up with raw girls like that when , but for the asking , they might have women of the maturest mien and manners . ''
`` But where , in the meanwhile , is the dear love herself , Frau Professorinn ? ''
interposed Frau Scherer , `` that I may hasten to embrace her  for I assure you I have thought of nothing else since I heard of it - that 's the fact .
To think that such celebrity , a man who goes into the highest circles , and so genteel-looking too ( between ourselves , but for heaven 's sake let it go no farther , my dear Frau Lichtenfeld , I am told that Princess Stephanie is almost off her head about him - quite a second Leonora , they say )  and to think that he should have picked out our Minchen , of all girls , it 's amazing , truly !
But as - dear , dear , who was it now ?
Let me see - no - yes - I think it is Goethe who says , that in love it 's all a lottery as to who shall draw the great prize and who the blank - is n't it , now ? ''
`` Well , well , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld , `` as far as my experience goes , you 're not very far out there , Frau Scherer .
If a housewife now were to buy her pig or potatoes with as little care and forethought as people page : 106 bestow on the choosing of partners , why , she 'd be sold and swindled right and left  and serve her right , too , for a lazy slut .
But that 's what I say , all the care and prudence in the world might n't answer better in the long run after all than this startling , buzzy like style of dashing into matrimony  and once we 're caught in the scrape , why we must make the best of it , as I tell Mina - though for aught she heeds or hears , I might as well be dumb and she deaf , I tell her .
But there , the sky hangs full of fiddles for her as yet  still , something may stick in the end and turn up when wanted , I hope  for that I will say , I 've never spared either myself or my words when it 's been for the good of my children , though it 's little thanks you ever get from them , Fräulein von Griesbach . ''
`` Oh yes , honoured Frau Professorinn , '' replied that lady , with a pulling up of the thin corners of her mouth , which did duty for a smile , `` I can quite believe , indeed I can , the fearful trouble your children must give you  and I never see those two boys , Wolfgang and Hans , tearing down the street , as if a mad dog were after them , but I feel that some dreadful calamity will overtake them one of these days , they look so wild , reckless , so - - '' `` No , no , my dear Fräulein , there you mistake , there you entirely mistake .
I warrant there 's not a better lad going , nor a more sensible , than my Wolf , though I say it who should n't , perhaps .
Boys will be boys , you know  but he 's a downright good , practical lad , with no nonsense in him , if you only get at the right side of him - the very image of his maternal grandfather , the Medicinalrath Duttenhofer . ''
page : 107 `` Dear , dear , do you say so ! ''
exclaimed Fräulein von Griesbach , with a lifting of her scant eyebrows .
`` Of course you know best , and I only remember your revered , highly-respected father when he attended my mother in her last illness  but I see not the faintest likeness to that truly able physician , with his shrewd , penetrating glance .
It rather seems , if I may venture to have an opinion in such a matter , that - - '' `` Oh , and how do you do , Frau Obertribunalprocurator ?
You find us all here in full conclave , you see  but I must really beg a thousand pardons for keeping you on the landing all this time , '' cried Frau Lichtenfeld , advancing to shake hands with the new arrival .
`` But then , it 's such a very cosy one , with this nice broad seat here , and those nasturtiums trained up the window , that I prefer it to any of the rooms , if I may venture to say so , especially when the sun shines in as pleasantly as now , '' said that portly , good-natured lady , sitting down beside the other visitors  and without further preliminaries she pulled a long stocking from the reticule which she carried , and began knitting vigorously .
`` And where 's the little pretty one ? ''
she asked  `` I 've expressly come to have a sight of her , as she does not deign to come near me ! ''
`` Yes , that 's what we 've all come for , '' put in Frau Scherer  `` but , bless you , we poor humdrum people are quite below the notice of Frau Emanuel Sturm that is to be !
She will have people of quite another sort to associate with now ! ''
`` But Herr Sturm is here just now , '' said Frau Lichtenfeld a little nervously , as she locked the press again  `` they are in the garden , I believe , and he page : 108 expects to monopolize her when he 's here , I can tell you , and glowers so if ever you go near to put in a sensible word or two about things .
But then , as I was saying to Therese only yesterday , there 's such an air about him , and he is so spoilt , that it 's best to let him have his way and not meddle with him .
But , bless me , great though they say he is , he 's more like a big child , for all I can see  wants everything on the instant he takes a thing in his head - for all the world like Otto  and if by any chance Mina should just be trying on a dress when he looks in , and he is kept waiting a little ( do my lord good , too , I say ! )
, you hear him calling her all over the house - ` Mina !
- Mina !
- Mina !
- are you going to keep me for ever , Mina ! '
- till it 's quite distracting-like .
But you must come into my room and see the presents he 's already been giving her , more fit for a princess than a girl of her station : such a cloak , trimmed with sable 's tails - would you believe it !
- to go travelling about with , for he is going to take her all over the world .
Think of that - not that there 's so much in travelling to my mind - - '' `` There I quite agree with you , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach .
`` I hold with the good old saw that says , ` Stay in thy country and earn thy bread honestly . '
These rolling stones gather no moss - - '' `` Just what I say , '' exclaimed Frau Lichtenfeld , without giving her friend time to finish - `` just what I say , my dear Fräulein , and the only time I ever left my birthplace was when Heinrich took me to Switzerland for our honeymoon  and , bless you , if we did n't get honey enough to eat and to spare too  everyday they gave it us for breakfast - would you believe ?
But I do n't page : 109 hold with such extravagance , and it was quite a trouble to me at that time that it is such sticky , dripping stuff , or I would have tucked it away in my pocket and brought it home with me .
And it 's past all belief the way they 'll charge you for candles in those hotels - robbers ' nests , I call them , that took every bit of pleasure clean away for my part : the only comfort was that I brought quite five pounds of candles away with me , and sugar enough to last me for half a year .
But as to those mountains now , and those horrible breakneck paths that Heinrich took me along , why , I flatly told him at the time I thought he had taken me there to murder me outright !
Herr Jesus , they made your head spin round like a top to look down some of them .
There was just one pretty thing that I saw though - yes , I remember it as if it had been yesterday  such a fresh green meadow as it was - at Andermatt , that was the name - so sweet , too , after that frightful St. Gotthardt , and I at once said to Heinrich , ` Oh , what a capital bleaching-ground that would make , would n't it ?
If only we could take it home with us ! '
But he had no sense , poor man , as I then discovered , and only laughed like a ninny .
Well , but as I was saying - as soon as he can get hold of her he 'll spend every hour in that back garden with her , or in the fields behind it . ''
`` Severe masters have short reigns , '' said Fräulein von Griesbach , in a half-aside  and then in a louder voice she asked insinuatingly , `` and do you think it quite prudent to let them be so much alone together , honoured Frau Professorinn ?
Well , and what does your brother say to the match , Frau Scherer ?
As her godfather and nearest male protector he ought to page : 110 have been the first to have been consulted , I should have thought . ''
`` I hope he may have got my letter with the news , '' answered Frau Scherer  `` but you know '' ( looking about her very cautiously and sinking her voice almost to a whisper ) `` he is so full of secrets and mysteries of late - I only hope no harm may come of it - and he 's been in twenty places at once , it seems , and even I , his own flesh and blood , have n't known half the time where to write to him  though he 's been last heard of at Frankfort .
But , indeed  't is strange the change that 's come over him of late . ''
`` Such a friendly and amusing man as he always was , '' sighed Fräulein von Griesbach  `` why , he might have made you laugh in the face of the toothache itself . ''
They say talk of the d - - and he is sure to appear .
Scarcely had the absent Professor 's name been mentioned than the door opened again , and , behold , in walked that individual in person with the indispensable pipe in his mouth .
Frau Scherer threw up her hands in astonishment , and all the ladies were not a little surprised at this unexpected visitor .
`` Why , Leopold , you have never come straight here after your journey ? ''
said his sister , looking at his dusty boots and that general air of unwashed and unshorn griminess which a long night-journey usually gives to a person .
Her brother grunted something without directly replying , and after shaking hands with her and the other ladies , asked abruptly whether Herr Sturm happened perhaps to be about the premises just then .
page : 111 The widow thought to herself that she had always considered him a bear , but not quite such an icy one  and Frau Scherer in vain tried , by means of significant winks and signs and nudges , to remind him of the fact that he had not addressed a word of congratulation or otherwise to their friend  but Fräulein von Griesbach gave a kind of a sniff as though she scented some mischief afar off , such as in her wisdom she had always predicted .
All these different signs , however , were lost upon Sontheim , who only repeated his query rather more gruffly than before .
page : [ 112 ] CHAPTER XXXVI .
THE APPLE OF YOUTH .
EARLY on the morning of that same day , soon after the event which had made Mina the happiest girl in the best of all possible worlds , she had gone down to the garden to wait for her lover .
And what joy in life was comparable to the thrill of that anticipated rapture !
As she was slowly pacing up down the path , with the dead leaves rustling under her light tread , and the morning dew like a fine silver spray dashed all along the grass , she wondered within herself whether she had ever really lived before now  whether she could ever grow worthy of this great bliss which made the heaven bluer , and added a lustre to the very sun himself .
Mina 's happiness humbled her .
It seemed so little she had to give in return for these splendid gifts of intellect and genius which the famous musician lavished upon her .
For must not innocence remain an eternal mystery to itself , or cease to be such ?
page : 113 Unconscious of herself , lost in ecstatic contemplation of him she loved , Mina resembled those Hindoo devotees whose personality is entirely absorbed in the light of deity .
She was bewildered with delight at the thought of passing a long life at this beloved man 's side .
Indeed , the emotion which his presence caused her was almost oppressive in its intensity  but now he was not here she could freely yield herself up to the full tide of her love .
She could picture his form , and that trick of the long , nervous fingers dashing back his rebellious hair , and the sudden sunlight of the smile when he looked at her , and every lingering inflection of that voice to which her pulses vibrated like the strings of his own violin .
And then how her heart beat as she heard his quick step , and saw him hurrying along with the eager hands that were always stretched out on catching sight of her .
`` Ah , sweetheart , '' he said , after holding her in a long embrace , `` I am glad I find you here  there is so much that I want to talk to you about and settle as to the future , you know . ''
And after imparting this information , he did nothing of the kind whatsoever .
Future , past , what were they but idle words - empty imaginings - unsubstantial shadows : was not the all in all of existence this golden now - this palpitating present in which they looked at each other in long-tranced silences , more eloquent than any speech - in which their fingers interwined intertwined - in which a sigh , a half-articulate word was overfull of the heart 's desire  but their lips only rarely met - Mina had wept so sorely the first time her lover had kissed her .
page : 114 By and by they went and sat down on a garden seat under the pear-tree in the shadow of the house .
Around about , on the trees , in the grass , there was a red-golden glimmer of leaves , for the rich yet subdued glow of the autumnal sun was steeping hills and fields and every nestling dell and corner in a somnolent splendour , in which the earth seemed almost to hold her breath for a space lest she should break the spell , and the whole gorgeous fabric suddenly crumble into dust and ashes .
There was absolute stillness , only at intervals might be heard the thump of a late over-ripe pear as it fell bursting on the grass .
Yet , though there was no wind , long shining threads of fairy gossamer went continually floating up through the clear air higher and higher , some getting enmeshed about the twigs , and branches , while the thin cloud-strips in the sky above looked only like a closer web of the same ethereal texture .
`` The people about here , '' said Mina , as Emanuel was playfully extracting one of these wandering films that had got tangled in her hair , `` call these threads ` Muttergottesgarn ' - Mother of God 's yarn , which she spun for the baby-linen of the infant Jesus , and they believe that every year at this season some of the superfluous threads are blown about in commemoration of this blessed event . ''
`` Why the people about here , '' remarked Emanuel , smiling , `` might furnish a whole bevy of poets with fancies and quaint conceits - at least to judge from all the pretty things you tell me , sweetest  but as to that , we musicians too might catch many an inspiration page : 115 from the beautiful , sad cadences of the folk-songs here .
Why , yesterday evening I actually followed a small knot of vintagers far into the country , they had such fine voices , and were singing in capital time too .
One of the songs was quite new to me  I can only remember a few words , however , but they were as beautiful as the tune itself  '' and he sang - '' ` Say , Kathleen dear , what comfort for my sighs . ' ''
`` Oh , '' cried Mina , vivaciously , `` I know it well , it is one of Hebel 's poems  they are sometimes rather obscure because of the Alemmanic dialect , but I understand it a little .
This is how it goes - is it not touching ?
- '' ` Say , Kathleen dear , what comfort for my sighs Is in pied flowers , or bees with honeyed thighs ?
Wert thou but kind , if in the deepest shaft - Where never bee yet hummed , or flow ` ret laughed - And thou with me , I were in Paradise . ' ''
`` Why , darling !
said Emanuel , fondly , `` that little head of yours is quite a treasure-house of folk-songs and sayings .
What a memory you must have ! ''
`` Oh no , '' said Mina , `` mother says that I am the most forgetful person alive  it is only because I love these songs and the people they spring from - like flowers , do n't you think ?
- that they stick to me so , just as the scent of the violets will cling to your hands long after you have put them away .
But tell me , will you really turn the song into one of your own beautiful melodies ? ''
`` After hearing it repeated by those sweet little lips of yours , it would be strange if it did n't turn into the page : 116 sweetest song I ever wrote .
You shall see if I do not make it worthy of the muse that inspired it . ''
`` Ah , '' said Mina , looking up with smiling awe , `` I do so wonder when I think how glorious melodies like that can ever be produced !
And then it has come into my head that you must be exactly like my ear Granny 's bees  for you know they get a little sip here and a little sip there , and then - who can tell how ?
- you find it all at once changed into cunningly-fashioned cells , full of the clear , golden honey .
And you too '' - she added , blushing - `` you too , I suppose , get hold of the sounds that are all about us  but how you build them up into those intricate harmonies that are such a labyrinth of tones , and yet with such perfect order in the plan - what a mystery that is to me ! ''
`` You sweet little speculative elf you , '' said Emanuel , fondly , `` it is not to you alone that the laws which govern what we choose to call the ` creation ' of works of art have been a puzzle  why it 's a stumbling-block to many of your philosophers , though they are much given to flatter themselves that if only they can invent big-sounding phrases enough , they 've clinched the matter satisfactorily .
`` But as to what art is - whether it is , according to Plato 's notion , the bodying forth of the archetype inherent in the soul  or the image or spectrum of the Cosmos mirrored in the mind with such superadded magic as there is in the reflection of a landscape in stilled waters  or yet a third something , an immaculate conception , a form begotten on the material universe by the brooding spirit of man - whether it is one , or none , or all of these mixed page : 117 together , I will not venture to say .
Theories are all very well , no doubt , but rather superfluous when you 're concerned with the arduous practice of art itself : such is my theory , at any rate - but then I 'm only a fiddler after all , and hardly know Aristotle from Plato , to my shame be it confessed . ''
`` But , '' interposed Mina quickly , flushing with pride , as not tolerating any abuse of her love , though it were by her lover himself - `` but you are such a very great genius !
And do you know what my father one day said that genius was like ?
I remember well , because I always had such a longing to see some one or other of those great men who had written the poems I loved , or the more heavenly music that makes one feel almost as though it gave one wings to fly away with like a bird !
And oh , if I had ever thought then that I was going - '' she whispered with naive , girlish enthusiasm .
Emanuel , taking the words out of her mouth , said , looking at her with deprecating tenderness : `` If you had ever thought that you were going to have such a good-for-nothing fellow saddled on you for life , perhaps you would have repented of your desire .
For I fear , Mina , we creatures of the fitful fancy are like those dazzling dragon-flies flashing through the air , which yet turn out commonplace enough when you 've caught them .
But what about your father , Mina ?
How I wish I had known him !
His image has taken such a hold of my imagination somehow .
You were going to tell me something he had said , sweetheart ! ''
`` But I do n't know that I am able to quite convey his meaning , '' answered Mina , doubtfully  `` perhaps you will laugh if I tell you .
He said he was sure the page : 118 squirrel mentioned in the ` Edda ' was a symbol of genius  for that it was the topmost thing flitting on the topmost bough of Yggdrasil , the tree of life , yet knew the secrets of the serpent secretly gnawing at its roots and the Norns ' decree as they watered them . ''
`` Not a bad definition , truly , '' said Emanuel , musingly  `` from him , too , I might have had an account of that wild , visionary northern mythology which I suspect might furnish some magnificent subjects for musical treatment .
There is that lovely myth of Balder , for example  , I only vaguely remember it , but how well its suggestive symbolism would lend itself to the composition of a symphony . ''
`` Oh , '' said Mina , `` that story from the ` Edda ' my father used to tell me , and that other one too , my favourite , about Iduna , the goddess whose eyes were as blue as the blossoming flax .
It was about her being the keeper of the apples which grew in Gladheim , where the glad gods lived who every day ate of these apples , the secret of their eternal youth .
But the giant Thiassi carried off Iduna , and when the gods could no longer get the apples they grew old and older , their beautiful locks turned grey , their brows got wrinkled , and the gladness that had dwelt in Gladheim forsook their eyes  and when the gods felt old age creeping through their veins they were ready to give up anything for the ransom of Iduna .
The poor gods !
Oh , it must be dreadful to grow old  and yet , '' she added , pondering , `` there 's grandmother - she is very , very old , you know - but she said when I told her this story once , that there was an apple which , if only we would eat thereof every day , would keep the heart 's eternal youth . ''
page : 119 `` Oh , what apple was that , sweet ? ''
said Emanuel , `` that I may see about getting some before age overtakes me quite . ''
Mina grew very red as she said , `` The love-apple , she called it  but , you know - I do n't think - she did n't mean exactly - - '' `` Yes , yes , she did mean exactly , '' said Emanuel , pressing Mina with a sudden impulse to his heart - and then looking round , as though suddenly recollecting himself and the eyes that might be peering at them .
`` Oh , '' he said , imitating Mina 's manner , `` you know it 's too dreadful to grow old - and I was growing very , very old , not quite blear-eyed , perhaps , but with the grey hairs coming like tares among the wheat , till my own Iduna here gave me to eat of the apple of love , and I grew young again - almost as young as herself  and will she see now , '' he said , boyishly flinging himself on the grass at her feet , `` whether the grey hairs have melted at her glance as snow in the sunshine ? ''
Then , with that swift transition of mood so characteristic of the man , he added with pathetic earnestness , raising his head and carrying Mina 's hand to his lips , `` Ah , my love , when I recall the frame of mind with which I came here , its desolation , its fierce unrest , the self-scorn eating into my heart  when I recall - - No , no , '' he said , as a sudden gloom clouded his features - `` let me not recall ... '' But what so swift , irrepressible , instantaneous , as thought ?
A sudden remembrance can cast its momentary chill over the sunniest hour .
For the memories of deeds done beyond recall do not , unfortunately , lie still as the dead in their quiet graves , but page : 120 rise , ghost-like and unnaturally vivid , when wrought-up emotion is at its highest tension .
Perhaps at the very time the spirit aspires to a new life that shall be purer and loftier than the old , conscience rears itself like a snake that is trodden on , and exacts atonement for wrong-doing long past .
Such returns of the conscience upon itself may torture like the touch of hot iron  and the nobler the nature was originally , the keener in proportion these pangs will probably be .
At that moment Emanuel felt a violent compunction , a strong prompting to reveal his whole past to Mina and let her be the arbitrator of his fate .
But , no !
an intolerable sense of shame withheld him , for with the finer susceptibilities awakened in him by her radiant purity of nature , he shrank at the thought of what , seen through her eyes , now appeared to him a defiled past , a past which she must never know , never suspect , never dream of .
Good heavens !
how could she ever understand ?
- and there was a sudden faltering as though he might yet bring dire anguish to this girl whose soul was opening out to him slowly as the wind-flower or morning glory opens to the sun .
And then he cursed himself for a fool .
There could come no harm to her now  she was safe enough .
Could he not give the girl all that women most desire in life , name and fame , and the dazzling rewards thereof ?
What if there were some things that could not bear being looked into by such eyes as hers : such there were in all men 's lives .
And he passed his hand impatiently across his brow as though he would have obliterated every impression of the past .
The sudden change in his expression had not escaped page : 121 Mina 's loving ken .
Without understanding its cause she too , with instinctive sympathy , felt a sudden clouding over of her happiness .
There came an unaccountable yearning over her to entreat his full confidence - to ask that whatever trouble might weigh on him , he would share with her : how far sweeter to divide his pains with him than even his pleasures !
But girlish timidity and awe got the better of her impulse .
Would he think she could understand him , young and inexperienced as she was ?
But in time he might see - love maketh very wise the heart .
Emanuel abruptly raised his eyes to Mina , seized both her hands in his , and placed them on his head , as though there might be purification in their touch .
The moment was past - the supreme moment when their two destinies hung upon the word that was never spoken !
page : [ 122 ] CHAPTER XXXVII .
EXPLANATIONS .
IT was at this moment that Leopold Sontheim , accompanied by Frau Lichtenfeld , stepped into the garden by the back-door  and though it was certainly not a hot day , he took out his bandannah handkerchief and wiped the perspiration several times off his broad forehead .
Half screened by the huge water-butt , the two stopped watching the unconscious lovers .
What a charming picture they made under the old pear-tree there , leaning towards each other with that love-light in their eyes , and the golden sunshine as it fell through the golden leaves making a glory of Mina 's hair  while Emanuel , who had now completely regained his usual buoyancy , was saying - `` But tell me , sweetheart , will you really like rushing about the world with me in this will-o ' - the-wisp fashion .
For you know , Mina , I mean to lug you about with me everywhere  and then , who knows , you may get homesick  these hills may come haunting your sleep - a page : 123 feeling I only experienced once while giving a concert , but that once was enough , for I came straight back here .
True , it may have been this fate here that drew me ! ''
he added , with a beaming smile at her .
`` But where you are it will be home ! ''
answered Mina , and then recurring to that poem of Hegel 's , she murmured in a low , moving voice - `` If in the deepest shaft - Where never bee yet hummed , or flow ` ret laughed - And thou with me , I were in Paradise . ''
At the thrilling sincerity of her accent and the intensity of the look , Emanuel felt a slight tremor creeping over his frame , and taking her head between both his hands he kissed her very reverently on the drooping eyelids .
The Professor beholding this uttered a suppressed oath or groan ( it was difficult for his companion to tell which ) , and she made sure now that the poor man was going out of his mind , as she had predicted with more or less emphasis for these six months past .
Should he , indeed , suddenly break out into raving madness , what a comfort to know that dear Herr Sturm was at hand !
While such were the thoughts rapidly passing through the widow 's mind Sontheim went forward , and brought his hand so heavily down on the musician 's shoulder that he turned round with a startled exclamation .
It felt like the detective 's grip who has secured his culprit .
`` Halloo , '' he cried , shaking the hand which he grasped off his shoulder , `` is it you , mein lieber !
Why you steal upon one like a thief in the night - and now I look at you , you have the guilty air of one too .
What page : 124 dark haunts have you been prowling in that you come back to your friends with such a scowl ?
But never mind , we will cheer you up - wo n't we , Mina ?
We will suffer no one to be wretched in our presence , you 'll see , Leopold , while we have such boundless happiness ourselves ! ''
His friend 's incredible coolness and self-possession so staggered Sontheim that he was at an utter loss for words .
He could do nothing but stare at him .
What !
- when with a word of his he could unmask him there and then as the false , unprincipled traitor he was !
What , when he knew that he had stolen this innocent girl 's heart under false pretences , and that her good name would be blasted , no doubt - he could stand there calm , smiling , utterly unmoved , till it was he himself who felt like the culprit !
Mina gazed at her kind old friend and godfather in silent bewilderment .
He had as yet addressed no word , taken no notice of her whatever : at such a time that seemed strange , unaccountable !
`` Well , '' said Emanuel , lightly , seeing that Sontheim still kept silent , with a heavy scowl on his brow which he could not or would not disguise - `` well , you might have said a word of congratulation to me under the circumstances , my friend - though in Mina 's case you may think it 's but a bad bargain at the best .
But come , I 'll go with you  no doubt you have some bad news preying on your mind . ''
Sontheim , with visible constraint , said a few lame words to Mina , which , whatever their purport , sounded rather like a condolence than a congratulation  and all the time he looked so painfully ill-at-ease that Emanuel page : 125 quickly picking up his round felt hat from the grass , whispered as he pressed Mina 's hands , `` I shall look in early to-morrow morning , darling  but now I must go and see what 's the matter with our bear ! ''
Sontheim looked furtively at Mina with a world of compassion in his eyes .
Should he ever again see her thus radiant with youth and happiness ?
or the next time they met , would she be like a rose which the storm has broken over-night ?
For though generally sanguine in his estimate of men and things , the Professor could not divest himself of an impression that this girl , with all her brightness , belonged to the class of tragic characters - to those , namely , who at the first violent collision of the heart with destiny founder like some goodly vessel striking on a hidden rock .
But he only grunted a scant good-bye as he went off with Emanuel , who turned quickly back at the street-door under pretence of having forgotten something .
It was only to say good-bye once more .
Sontheim was no sooner in the street than , unable to contain himself any longer , he burst out with - `` No , I could never have believed it !
I knew that you were as weak as water where women are concerned , but not - not that you were treacherous , dishonourable not , in short , that you were a - - '' `` Stop , '' cried Emanuel , passionately  `` do not utter words that even from his oldest friend a man can not calmly listen to .
Listen !
I should have written to you before taking the leap , no doubt  but how was one to let you know when no one could tell where the devil you were ?
and so in my impetuosity - but no matter now - I am free ! ''
page : 126 `` Free , '' repeated Sontheim , with a look of sudden terror , `` how free ? ''
`` Yes , yes , '' cried the other vehemently , `` you shall hear all about it man  but for heaven 's sake do n't look so scared .
Did n't I mean to tell you all about it before ever speaking to them !
But where were you ?
How was one to write to you ?
I heard something about revolutionary propaganda , secret conspiracy - heaven knows what !
Was it my fault that you were skulking in unknown taverns and cellars throughout Germany ? ''
Emanuel by this time had worked himself up into a fine passion , and from accused was turning accuser .
They had now reached Sontheim 's dwelling , who , unlocking the door of his study with rather an unsteady hand , entered with Emanuel .
Everything there were exactly as the Professor had left it , down to a nosegay of monthly roses shrivelled to a mere repulsive skeleton of its former self  only the dust lay thicker than ever on the confused litter of books and papers .
In spite of his painful anxiety Leopold Sontheim filled himself a fresh pipe , and divesting himself of his coat and boots , donned once again the cherished old dressing-gown and slippers .
`` Ah , '' said Emanuel , suppressing a smile , `` the old Adam still sticks to you , I see , in spite of everything  '' and he seated himself on the edge of the only chair that was not quite encumbered with books .
`` But you have not told me yet , '' said Sontheim - and his voice shook a little as his hand had done - `` how it happens that you are free . ''
`` Well , you shall hear all about it , if you will only page : 127 give me time , '' replied Emanuel , throwing some of the books on the floor .
`` On that terrible morning , Leopold , which neither of us can forget , I resolved on one thing once for all .
If I could not untie the accursed bonds , they should be cut asunder somehow .
`` As I walked from your house to the station , I hesitated between starting for Paris , St. Petersburgh , or Rome .
What was to be done had to be done quickly too .
I was due at the musical festival at Leipzig in August , and in Birmingham in September .
On my way a bright thought struck me .
I would seek out Raoul , who was somewhere in Italy : there is no one like him to help a fellow in trouble , you know  and with his endless resource - who could tell ?
- he might get me out of the toils again !
`` So I went straight off to Venice , where I heard he was , but he had left again  and I followed him to Mantua and Florence  and at last , after all , found him back in the old studio at Rome .
`` I confess to a queer sensation when I re-entered that well-known place again , which I had last seen - well , never mind .
`` And now , having found Raoul , I made a clean breast of it .
He is a trump , that fellow .
His advice was that we should hunt up the priest who had married me under the late Pope , ten years ago - the priest who had been so liberally bribed , you remember  and he begged me not to move in the matter at all , but to let him make the necessary inquiries .
`` He had quite lost sight of this priest for a long time now , and it tool him some days , therefore , to come upon his traces again .
As it happened , he and page : 128 Raoul himself would now be the only living witnesses of this marriage , as Margutta , the housekeeper , had died some years before .
`` One day my friend burst into the room , whistling his favourite air with such gusto , that I knew he was the bearer of some good intelligence to me before he had time to exclaim : ` Let me congratulate you , mon cher  you 're no more married than I am ! ''
`` How so ?
how so ? ''
cried the Professor , breathlessly .
`` Well , Sontheim , to make a long story short , that priest - then locked up in a convent for grievous disciplinary offences - had no more business to perform that ceremony than you yourself would have had .
For it seems , according to the laws of Rome , a marriage is invalid if not performed by the priest of the parish in which one of the parties is residing , or one endowed by him with the faculty , as the phrase is .
`` But this scamp of a priest , eager for his bribe you see , played us a trick which we should never have discovered had things gone differently  so what a model told Raoul years ago seems true enough - that for ten pauls you could get a priest to marry you to your own grandmother , only you must not meddle with the laws of succession afterwards .
`` Well , you see I am free !
You remember the letter you showed me that morning  I noted the address there given , and the mention of the Count 's gradual sinking , so I plucked up heart of grace and made the last communication I trust ever to have to address to that - that - - '' Never mind , '' said Sontheim  `` go on , go on . ''
page : 129 `` Well , I wrote a succinct statement , with Raoul 's approval , informing Madame that as to that little marriage business of ours we had hitherto been under a misapprehension , and that she was not a bigamist , but , as good luck would have it , quite decently married to her present husband  and that , therefore , to set her mind at rest in case of disputes as to questions of inheritance , her right could not be disputed . ''
`` Yes , yes ! ''
cried Sontheim , and took a long breath , like one off whose breast a load has suddenly been taken .
`` And so now , '' he said , slowly , with the faintest interrogation possible in his tone , `` you really mean to marry that child Mina ? ''
`` What do you mean by ` really mean to marry ? ' ''
cried Emanuel , testily .
`` Of course I mean to marry her  but perhaps , '' said he , with a sudden humility of look and accent , `` perhaps you think that that dear angel is too good for such a scamp as myself .
It is true there is one disgraceful , shocking episode in my life  heaven knows I would have wiped it out with my blood , had the opportunity been given me  but , Sontheim , there are things that are like a madness in the brain - we are scarcely at all times responsible for them .
But what 's the use of trying to extenuate what must always remain intolerable . ''
Sontheim here interposed warmly : `` There now , you are always in extremes !
I consider , whatever may be said , that you have been more sinned against than sinning .
And then , when one reflects on the temptation you have had ! ''
Here the Professor shifted uneasily about in his chair .
`` At all events , treachery did not originate with you .
How can a poor devil of a man page : 130 help himself when destiny throws such a bait as that in his path . ''
There was something in his friend 's tone that made Emanuel raise his eyebrows .
`` As to Mina , '' continued Sontheim , `` I have nothing to urge against the match now , you may be sure .
Indeed , though she is a dear , good little soul , I think she 's in luck 's way to get a man like you , at the meridian of fame , for husband  '' and he added jocosely , `` one whom all the ladies go mad after , if report says true ! ''
Emanuel , who had been strumming impatiently on the table during this speech , here burst out , with a slight laugh , `` There 's a proverb about pearls , you know , Leopold .
Never mind , we wo n't quarrel about trifles when the chief thing 's settled once for all .
But , by the way , you will of course never breathe a syllable of all this to Mina .
Heaven only knows what effect it might have upon her  and in any case it would take the bloom off her love were she to know of this .
She is so young !
Years hence , perhaps , I may tell her all about it .
Promise me you 'll never mention it to her , Leopold . ''
`` Oh no , upon my word , she shall hear nothing from me , '' cried Sontheim  and to emphasize his promise he shook hands with his friend across the table .
`` Of course you 'll give her away , Leopold ? ''
said Emanuel .
`` Naturally !
But is the wedding to be soon , then ? ''
asked Sontheim .
`` Yes , yes , '' said the musician  `` it should be tomorrow if I had my will .
I hate putting these sort of page : 131 things off  but there 's that notable mother , you know , she 's crazed about gowns and ribbons , and a lot of fiddle-faddle of that kind - as if a man wanted to set up in the drapery line when he takes a wife unto himself !
But she 's inexorable about it  says the trousseau ca n't possibly be ready till the middle of November .
Thank heaven , Mina has no nonsense of that sort about her  but of course she would n't be the Mina she is if she had : she would n't be my love at all , but a commonplace creature who can not dissociate the most solemn acts of life from frippery !
No , she would go with me to the altar in that faded green print in which I first saw and fell in love with her , bless the darling  but filial affection will not let her run counter to her mother 's hobby .
However , the upshot of it is , '' he added , gloomily , `` that we ca n't now get married till the end of December . ''
`` Well , well , '' said Sontheim , with a smile , `` that is n't so far off , after all , considering October is drawing to its close . ''
`` Unfortunately , '' replied Emanuel , `` in another fortnight I must be off on the grind again .
I have to give concerts at Vienna , Berlin , Breslau , Prague , Munich , and I shudder to enumerate what other places besides .
I want to make a good big sum of money , so as to live merrily with my love !
I expect to return just in time for the wedding , or a day before at the utmost .
`` But now I must be off , for I have promised to play at the Grand Duke 's to-night .
He is staying at Ludwigslust , and has taken a craze about me , just when it 's confoundedly inconvenient .
But what can one do ?
page : 132 we musicians can not afford to offend crowned heads as you do , Leopold .
However , it has yielded me one little satisfaction  for the Grand Duke discovering what a fancy I had taken to that Rococo Pavilion in the Palace Gardens , very courteously placed it at my disposal during my stay here , though it is connected with some romantic episode in his father 's history , owing to which it has been carefully kept in its original state . ''
`` Oh yes , '' said Sontheim  `` some melancholy and discreditable story there is , I remember , about an Italian singer who , rumour says , drowned herself in the Venus Pond , as it is called .
Did I not come upon you there one evening - - '' `` In the flagrant act of making love to Mina , you mean , '' said Emanuel .
`` Ah , what an expression your face then had !
Let me tell you , you would n't do for a courtier , my friend - nor even , I fear , '' he added , with a knowing glance at Sontheim , `` for a very successful conspirator , for you always show so exactly what your feelings of the moment are .
By the way , what is the meaning of certain mysterious rumours that have reached me ?
Do you seriously contemplate , Hercules-like , to demolish that German Hydra of the thirty-six crowned heads ?
No , no , my friend , the attempt is hopeless  should you cut off one of them you will see it immediately replaced by another !
But ` ware your own , Sontheim  there 's a storm brewing - I can sniff it in the air far off  there 'll be sorry work done , I fear ! ''
The Professor did not immediately reply , but ruminatingly puffed away at his pipe with more than usual energy .
The fact was that he had only this very morning returned from Leipsic , having hurried back owing page : 133 to his sister 's letter , which contained the news of his god-daughter 's engagement to his friend Emanuel Sturm .
At the latter city he had , indeed , been in secret communication with Robert Blum , and republicans of like convictions .
For after the demolition of certain hopes which he had secretly cherished Professor Sontheim could settle to his books no longer .
A fever seemed to rage in his veins , and the burly man would now and then grasp his short bull-like neck as though he felt some one throttling him .
Ardent patriot he had always been , though hitherto too much of a book-worm to concern himself practically with politics , especially at a time when the thing itself scarcely existed in the German fatherland .
But just at this period - a year or two before the Revolution of 1848 was transmitted like an electric current from one part of the continent to the other - a growing disaffection with the present condition of misgovernment broke out in the many sub-states of the unwieldy Empire  and the problem of the situation was , how to establish any conceited action amongst the republican members of so many petty and disjointed sovereignties .
Now Sontheim , at one of the secret tavern meetings where republicans used to address each other till long after midnight through dense clouds of tobacco smoke , had offered to start on a confidential mission to various principalities of the Bund , in order to sound and bring about an understanding between the different leaders .
There was the less fear of rousing the suspicion of government from the fact of his having hitherto kept so much aloof from all participation in revolutionary agitation  although now he at once page : 134 assumed a prominent position , owing to his strong will , his encyclopædic knowledge , and a certain brutal directness of speech and action when himself roused , which acted like a pair of bellows in fanning into flame the smouldering passion of his auditory .
So he was dubbed the `` Red Sontheim , '' in compliment to the fiery complexion of his politics as well as his hair .
When thus interrogated by the musician , therefore , he kept silent for a time , being somewhat taken aback at the question , as hardly knowing what answer to make to an intimate who was yet the friend - or at least on terms of apparent friendship with the very princes whom evening after evening he denounced as leeches , cut-purses , and assassins of the people .
Presently looking sharply at Emanuel , he said hesitatingly : `` When one is hand-in-glove with so many princesses and grand dukes , I fear opinions on some subjects must be considerably warped and handicapped  but what has put those notions about me into your head ? ''
`` Oh , '' said the violinist , smiling a little scornfully , `` I do n't want to pump you !
Do n't tell me anything if you 'd sooner not .
Though surely , '' he added with a momentary frown , `` you would never suspect me of babbling to you to these same princesses !
I see a little deeper into a millstone than perhaps you may give me credit for  at all events , knocking about the world as I do , not with closed eyes exactly , I apprehend the new spirit that is abroad : an unfledged spirit it is , helplessly sprawling at present , but it will grow to a gigantic size , and transform the face of Europe one of these days - but not in our time , Sontheim , not in our time .
Why page : 135 do n't you know I 'm revolutionary at bottom ?
but it all goes into music with me  only the crowned Midas ' do n't see it .
And why should I enlighten them , pray ?
for till the people shall have become our peers we must still have princes for patrons .
There 's my profession of faith , but I do n't want yours , Sontheim  on the whole , it will be better you should keep your counsel , especially as I am staying in Grand Duke Ludwig 's pavilion . ''
The Professor , who had risen , laid his hand with a certain rough affection on his friend 's shoulder .
`` My dear Emanuel , '' he said , `` there 's nothing I would not trust you with as far as I am concerned  but to tell you the truth , certain matters in which I am implicated are not my own to divulge .
You guess truly that I am of late plighted to a cause which I consider of paramount importance to our poor , divided , down-trodden people .
However , I am a patriot even before being a republican !
What I desire above all things is to see the patched , many-coloured coat of our poor enslaved nation entire again  to see it strong , indivisible , instead of a laughing-stock to the world .
But there 'll be an earthquake ere long that will shake their rotten thrones , and then we shall cease to prate of being Würtembergians , or Saxons , or Badenser , or Prussians , and pride ourselves on being Germans , and Germans only . ''
The musician shook his head as he answered : `` You wo n't achieve it with conspiracies and revolutions , take my word for it .
You will find your want of unity a fatal impediment  each state , should there be a revolution , will waste its fire by going off at the wrong moment and will then be gagged and bound more tightly than before .
Ah , I fear , I fear - - '' page : 136 `` But , '' cried Sontheim , interrupting him eagerly , `` that 's the very mission on which I - - '' and then he stopped abruptly , as being on the point of disclosing a secret which he had bound himself by oath to keep .
`` Well , '' said Emanuel , smiling as he rose , `` I wo n't stay longer , or in spite of myself I might worm some of your secrets from your keeping .
You know where I 'm staying , and I suppose your republicanism will not prevent your coming to see me there . ''
page : [ 137 ] CHAPTER XXXVIII .
PASSING AWAY .
IT was one of those soft , subdued days in early November , when the winds , after blowing from every point of the compass , seem spent out with howling , and leave off worrying the poor palsied leaves still spasmodically clinging to the strong arms that have held them up so unweariedly to the light and air of heaven through all the sweet summer months , and that are now so powerless to avert their fall .
For these leaves , although flaunting it in such bright and garish tints as if mocking at decay , yet have the death-brand upon them , and seem to burn and shrivel up like chips consumed in the flames of a slow yet quenchless fire .
In the meanwhile their patches of hot colour stood out all the stronger against the wan monotone of the quiet sky , which , neither grey nor blue , had a milk-like hazy look , touched with a watery sheen and glimmer in that part of the heavens where the sun should have been .
page : 138 Yes , it was a day of lull  a truce between conflicting elemental forces  and the tired earth , with half her bravery gone , desisted from the passionate struggle for her vanishing glories , and only sighed for peace .
And peace there was far away yonder , where the hills melted into the horizon in a soft gradation of grey in grey  and peace down in the valley where the steep-roofed town lay faintly visible through the frail folds of the pallid wavering mist  and peace in the cottage here on the hill-side , where no living creature was stirring on this Sunday afternoon save old Dame Lichtenfeld , and her older raven , who kept solemnly hopping backwards and forwards , as though he had been entrusted with the care of the premises .
For his mistress , arrayed in her best Sunday gown and frilled white cap , was for once taking her ease in the well-worn brown-leather arm-chair  the same capacious chair where successive generations of babies had been crooned to sleep in her arms , no doubt .
Now , however , that .
there were no babies , she had still got her flowers  for on the sill , outside the small diamond-paned window , there yet lingered a few pale Michaelmas-daisies and marigolds , which always blossomed there later than in any other spot , and from time to time she would pass her lean bony fingers very gently over their petals , as though they could feel her touch  from time to time even she would mutter some words , seemingly half addressed to them .
To this solitary woman , indeed , there existed no very distinct demarcation between herself and the animals and plants which lived around her , and had now for more than twenty years been the closest companions of page : 139 her old age .
A well-spring of love there was in her , constantly overflowing into everything animate and inanimate that surrounded her , which again , although only a reflection from herself , returned back to its source like something from without .
All at once , however , this settled calm was disturbed by a low , blithe sound as of talking and laughter  then there came a pattering of footsteps on the dry leaves , and the click of the garden gate swung quickly back on its hinges  then the steps and the voices ceased again , and a person with sharp ears might have heard something which sounded suspiciously like a kiss .
But the old lady , whose senses were slightly blunted , did not hear any of these things , so that all at once she was almost dazed and dazzled with the life , light , and happiness that seemed literally to stream into the low , dim apartment , as Emanuel and Mina entered it together .
`` Why , children ! ''
she cried , rising , not without some difficulty , to her feet , and then she looked from Emanuel 's keen , beaming features to Mina 's bashful , blushing face .
`` Oh , Granny , '' murmured the latter , but she got no further , and dropping her long spray of crimson berries , she threw her arms round the old lady 's neck , her rose-red face vanishing completely beneath the starched frills of that enormous mob-cap .
Grandmother and grandchild held each other in a long embrace .
With the piercing intuition of a loving heart , the former had indeed divined Mina 's secret before the girl herself had suspected it .
And , unknown to any one , she had hoped and feared , and page : 140 prayed , and watched over her favourite as much as it was possible for her under the circumstances .
So she said , when she had at length freed herself from Mina 's embrace , stretching out her hand to Emanuel , while her eyes were dim with tears , `` Bless thee , my boy  thou hast fulfilled the wish nearest my heart !
Now truly I shall depart in peace . ''
`` Come , little mother , do not be a kill-joy for once in your life , and that just when we mean to set about living in good earnest .
Why , what 's eighty or thereabouts when one is an evergreen like you ? ''
said Emanuel , as he suddenly seized her round the waist and , almost lifting her off the ground in his mad way , imprinted two or three hearty kisses on her shrunken cheeks before he would let her go .
They all laughed , and then he went on , `` You know you are coming to live with us , you and your raven to hoot  and see if you do n't dandle yet another generation on your knees before you have done with us , little mother . ''
`` No , no , my children , '' she answered  `` when one is as old as I am , one has struck one 's roots too deep into the soil to bear transplanting , though it were into a very bower of Eden .
This plot of ground , and all around as far as you can see - that valley where my loved ones lie , and the hills over there behind which the sun goes down , even as we , children dear , go down into our graves to rise again into glory everlasting - all this , not to speak of my bees and flowers , has become part and parcel of this old life now  and when I go from here , 't is that I 'll have gone to my long rest . ''
The old lady said this in a low , inward voice , speaking page : 141 to herself , seeming almost to have forgotten her guests , till recalled to the present by Mina , who , perched on one of the arms of the huge easy-chair , with her chin propped on the top , heaved a deep sigh as she said , `` Oh , Granny , I pictured to myself how glad we should make you - - '' `` Forgive me , my pet , forgive me , '' cried her grandmother , taking the small hand that had been stroking her cheek with much the same tender gesture with which she herself had stroked the flowers  `` it was the depth of my gladness that made me speak as I did , because I felt I could cease from troubling now , But you do n't understand - how should either of you understand ?
But tell me , children , tell me , are you very happy ?
Ah , my boy , I am glad you will have some one to love you and take care of you .
Yes , you look different already , not hunted-like and bitter as you did  and by and by , when you know her better , you will see what Minchen is - just like the sweetbriar that fills the air for ever so far round , and yet you can hardly tell where the sweetness comes from .
`` Ah , love one another well , my children , for believe me , who have long outlived man 's allotted span of years , and borne some of his heaviest trials - believe me , there 's but one thing here below with which to overcome all the ills that flesh is heir to  one blessed thing which will keep our hearts from breaking in the hour of affliction , and the spirit from vain boastfulness if good fortune be allotted it  one sweet thing that will make us feel the kindred that 's all the world over - love , you know , and always love  children dear .
`` But here I am preaching to you like an old dolt , page : 142 as if you did n't know all about love , bless you , far better than your mummy of a grandmother .
And I dare say , poor things , you are famishing after that climb up the hill  so now I 'll just go into the kitchen and get you something to eat and drink , for Susan has gone to the wake . ''
But Mina would not hear of her grandmother putting herself about  and protesting that she knew exactly where the things were put , and what to get ready , she disappeared with a happy nod and smile .
While she was very busy in that neatest of pink-washed kitchens , her grandmother said to Emanuel , `` Make her very happy , my boy  she is a tender plant , and needs love as much as my muscatel grapes do the sunshine , but she will repay it a thousandfold too . ''
`` Ah , '' he replied , `` I know well what she is , little mother  one has n't knocked about the world as I have without getting to know one 's fellow-creatures rather better than is quite pleasant always : they are a ramshackle lot on the whole - a vain , grasping , double-faced , self-seeking lot .
Nay , nay , do not look so shocked  it is because I know the world so well that I prize at its full worth this sweet girl , whose nature is as limpid as a stream of clear water , in which you may count the very pebbles at the bottom . ''
`` Yes , yes , '' she said , nodding her head , `` she 's like her father , and like her grandfather - my dear , dear husband that was .
He , too , had a heart without guile  and so truthful he was , he could n't understand people were ever otherwise , but believed always everything that any one told him .
And that does n't answer in business , you know , Emanuel , and so they swindled him  page : 143 and one man - a friend he called himself , the false-hearted knave - got him to lend him more money than he could spare , and then went off to America and never paid a groschen , and that was the ruin of my dear , dear Hans : for then he became bankrupt , and though he paid off every kreuzer he owed , he never got over it , for his heart was broken - though he would always hide it from me .
How it all comes back now , oh so vividly , the day we came up to live here in the little summer-house , on that cold March day  and there was no stove here , either , to light a fire in , and the water running down the walls , and all the children crying with cold and hunger , and Hans trying to comfort them , when it was he , poor heart , who wanted the comfort most .
Ah me , ah me !
`` So when I used to think how it had fared with poor Hans - and with my poor Heinrich , too , for he never throve , though he was such a great scholar , they said - you see I could n't help being afraid for my Mina , for she 's like the apple of my eye to me , and her mother has no right understanding of that child  and then she made such great friends too , in that warm , confiding way she has , with a very noble lady , I believe , and a very beautiful too - but , but - - '' and she shook her head dubiously , `` when I looked at her eyes it gave me a shiver - there was something so uncanny inside of them .
But now , '' she said , looking up at Emanuel with a happy face , `` now it is well !
Have n't I known you since you were that high ?
and though you have been away in the wide world , and perhaps had to have dealings with those who were not upright and honest , they ca n't have changed your heart for you , Emanuel  page : 144 and you will take care of her , you will take care of the child when I am gone , God bless you ! ''
She uttered the last words almost in a supplicating voice  and Emanuel , deeply moved , answered as he pressed her hand : `` I will watch over her as the better angel of my life - but let me go now , and see what she is about so long . ''
`` No , no , my boy , you stop here , '' said Mina 's grandmother , shaking her finger at him , `` or the child will spill the soup , for she 's not very apt at those things as it is .
But I 'll just go and give a look round myself , for my old hands have n't quite forgotten their cunning yet . ''
So saying , she walked out of the room , holding on a little by the wall as she went , and found Mina very busy in the kitchen putting the plates , queer-handled knives , and two-pronged forks on a tray .
But instead of further bestirring themselves about these things , the old woman and the young one took to hugging and kissing each other , and to laugh a little and to cry a little with caressing ejaculations in between , as if they were regularly demented with joy - in fact , they had it regularly out , so to speak .
But a strange thing happened presently .
Mina at last went back carrying the tray , leaving her grandmother mixing her pancakes in a saucepan  and an unconscionable time did the girl spend laying the cloth , with the assistance of Emanuel , who insisted on all sorts of interludes , and between the placing of every spoon did a little spooning on his own account .
But presently the cuckoo popped out of the cuckoo-clock and loudly proclaimed that it was two .
page : 145 Mina , recalled all at once to a sense of time , exclaimed , `` Dear , what a long , long time Granny has been in the kitchen  why , she must be inventing some new dish to surprise you with ! ''
`` Oh , I know what she is about , '' said Emanuel , with a saucy laugh  `` she thinks I want you all to myself , sweetheart . ''
`` But we must go and fetch her at once , '' exclaimed Mina  `` why , it is such a long time past her dinner-hour . ''
So they went together into the kitchen - but the old lady was not there  neither did she answer when they called her .
Then , to their unutterable surprise , they caught sight of her through the window , rambling up the path which led up the vineyard .
`` Granny , Granny ! ''
called Mina , rushing out of the house , followed by Emanuel .
They had quickly overtaken her , and Mina , seizing her by the arm , said , a little out of breath , `` Why , Granny , you were not thinking to find any grapes left on the vines at this time , were you ? ''
`` No , no , Annerle dear  it was the door of the sitting-room I was looking for , to be sure , '' she said , calmly .
Mina , utterly taken aback , stared at her in a bewildered way , as she now walked unconcernedly back with them , seeming perfectly well too .
`` And has Hans returned from the town yet ? ''
she asked .
`` Is it all over ?
Have they sold everything ?
Well , we must meet him with smiling faces  we must not let him think we are fretting , children .
No , no , do n't cry  it will break his heart to see you crying so .
And as long as there 's no shame , what matter , I say page : 146 And we shall make a living by the bees yet - see if we do n't  and there 's no misfortune if we only hold together , children ! ''
Mina was trembling now , and large tears were gathering in her eyes .
Emanuel whispered softly to her : `` The excitement of this afternoon has been too much for her .
But be quite natural with her , dearest  look as though you took everything for granted .
It may be a sudden weakness which will pass when she has eaten something , for she seems well otherwise .
We can do nothing else . ''
Mina , after this , tried hard to keep her self-control  but she looked very anxious and pale as she dished up the dinner , which she could not touch herself , though she made a pretence of doing so .
Her grandmother , however , partook of the soup and meat , all the while asking , after people that had been lying in the churchyard these thirty years and more  and sometimes she would address Mina as her daughter Annerle , and sometimes as her daughter 's daughter , Elfrida  and she spoke of long-past events as though they had happened a few hours back .
Emanuel and Mina did not know what to do .
They spoke to her , and she spoke to them  but she saw them through a veil of shifting memories , in which their faces were being mysteriously exchanged and confounded with other faces - like those cloud-shapes , undergoing continual transformation even as you are looking at them .
She was not delirious or mad by any means , only part of her brain seemed suddenly to have given way  the present being obliterated , the impressions of page : 147 the past alone suddenly standing out with unnatural or preternatural distinctness .
`` Yes , yes , '' she said , `` and so you are going to be married ? ''
Mina looked up quickly , thinking that her grandmother was coming back to reality at last .
`` It is to be quite soon too , '' she put in hastily , as though to keep her grandmother to the point .
`` When do you think , now ? ''
`` Why , child , as if I did n't know that , '' she answered , nodding her head .
`` Is not the wedding-dress ready and the bridal wreath prepared ?
Will not the bridegroom be here soon ? ''
`` Oh , Granny , '' said Mina , persisting , `` I do so wish you could come and see all the fine things that mother is getting for me .
You would n't know me again in them . ''
Her grandmother made no direct reply to this  but Presently she said , `` Well , it is getting late  I am a little tired , I should like to go to sleep . ''
So Emanuel , giving her his arm , supported her to the arm-chair , in which she lay back , closing her eyes .
Mina now drew her lover into the porch , and begged him to go for a doctor , with a white , piteous face .
`` My darling , '' he said , `` no doctor can do any good here - your grandmother is not ill  but of course I will go at once to please you .
But will you not be frightened to be left alone here , under the circumstances ?
I can not be back before evening , you know . ''
`` Frightened - oh no !
Why should I be frightened ? ''
cried Mina .
`` Granny will wake up presently , and be quite herself again  do n't you think so ? ''
page : 148 `` Certainly , certainly , darling , '' said Emanuel  and after considering a moment , seeing that there was nothing else to be done , he hurried off at once , after tenderly embracing his betrothed .
Mina remained for some time standing in the porch , watching Emanuel go down the hill at his quick , swinging pace .
At the turning into the wood he looked round and waved his hat .
Then she went back into the house , and sat down on a stool at her grandmother 's feet .
She was sleeping very peacefully .
There was no sound but the loud ticking of the clock .
Yes , and now a robin-redbreast trilled out a glad , homely little song , as her alit on the window-sill , where there were always crumbs for him in the wintertime .
For now the sun broke through the clouds  they swung back like the wings of a colossal portal , and he gleamed in parting glory over leagues upon leagues of mist-enshrouded land .
Suddenly a breeze sprang up , and swept the mists , like so many cobwebs , from off the face of valley and hill-side  then a faint pink glow gradually suffused cloud after cloud , right up to the zenith .
But high in the east stood the full-moon , white and spectral , facing the sunset .
Long flights of crows , filling the air with their thick , husky croaking , went flapping ponderously across the valley from east to west .
When the level sunbeams struck on the humble casement , till each pane of glass flashed and burned again , the red chequer-work being reflected on the wall opposite , Mina , to her great relief , saw her grandmother page : 149 open her eyes .
With a long , thirsty look , as though she were drinking in the light , her gaze dwelt on the glowing orb already half submerged  and when it suddenly went down , and her marigolds closed their petals , she turned her face away with a long sigh , and leant back in her chair again .
`` Can I get you anything , Granny dear ? ''
asked Mina , very gently  `` a glass of milk - or shall I make you a nice hot cup of coffee ?
or say , what would you like ? ''
A faint smile lit up the aged face , and she put her tremulous hands on Mina 's head , as though to invoke a blessing on her  but she only said , almost in a whisper , `` Well , it is getting late  I am a little tired , I should like to go to sleep  '' and she closed her eyes .
It was getting dark and cold now , and Mina presently fetched a knitted counterpane to cover her grandmother with , who was sound asleep again .
She then put some more wood on the fire , drew the curtain , and lit the small oil-lamp  and sitting down on the stool , with her back resting against her grandmother 's knees , she went to sleep too .
By and by , however , she woke with a start , and an unaccountable sense of cold .
Some noise had disturbed her  but she found it was only the raven , who was uneasily scraping the floor with one foot , with a hoarse , unearthly croaking such as he but rarely uttered .
`` Well , you poor old miser of a Mugin , '' she said  `` and ca n't it remember then at all where it hid that toothsome tit-bit away !
but never mind , Mina will give it another . ''
Mugin treated the remark with cold disdain , and scraped away all the harder .
page : 150 Mina now rose to her feet , stretching her arms , for her cramped position had made them quite stiff .
`` I never knew Granny sleep like this before , '' she said  and then she bent over her and said in a low voice , so as not to startle her , `` Why , Granny , wake up ! ''
and she took one of her hands in her own .
But she dropped it with a low , startled cry , and it fell back like a stone .
`` Granny , Granny ! ''
cried Mina  and she shook her grandmother violently by the shoulders .
`` Wake up , wake up - you have slept over long , grandmother . ''
But the tired lids never unclosed , only the head drooped forward helplessly .
`` Emanuel , Emanuel ! ''
Mina called out wildly , as she rushed to the door and threw it open  and her cry echoed far through the dark , silent night .
Then she ran back to the chair : it was all a mistake , she must have been dreaming  and she clasped her grandmother in her arms .
As she did so , her heart gave an instinctive shudder - she knew that she was alone with the dead .
Alone with the dead all alone , on the lonely hill-side , in the dark night - it was an awful thought !
Mina buried her head in her hands and wept  but the love that she had borne the dead woman cast out her fear .
* * * * * She did not know how long it was before the sound of footsteps roused her from her silent weeping .
When Emanuel returned at last with the doctor , and saw the pale , tear-stained face , he knew how it was .
The two men almost forced her out of the room  but when the doctor had gone back to it , Emanuel said - page : 151 `` We should not grieve , my love - we should rather be thankful that so sweet a soul has passed so sweetly away .
Why , it was sympathy with your happiness that was too much for the old heart !
Remember what a long , long life she had had , and let us pray that ours , if not as long , may be as kindly a one ! ''
page : [ 152 ] CHAPTER XXXIX .
THE SNOW-BRIDE .
WITH very red cheeks , and blue noses , and mottled hands of mixed red and blue , the children were having a fine time of it in the garden on this cold winter 's morning , when you could see their breaths rising up through the air like smoke from so many chimneys .
They were very hard at work indeed , much harder than they would ever have been in school-hours .
But were they not shaping something with their own hands , mimicking the world around them  in short , were they not making a bride of snow ?
- one that should take the shine out of the real one too , with the superior charms of her immaculate beauty !
And what an inborn passion in the tiniest mortal , as well as in the very greatest amongst men , is this that he shall make something after his own image !
To become even as one of the gods themselves , and create a world in little  to produce on a small scale a page : 153 copy of the great order of things  or , better still , a corrected and revised version of the same - an `` edition de luxe '' in short , with all the mistakes eliminated , and copious foot-notes annexed in elucidation of obscure passages in the original text .
And this playing of children , ay , or of kittens or puppies , is it not a kind of rudimentary art ?
Or art itself , what is it but the highest kind of play ?
The imagination having ceased to minister to the mere needs of the body , making a lofty sport of life itself  and by compressing its varied manifestations within a narrow compass , giving it that completeness of form , that perfection , which man seeks in vain to grasp in the labyrinthine profusion of existence with which nature astounds , bewilders , and dazzles him by turns !
These children , however , though they were German children , were not yet given to theorize about their enjoyments , but simply enjoyed themselves and asked no questions .
And there was no doubt that they thoroughly did enjoy what they were about .
For were they not at that instant glowing with the inspiration of the poet , the painter , the sculptor , all in one ?
bodying forth their conception of beauty in the most ideal of all matter , matter heaven-descended that very morning , and with only one drawback to it , a serious one perhaps - that of being even more frail than the bloom on beauty 's cheek itself .
But what of that ?
Thee young artificers did not vex themselves as yet with questions as to the possible durability of their work  they were far too much engrossed in the workmanship itself , in the delicious sensation of seeing something being shaped under their hands .
page : 154 Wolfgang was the master-spirit : he kneaded and patted and modelled away with his thumb and forefinger , after Hans , his assistant on this occasion , had built up the figure in the rough , as though he had passed all his life in a sculptor 's studio , and seen him manipulating the wet clay  while Conrad and Otto , approving themselves docile pupils for once , brought the fresh snow as it was wanted  and even Lulu , who , with much puffing and panting , carried a tiny handful now and then , was treated with amiable condescension .
`` But what sort of eyes will you give her , Wolf ? ''
asked Hans , standing at a little distance and regarding their handiwork with great self-complacency , while his brother , working away at the nose , was trying to model it as well as he could after that Grecian pattern which he had learned , in the drawing-class .
`` Shall I get you charcoal - I like black eyes best , do n't you ?
And wo n't they look splendid with her white face !
Why , it 'll make Minchen jealous to see her , for she has n't got such coal-black eyes , or such a white skin either . ''
The boys were so absorbed in their handiwork that they were quite startled at the explosion of laughter which followed on this remark .
`` Oh , Herr Sturm , Herr Sturm has come back ! ''
shouted Otto and Lulu , bounding across the snow towards Emanuel .
He and his betrothed had been standing there unobserved for some minutes watching the growth of the snow-maiden .
After many greetings and kisses had been exchanged , for he was a great favourite with the children , he said banteringly : `` So you think , do you , that Mina will be jealous of this lovely effigy , this moon-faced maiden , page : 155 who will have the blackest eyes ever seen in anybody 's head yet ! ''
`` No , no , '' said Wolfgang , scornfully , `` I 'm not thinking of charcoal - it 's such a common dodge that ! ''
Then , turning to Lulu with an unusually coaxing tone of voice , he said , `` But I know who 's going to let me have two of those round blue beads that she has round her neck , like a little good fellow that she is . ''
Lulu 's underlip drooped considerably at mention of her darling blue beads , and she sidled nearer to the musician , thinking he would shield her from those more violent measures that her brothers were wont to resort to when gentler means had failed .
`` But , boys , study your model a little more closely before putting in the finishing touches , '' said Emanuel , gaily , as he placed Mina next to the snow image that was now finished all save the eyes .
`` I would n't exchange , Hans , though yours is certainly a heaven-descended bride . ''
It was an odd contrast , this snow-image and the blooming young girl , who looked more exquisitely lovely than usual just then .
She had left off her mourning for her grandmother , and wore a soft cloud-blue merino , with a waistband confined by a magnificent enamelled buckle , one of the many gifts of her intended  her neck was covered with a salmon-coloured china-crape fichu with long fringes , but her pretty , girlish arms were perfectly bare , in spite of the five degrees Reaumur .
The keen air and her over-brimming happiness had heightened those soft , ever-changing carnations of her face , that came and went like the flush on an evening cloud , while the page : 156 bright sunshine , catching the loose , curling rings that clustered so luxuriantly about her temples , gave them a glow as of red copper - but the shining of her eyes was beyond all description .
`` Eh , Wolf , where will you get such another pair of eyes ? ''
asked Emanuel  `` I think to match them you 'll have to clamber up that mythical beanstalk , you know , and steal a pair of the golden Pleiades themselves  or maybe , if you only utter the proper incantation , a couple of shooting stars will lodge themselves in her head of their own accord .
But in the meanwhile perhaps these will do as a makeshift , '' he said , unfastening a pair of turquoise shirt-studs which , with his fine taste , he would have scorned to have worn had they not been the gift of a Viennese imperial princess  and he stuck them in himself .
The snow-bride now stood forth complete , and the children , delighted with the general effect , clapped their hands and began gleefully dancing round her in a ring .
Emanuel and Mina laughingly joined them , and the former improvised the following lines , which he sang to a tune of his own - `` Snow-bride , Snow-bride , Raised in an hour , Fairer than a flower  Wouldst thou abide , Beware the sun 's power !
The moon is for the bride , Its silver is her dower  But the flame-god , the pride Of the tall sunflower , Will melt thee in an hour ! ''
page : 157 Emanuel had only returned on the preceding evening , and this was a Tuesday , the day before Christmas .
He had been absent nearly two months , giving from fifty to sixty concerts within that short space of time .
His tour through Germany had resembled a triumphal progress  and especially in Vienna , where he had gained his first great success , the enthusiasm reached a pitch bordering on frenzy .
In their transports of admiration the people vied with each other as to who should split the greatest number of kid gloves in his honour , and his portrait was to be bought in every imaginable and unimaginable shape , even to figuring on cheap pocket-handkerchiefs or on gingerbread .
Being but a mortal after all , he looked rather fatigued after his musical campaign , and said half-laughingly to Sontheim , `` Many such victories , and I am undone . ''
He was already bound to appear in London at one of the Philharmonic Concerts on the 8th of January , 1847 , so that he had stipulated the marriage should take place on Christmas Day itself , in order that he might have about a fortnight he could call his own for the honeymoon .
In spite of the confusion into which the preparations for the impending wedding had thrown the family , Emanuel had managed , by hook or by crook , to get Mina all to himself in a quiet corner for a few hours that morning , though every now and then she was pounced upon by her mother , who was flaring all over the place that day .
And the dinner was dished up , and the children all came in with sparkling eyes , in high feather at the success of their morning 's work .
After dinner in walked page : 158 Professor Sontheim and his sister , to have a last look at Mina before the eventful morrow .
Frau Scherer was immediately carried off by Frau Lichtenfeld to inspect the dresses , and the presents , and the preparations for the wedding breakfast , and all the thousand and one things which so important an event brings with it .
All hope of further privacy for that day was clearly at an end .
`` And where will you be off to to-morrow , you people ? ''
inquired Sontheim , after having presented his god-daughter with a complete set of her father 's philological and mythological works , which on this occasion appeared for the first time nicely bound in a collected form , presenting quite a respectable appearance This attention to a neglected scholar 's researches afforded Mina more genuine pleasure than the costliest gift would have done .
`` Oh , '' cried Emanuel , `` would I could carry Mina off with me this minute without further ado !
All this fuss irritates and worries me more than I can say  when we have got safely over to-morrow a load .
will be taken off my mind .
I have still to go to Ludwigslust this afternoon , as I promised the Grand Duke I would play there for an hour  then I dare say I shall have to be sitting up half the night to finish a fantasia for the violin which was advertised for Christmas , and for which my publishers are clamouring . ''
Frau Lichtenfeld , who had returned , pricked up her ears at this , exclaiming : `` Sit up half the night , Herr Sturm !
And to-morrow your wedding !
Why you will not be fit to be married - and it ought n't to be allowed , ought it , my dear Frau Scherer ? ''
page : 159 `` Ah , '' sighed the latter , casting a deeply sentimental look at Emanuel , `` no doubt Herr Sturm is in the first instance wedded to his art , and finds the celestial bride more exacting than any mortal maiden ! ''
`` Why , Pauline , '' exclaimed Frau Lichtenfeld , testily , `` what are you talking about ?
It 's - it 's - it 's almost like insinuating that Herr Sturm is a bigamist . ''
Emanuel started slightly , then broke into a merry laugh , turning to Mina with , `` Nay , I hope you and she will love each other like the twin-sisters you are . ''
His betrothed only replied with a look of the fullest comprehension , but her mother shook her head discontentedly as she said - `` It 's a bad habit , that sitting up of nights , Herr Sturm - a sadly wasteful habit , howsoever you look at it  and if Mina were only of my ways of thinking she would leave you no peace till she had broken you of it , for , as I could prove to you , it hastened the death of her deceased - - '' `` But my dear Frau Professorinn , '' Frau Scherer said , interrupting her , eager to vindicate a character for æsthetic culture , `` you do n't take into consideration what the throes of musical composition must be , and that the artist , no doubt , needs the deep solitude of midnight to gather these blooming flowers sprouting in the gardens of - - '' `` Of course , of course , '' cried Frau Lichtenfeld , impatiently , `` I know what 's what as well as other people - it 's like a dream , that 's what it is !
And I never was more annoyed than one night on waking suddenly from a dream so life-like that I thought to myself , ` Well now , Elise Lichtenfeld , there 's something to be made of that . ' ''
page : 160 Sontheim , who had been turning over the leaves of one of the books he had brought , here said bluntly , raising his head - `` Wonder of wonders !
you , too , set up for a dreamer or a fashioner of dreams , my worthy old neighbour ?
Well , that whets my curiosity !
Let 's hear whether fat cows and lean cows have any part in your midnight visions ! ''
`` Oh , you know , '' replied the good woman , complacently , `` once I dreamed that I was making a pudding - quite a new kind of pudding , and it smelt so very nice , that if only Lulu had not woke me up just then - she was cutting one of her back teeth and very fretful , poor pet - I declare I could have mixed it in the exact quantities .
And the other day , why if I did n't dream that I was trimming a bonnet for Mina  such a sweet , pretty bonnet it was , the colour of the ribbons , and the shape and the velvet - nothing could have been more genteel if I had sent all the way to Paris for it .
So when I woke up I went out and bought everything to match the dream  but ah , bless you , it would n't turn out quite as lovely - though everybody who sees it says to me , ` Why , my dear Frau Professorinn , where did you get that charming , that most becoming of bonnets from ? '
But you shall judge for yourselves , for my daughter will travel in it to-morrow . ''
Emanuel , Sontheim , Frau Scherer , all laughed , and begged for a sight of this dream-bonnet  only Mina was so absorbed in her own sweet thoughts that she had not heeded what was being said , till suddenly admonished by her mother to hold up her chin for once like a rational creature .
page : 161 While in the act of tying on the broad , claret-coloured strings , Frau Lichtenfeld suddenly started , ejaculating , `` Ach Gott !
if there is n't Otto and Lulu howling now  it will be the death of me , it will , if there 's a mishap to-day of all days in the year .
What - what shall I do if Lulu has broken her shin or dislocated her hip with sliding on the ice , though I forbade her doing so ! ''
and with these words she scuttled wildly downstairs , anxiously followed by the rest of the party .
When they got to the back door they heard Hans saying dolefully , `` Be quiet , will you , you little simpleton  crying wo n't mend broken bones again , you know . ''
`` There , there , I knew how it would be ! ''
cried Frau Lichtenfeld , in shrill dismay .
`` Mercy upon us , what 's broken ?
who 's broken - - ? ''
`` It 's her head , '' whispered Otto .
`` Her head ! ''
screamed Frau Lichtenfeld , as she pounced down among them in wild affright  and seizing the sobbing Lulu in her arms examined her all over as she asked , `` Where is it then , my precious pet ?
tell me , where is it ? ''
`` Oh , '' said Hans , in a tone of voice as if that would have been but a small grievance , `` nothing 's the matter with her - it 's our snow-girl that 's lost her head , do n't you see ? ''
`` It 's the wicked , wicked sun that 's done it , '' said Conrad , biting his nails with vexation .
`` The wicked , wicked sun , '' echoed Otto , wrathfully , looking up at the dazzling orb , who now in his noontide glory reasserted some of his old power by making breaches in winter 's trenches  for the snow was thawing here and dripping there from some of the projecting page : 162 spouts and most exposed twigs of trees .
And thus it had happened that the snow-maiden , which the children had shaped with such pains and enthusiasm , was already minus her head .
While the elders of the party were joking about the momentary confusion thus engendered , Frau Lichtenfeld , with her usual practicality , darted on the shirt-studs of the virtuoso amid the fallen snow , and restored them to their owner , saying - `` Did any one ever hear of such reckless waste !
A Princess 's gifts given to children , like sugar-plums ! ''
and she ordered them to be replaced in his shirt .
He submitted to this with the better grace as Mina herself proceeded to do it .
In spite of the general merriment , a shade of apprehension momentarily clouded Emanuel 's mind , and through his laughter it continued to obtrude itself .
For , like most men of that type , he had a strain of superstition in his blood , and he felt a presage of evil on seeing the effigy of his betrothed thus speedily dissolving in the rays of the sun .
As he looked towards Mina he felt a yearning impulse to seize her in his protecting arms , and carry her off then and there to his little house in the park , and let no one so much as look at her again .
She was just then administering consolation to her rueful brothers and sister .
It was charming to see her gathering them about her , and on the spur of the moment inventing a tale to divert their attention .
As it is very short , it may be given here as illustrating that quality of airy fancy which was part of her nature .
`` You must know , '' she said , addressing her little page : 163 circle of listeners , `` that the sun and moon were once rivals courting the earth for their bride at the same time .
And the sun , shaking uncounted gold in the earth 's lap , promised to make her the envy of all her sister planets if she would lend a favouring ear to his suit .
But when the moon saw the green-girdled earth dimpling with smiles through her crocuses and daffodils , while with white-lashed daisies she looked up at her fiery lover , he grew thinner and thinner , till with constant pining he came to be so mere a shadow that you could see the blue sky through his body .
`` At this sad sight the earth felt a great pity come over her for this poor , waning fellow , and would have herself cut into halves by the aid of a sorceress so that the sun and moon might each have part of her .
But ever since then there has been enmity between the sun and the moon : and all that is strong , lusty , and resplendent , sides with the sun  but everything fair , frail , and fleeting follows in the footsteps of the wandering moon .
`` So you see , dears , the snow , and all the fairy forms fashioned by the frost-spirit in the pale moonbeams , must hide from the fierce sun , or be shot through with his burning arrows . ''
After Sontheim and his sister had taken leave , and been accompanied by Frau Lichtenfeld to the front door , Emanuel remained listening to Mina 's little story with the pleasure of a boy .
Aided by Wolf he had been quickly restoring the snow-bride 's head , making it even better than before , to the delight of the children , who now , however , had to go in to their milk and coffee , the lovers still lingering in the garden loth to part .
page : 164 `` To-morrow at this time we shall be bowling along the road to Avignon , my own one , '' said Emanuel , pressing Mina to his heart as he bade her good-bye .
It 's an age till to-morrow that I have to leave you , but thenceforth we part no more . ''
The leave-taking in the garden was such a very protracted affair , that Frau Lichtenfeld , popping her head out of the window , loudly admonished Mina to come into the house at once , or that she would catch her death of cold before she was well married and all .
Reluctantly , with many mutual longing looks back , Emanuel at last tore himself away , and Mina rejoined her mother .
The snow-bride , left alone in the early gathering twilight , became gradually tinged with a pale , pink glow , as if warmed and kindled into a transient life of her own .
The lower part of the figure did not catch those rays , and being perfectly without shadow amid the surrounding snow , imparted to it an appearance of floating amid air instead of standing on a solid base .
Sometimes the very commonest object will catch from surrounding associations a beauty that does not properly belong to it  and thus , in the fleeting of the short winter sunset , this snow image , though but the work of a few children , might have stood forth to the poetic Germanic mind which originated the idea as the symbol of an immaculate bride .
Pride of an hour , spotless bride of snow , will she linger even till her prototype is a bride indeed - a delighted and delighting bride ?
Or will they seek and find her no more when to-morrow 's sun shall brighten the world ?
Symbol of human happiness , will she have vanished , page : 165 alas , as though she had never been ?
Softly it stole on us as though wafted from above , as snow is - a fair gift of the great gods themselves .
Unawares , under our hands it took unto itself a radiant form , even unto the uttermost of the heart 's desire .
Shall we , shall we still find it when we would take it to our home to be unto us a daily joy , a perennial delight  or will it have passed away , vanished without a trace , even as the snow-image - the pride of an hour ?
page : [ 166 ] CHAPTER XL .
THE TRUE TARANTULA .
`` IF you follow my advice , Mina , '' said her mother when their friends had all gone , `` you will go straight up to your room - and why not to bed too ?
though it 's a little early maybe  but what 's the odds when the daylight 's gone , I should like to know !
For you 've lost your colour again , and if there 's one thing I ca n't abide , it 's a bride that looks as if she had been rolled in flour as she goes up to the altar , just as though it was her own funeral she was walking after .
Upon my soul , if that was n't exactly the way your aunt Anna looked on the day she was married to Peter Knorr , the rich goldsmith ( such a good match as it was too , and when he had given her a set of the handsomest diamonds you 'd ever wish to set eyes on , though a trifle old-fashioned in the setting , I do n't deny )  but the poor thing she died the year after in childbirth , and so perhaps it is n't to be wondered at after all .
And what a crying shame it was that the page : 167 money was n't kept in the connexion  but , with the usual luck of the Lichtenfelds , if Elfrida must n't go into a decline just when it was whispered that her father had already arranged a brilliant match for her .
Well , well , but as I was saying , Mina , though it may be a trifle early , it 's the sleep before midnight that puts the best rouge on a girl 's cheeks , you know .
And there 'll be nobody to disturb you again , for I must go out presently and do all my marketing for the christmas-tree still - for the children wo n't be balked of that  and instead of to-night they shall have it tomorrow when you 're gone , so they must go to bed extra early , as Sabina has her hands quite full enough in the kitchen : so you wont be disturbed again if you go up now , and I 'll call you early to-morrow morning . ''
Though it was in truth only half-past four in the afternoon , Mina was at any rate quite willing to retire to her own room .
The day had been an exciting one for her , and though young and strong , her nature was so delicately strung , and vibrated so sensitively to every influence , that of late she had sometimes shown slight symptoms of an overwrought nervous system , so that Emanuel had once or twice playfully called her `` his other violin . ''
She therefore bade her mother a more than usually affectionate `` good-night , '' saying that she felt in need of rest and quiet , though she might n't go to bed just yet  and then she slipped away .
And once again - as on that afternoon in the sweet spring-time when the swallows came home to their nests , now choked up with the snow - Mina was all alone in her chamber  that ivy-curtained maiden-chamber , page : 168 with its narrow bed and plain furniture , in which , though no flowers were now to be seen , there yet lingered a ghost of perfume as of the spirit of all sweet flowers dead .
Instead of sitting down to rest , however , Mina moved about softly , now taking up this thing , now that - for to her a thousand and one memories clung to these heterogeneous knick-knacks and old , well-worn books , that she handled so tenderly .
For was she not bidding good-bye to her girlhood , as it were , in this room which was to be hers for the last time that night - for there , spread out in state , lay the white bridal dress , with its wreath of orange blossoms and costly lace veil .
And the world without , too , was white and spotless even as the bridal dress that was to clothe the limbs of the young bride .
There stood the old pear-tree , decked out in festive wreaths as in her honour  but instead of a bridal wreath of blossoms , his gnarled and twisted branches were garlanded with the barren blossoms of the snow .
And all along the garden ways , and on the grass , and far away to where the hills stood out with sharp-cut outlines against the crystal clearness of the sky , lay the immaculate snow , just touched with a faint ghostly blue as of meandering veins .
For the last time , Mina scattered some bread-crumbs on the window-ledge for the poor starving birds .
Then with a swelling heart , moved at once by a tender retrospect and a blissful anticipation , she fell on her knees by the bedside , and covering her face with her hands , gathered her life as if it were a flower to give into the hands of her beloved .
page : 169 The divinest poems perchance are those that were never penned , hardly whispered into a kindred ear .
`` I think I am too happy ! ''
sighed Mina , as her whole soul went forth in an intense though voiceless prayer , while dwelling on the new life that would dawn for her , and which filled her at once with ecstasy and dread .
`` What have I done , what shall I do to deserve such happiness ! ''
And still , while she longed for the hour that should unite her for ever to the man she loved , she again wished inconsistently that she could postpone the day indefinitely .
For , strangely enough , happiness when it has reached its utmost limit verges on pain  just as in pain when it can go no further , there is a bitter-sweet residuum of luxury which at once benumbs and intoxicates the brain .
While Mina was thus completely absorbed in devout and rapturous thought , there came a knock at her door , which she did not hear  but she quickly rose on being startled by a footstep on the floor .
Then she uttered a little cry .
Was it , could it be her friend the Countess in the flesh who stood there dimly discernible in the half-light which still lingered owing to the reflection from the bright snow without ?
Mina stood for the moment rooted to the spot with surprise  in the next , she had thrown her arms round her friend 's neck in her sweet , affectionate way , and was kissing her with glad effusion .
In her joy she hardly noticed whether her kisses were returned or not .
`` And is it you , is it really you ? ''
she cried  `` what a wonderful coincidence you should return on this of all days of the year ! ''
page : 170 The Countess , freeing herself from her embrace , said - `` You must really excuse my unceremonious entrance , Mina  but as there was no one to answer the bell anywhere about the premises , apparently , I had to let myself in , and then walked straight up , as I knew the place , thinking to find you here .
For you do n't know how much I wanted to see you - indeed I only arrived a few hours ago .
But , Mina , I think you must have grown , child .
Why , you look quite beautiful !
And so they tell me you are going to be married !
Is it true ? ''
`` Yes , to-morrow , '' answered Mina , with a sweet , shy , and yet proud look  `` do you know to whom , dear Countess ? ''
`` Ah , do you know to whom , Mina ? ''
echoed the latter in so low a voice that it was easy to misunderstand her , fiddling with a ring on her finger , the very opal ring which had been sent her by Mina a short time back .
Mina opened her eyes to their widest for a moment , and then she burst into that blithe , silvery laugh of hers , gladder than any lark 's song just now , as she answered - `` I beg your pardon , I do n't think I quite heard what you said . ''
`` To be sure , to be sure , '' murmured the visitor in the same low voice , slipping the ring from her finger as she asked , `` Do you recognize that ring ? ''
`` Recognize it , '' said Mina , `` yes , of course I do  it 's the ring Lulu found in the grass and that we sent you , thinking that no one but yourself could have been quite page : 171 so careless as to lose something so splendid , and precious , and costly as this is .
And you never even acknowledged having received it , dear Countess - but then mother said that was so like the grand lady you were .
Ah , I am very glad you have got it all right , at any rate . ''
`` But suppose it does n't belong to me at all , Mina dear , what then ? ''
asked her friend .
`` Dear me , why to whom can it possibly belong ? ''
said Mina , half absently , as her thoughts strayed back to Emanuel .
`` Ah , do you know to whom ? ''
asked the Countess , in the same subdued voice in which she had hitherto spoken  but there was something so significant in her tone that Mina , shaking her head , looked at her with puzzled eyes .
`` Shall I tell you - would you like to know ? ''
she went on with the same insinuating softness  and then , without waiting for a reply , she suddenly asked , `` Is that the wedding dress hanging there ?
Why , one might take it for a ghost in this light .
Could n't you let us have a candle , or a lamp , or something of that sort , child ? ''
she said , going close up to it , `` for I should like to see whether it 's made after the latest Paris fashion . ''
While Mina set light to the wick of the oil lamp , for which she had herself last Christmas made a gaily-coloured transparent shade , the Countess walked to the window , threw it open , and , to Mina 's surprise , who remembered her detestation of cold , looked out on the wintry landscape .
While she did so , Mina fancied she heard her humming snatches of a wild , fantastic tune page : 172 that she seemed to have heard before  but where , she could not recall .
`` Ah , ah , '' muttered the Countess , as she closed the window with a little shiver , and drawing a chair close to the small black oven that stood in the corner , spread out her hands towards it , `` things come to pass strangely , very strangely  to think that on that evening I might have - but what a costly veil that looks from here , child , do let me examine it near , for I have a passion for anything in the shape of lace  from what I remember you were not given to the indulgence of much finery once upon a time , Mina . ''
As the latter brought her friend the lovely gossamer texture of old blond-lace , she said , blushing - `` He gave it to me , you know . ''
`` Why , it must have cost a small fortune ! ''
cried the Countess after looking at it , and then she carelessly flung it on the back of her chair , with a certain furtive gleaming of the eyes .
Mina was rather annoyed to see this dearly prized gift treated so cavalierly , but without saying anything she removed it gently and carefully folded it again  then sitting down on the edge of her bed opposite to her friend she said warmly - `` And did you really come all that long , long way , in this weather , to be present at my wedding , dearest Countess !
I know you once said you would , but it seems too , too kind - I can hardly believe it yet ! ''
`` To be sure , to be sure , child , '' replied her friend , `` it is the wedding brought me here - what else should it be ?
But can you guess who the little bird was that first gave me an inkling of it ?
- for you know you never page : 173 sent me the news for all your protestations of undying friendship . ''
Mina looked a trifle guilty as she stammered - `` He could n't bear it spoken about more than we could possibly help  and knowing you to be in such trouble too , I hardly liked intruding my happiness upon you at such a time '' - and she glanced at her visitor 's sable dress , and hardly knew how to express sympathy concerning a loss about which she was so much in the dark .
The Countess , answering her look , said - `` Yes , I am in mourning for the man whose name I bear  but let us not talk of funerals when a wedding is at hand , '' she said , in a voice that grated strangely on Mina 's ear  `` what I wanted to tell you was that the little bird that whispered the first news of what was brewing here was this identical ring . ''
`` The ring ! ''
echoed Mina , getting more and more puzzled as she looked from the opal ring which the Countess was holding to the light of the lamp to the latter  `` how is it possible ? ''
Then shaking her head with a sweet laugh she cried , `` Ah , I see , you think I am as big a child as ever , with my head full of nothing but witches and fairies and stories of that sort  but you know '' - in a profoundly serious tone - `` I have grown so much , much older than I was when you were here .
What we feel and think , maybe , stretches time out to such a great length , or dwarfs it to something quite insignificant , and within these past months I have come to know the two deepest things we can conceive perhaps , love and - death . ''
At those last words Mina 's eyes shone with a rapt , inward light , almost as though her innocent gaze fathomed mysteries that perplex the wisest .
page : 174 `` Death ? ''
said the Countess , interrogatively , arching her eyebrows , `` that is a strange conjunction for a girl like you to think of . ''
`` Yes , '' said Mina , hardly heeding the interruption , `` my dear grandmother passed away from us in the beginning of November , and no one but myself was with her at the time .
And to feel what was alive even now stricken all at once into something that can not hear us or see us , what a shock , oh what a dreadful shock that is ! ''
Then , as though suddenly recollecting herself , she quickly got down from the bed , and coming to the side of her friend , put her arm tenderly round her as she said - `` But you , dearest lady - forgive me - what must have been your feelings , when so natural a loss as mine was still so affecting ! ''
But the Countess somewhat impatiently said - `` There , there , Mina , I am not sentimental  I do n't profess that there was any love lost between me and the Count - at least on my side .
But for a girl on the eve of her marriage to talk of the death of her grandmother could only happen in this fatherland of yours , I believe , where you are all overflowing with what you call gemüth .
Well , I am glad of it , very glad  but we of the passionate south love after a different fashion . ''
This cynical speech grated sorely upon Mina .
She could not somehow make the ideal which she had fashioned of her friend tally any longer with her actual presence .
Who of the two was altered , then ?
Her beauty was the only thing as magnificent as even her imagination had pictured it .
page : 175 Not meaning to let any imputation rest upon her love , however , she said softly : `` I do n't think true love makes us indifferent to other things .
Since I have known Em - him - I have loved everybody and everything in the wide world better for his sake .
I feel sometimes as though , if I only could , I would shed my very blood to make others as blest as I am . ''
`` These are fine words , fine words , Mina , '' said the Countess , with a slight sneer  `` but why did you falter just now when you were going to pronounce Emanuel 's name ? ''
Mina , with a resentful thrill , quickly raised her head , flushing to the roots of her hair .
She had never yet been able to summon resolution enough to speak that name of names to any third person  and here was a woman who pronounced it with an accent - in a tone - as if - `` Well , child , '' said the Countess , with a light laugh , tapping Mina on the cheek , who , however , got up and moved farther off , `` why do you colour and look so indignant ?
May no one even utter his name but yourself ?
You forget , my dear , that he is a public man , your beloved  and I dare say his Christian name is as familiar to ladies ' lips as his playing to their ears . ''
Here the Countess laughed , apparently so tickled by her own joke that it seemed she would never give over , till the strange , mocking , hysterical fit sounded more dreadful than the wildest sobbing could have done .
At last , as though by a violent effort , she stopped herself , and rising from her seat began walking to and fro .
Mina , who had stood looking at her in a bewildered page : 176 manner , now said , with an indignant trembling in her voice , `` I do n't know what you mean , Countess ? ''
`` Mean , child , mean ! ''
cried the latter , getting more and more hilarious and excited , as laying her hand on Mina 's arm she almost forced her to walk up and down the room beside her .
`` What should it mean but that I am sympathetically moved with the thoughts of this wedding of yours ?
You are so cold , you do n't understand these violent emotions , you see . ''
But Mina , who just then caught sight of her gleaming eyes , almost felt as if she would like to rush out of the room , and fly for ever from her dearest friend .
Then again she upbraided herself for this pusillanimity .
They had thus taken a few steps in silence , when the Countess , tightening her clasp of Mina 's arm a little , said : `` I have wandered from my point again  I meant to explain how this ring could whisper little things about little people .
Thereby hangs a tale , you see  and your sending it to me was providential , no doubt . ''
On these last words she dwelt with lingering emphasis  and then suddenly changing her tone to one almost imperious , she said : `` Mina , look at me  you are not observant , I know  but have you never tried to guess who I really was - where I came from - what country I belonged to ? ''
Mina was indeed looking at her in wide-eyed astonishment as she said : `` Why should I try to guess where you came from , Countess , when it was from Odessa you told me , I remember well  and also that - - '' `` And did you really believe all those figments ? ''
cried the latter , disdainfully .
`` Had you no eyes of your own , then , to find out my real nationality from a page : 177 thousand indications ?
Could you not see that I am South Italian , from the sole of my foot to the crown of my head ?
Bah , what matter !
You saw me dance once , I believe ! ''
and here she laughed more weirdly than before , and made a few steps as though she would launch forth once more into those intoxicating motions - still keeping hold of Mina 's arm , however , who could not , without positive violence , now have freed herself from her grasp  `` do you remember ?
One moonlight night it was , when I thought that I heard - nay , when I did hear - the fragment of a tune to which my feet must move , though I lay on my death-bed , I think . ''
Mina remembered the night well now , the night on which the great musician had for the first time sung under her window  but she suddenly shivered as though a current of the cold night-air had streamed in upon her .
`` What I danced then , Mina , was the tarantella - his tarantella  do you understand ? ''
`` His tarantella , '' repeated Mina , mechanically .
She remembered dreamily that her betrothed was famous for the composition and playing of a tarantella , which he had always , almost angrily , refused to play to her , however .
`` Yes , his tarantella , '' said Antonella , walking , with ever quicker steps , up and down the room  and clutching the poor girl 's arm so fiercely now , that she left the blue marks of her fingers in her flesh .
`` Once I , a peasant girl of Capri , was bitten by a tarantula .
It was in the ruins of Tiberius  and you know that we ignorant peasant folk believe its bite to be mortal , unless there is some one can play a tune to page : 178 us which will keep us spinning round and round till we drop down with the fatigue of it .
We , there happened then to be a young violinist on the spot '' - Mina 's arm twitched slightly here - `` a half-starving , unknown violinist , who then played a tarantella , composed on the spur of the moment , which saved my life and made his fame .
And what was the consequence , dear Mina , do you think , of the young musician saving the young contadina 's life ? ''
Antonella paused for a moment , and then went on hurriedly : `` Why , that they fell wildly , blindly in love with each other !
And this ring here , do you see - and with a sudden jerk she threw it from her , when falling on the floor it went spinning round and round for several minutes like a top - why , the contadina gave it to her lover , owing to a superstition about it , on the day they got secretly married to one another ! ''
Mina gasped like one who is suffocating , and both her hands went suddenly to her heart , as though she had been stung there  but then wrenching her arm abruptly away , she confronted the Countess with flashing eyes , and cried - `` No , no !
You lie ! ''
She was like a person transformed all at once  her shrinking timidity , her girlish softness , were gone  like some desperate animal at bay she faced the speaker , and there was a superb thrill of passion and pride in the nostrils as she panted , rather than said , even more defiantly than before - `` You lie ! ''
`` Softly , softly , though anger becomes you mightily , '' said Antonella , not without astonishment measuring page : 179 the girl , who eyed her unflinchingly , as though she would look her through and through and dare her to repeat her words .
`` Not so meek as it would have one think , '' sneered the Countess , `` though it does speak of shedding its blood for the happiness of people in general  but when it comes to particulars that 's quite another thing , always .
Let me tell you , my dear , that it is not polite to give people the lie direct  and at any rate suffer me to tell my tale in my own manner .
`` I said we were married - but about that there 's a doubt , maybe !
That was a slip of the tongue , or i another kind of slip - never mind now  for I married - legally or illegally , I do n't know which - the Russian prince who , while I was living with Emanuele , offered me rank , lands , boundless wealth , everything in short that I then thought in my vanity would make a woman like me happy .
`` Ah , Mina '' - and she dropped her voice to one of soft entreaty - `` little did I then know what it is to have sucked in a passion with tones that were powerful enough to bring you back from the very brink of the grave itself !
Think me , if you will , wicked , and deceitful , and treacherous , and a criminal , everything that 's bad under the sun - but one thing be sure of , that no one can ever in this world love Emanuele as I love him  nay , more , that he , too , never will , never can , by any possibility , ever love another woman , in this world as he loved me .
Loved ?
- ah , still loves , and ever must , I say ! ''
Mina was trembling all over now like a person in an ague  but with desperate self-command she said , looking page : 180 the Countess once more full in the face , while her own was almost the colour of ashes , `` Oh how unhappy you must have made him , then , if he loved you as you say , and yet you went from him ! ''
`` Unhappy , '' repeated Antonella , `` I believe you !
Did he not hunt me all over the world till he found me again !
But I , was I less unhappy , girl ?
Nay more , more - the thought of Emanuele was like a thirst , a very fever within me .
It was in vain Count Ogotshki took me to the gayest capitals in Europe , that I frequented the highest society , that I dressed superbly , that whatever wealth could offer was at my feet - still I sickened and fell into long fits of death-like lethargy , from which nothing but music , his music , could rouse me .
At last he succeeded in tracing me to Paris , where we then resided .
Shall I describe what followed ?
The delirious passion , which he avowed to me nothing could stifle - - `` No , I will spare you !
Mina , how shouldst thou understand such passion as there is betwixt us ?
You are but a child , nothing but a child , after all .
You suffer at present , but it will pass over  but I - this love is bone of my bone , flesh of my flesh , you see !
`` Do you think he would ever have left me , child ?
Never , Mina , never , had I not forced him at the last , yea implored him on my knees , to leave me , for fear of Count Ogotshki , who was beginning to have his suspicions .
Then , from wounded pride , anger , spite , despair - well , no doubt you can guess the feelings which might hurry him into sudden marriage with another .
`` There , read that !
You know his handwriting !
page : 181 Read - and ask yourself whether he ever wrote to you in such a strain . ''
And she placed a letter in Mina 's hands .
It was one of those madly impassioned notes which he used to send her at one time .
And to Mina , when with her burning eyes she could at last make out the letters , it seemed , indeed , as though he had never written to her in such a vein as this .
She was too inexperienced to distinguish between such passion and the true love with which she had inspired and reclaimed him .
A kind of numbness was creeping over her faculties .
The will of the woman before her was gradually overshadowing hers .
For a moment as she read those scorching words , jealousy , like a hot iron , entered her inmost heart  for a moment she could have turned upon the woman before her and rent her to pieces , but she only convulsively wrung her hands together even to soreness , and then , with a supreme effort over herself , she at last said - each slow word wrung , as it were , from her dry throat - `` Oh what - what - would you have - me do ?
I will do - whatever - is best - for his happiness ! ''
`` And can you doubt , child  can you doubt ? ''
whispered Antonella .
`` I am free now , remember  and with the woman he has loved all his life , he will get , besides , the wealth and station of a prince !
Would you deprive him of all that , because in a moment of pique he chose to get engaged to you ? ''
`` But , '' stammered Mina , throwing out her hands as though she were groping in the dark , `` it must rest with Emanuel  '' and with a glimmer of hope stealing over her ashy countenance , she said , `` He is free to page : 182 choose !
Let nothing bind him to me if it is you he prefers  my happiness is as nothing in comparison with his .
Go , go , let him know you are free - now - at once - - '' `` Fool , '' almost hissed the Countess , `` fool or hypocrite - - '' and then with a sudden change of voice to a tenderness not quite assumed , `` Forgive me , child , forgive me , I am almost mad !
`` But do you not see , can you not comprehend , that Emanuele is a man of high honour - though once , maybe , his passion for me was too strong even for that !
Do you think he will ever break his word to you of his own accord , and at the eleventh hour , too !
Little do you know him then , it seems !
Do you not see that the very fact that he might marry infinitely more advantageously now would deter him from such a step .
No , no  if you would act nobly you must give him up freely , of your own accord - never let him know the sacrifice it 's been - never let him see you with such a look as now - - '' And then this woman flung herself all at once at the feet of the girl , and , writhing on the ground , cried wildly : `` You used to say once that you loved me , Mina  that there was nothing in the world you would not do for me .
Now the supreme hour has come - I am free once more  and were he who is my all - ah , if you take him from me , take my life too - say so , and - - '' With a gesture quick as lightning she drew a small dagger from her bosom , and brandishing it above her head , cried : `` Nay , turn not so deadly pale - what is it but a prick after all !
Only say so , and I swear , by all I hold sacred , I swear that the moment I know I will plunge this blade in my bosom , here before your eyes . ''
page : 183 She looked almost mad .
Mina , expecting every moment to see the steel in her breast , flung herself in a frenzy of fear on the arm of Antonella , who with her wildly glittering eyes looked indeed capable of committing any deed of violence .
But the latter , shaking her off , cried : `` Promise , promise that you will not part us , now that after long years we may come together at last .
Promise , or I will never leave this room alive . ''
Mina , in a voice that was hardly articulate , said , or rather breathed , `` I promise , '' and her head drooped forward as though life itself were forsaking her  then she made a feeble sign with her hand as though to bid the Countess leave her room .
But the latter , who had risen to her feet , now cried , `` Noble soul , I knew how you would act ! ''
and advanced a step as though she could have clasped the girl in her arms , but that Mina , with an irrepressible movement of abhorrence , turned her face to the wall .
Nevertheless , the Countess Ogotshki did not go yet .
She paced several times up and down the room in silence , and then said : `` I see that the sight of me is intolerable to you now .
I will not inflict my presence upon you much longer - indeed there is no time to lose .
I have your promise , that suffices  for the rest you must let me act , and trust yourself implicitly to my guidance .
Of course you must be gone from here before a certain hour to-morrow . ''
Seeing Mina make a faint sign with her head , though she did not turn round , she said , `` Farewell !
may we meet again under happier auspices , '' and quietly walked out of the room .
page : [ 184 ] CHAPTER XLI .
IN THE TOILS .
THE Countess Ogotshki left the house in the Silberstrasse as unobserved as she had entered it  and in spite of the thick furs which she wrapped more closely around her , she shivered with the cold as she stepped into the street .
Once there , she looked in every direction for a conveyance  but in vain .
She was perforce obliged to walk some distance down the street , which , as she proceeded along it , became more and more crowded with bustling people , who  in spite of the freezing weather , were still intent on buying their Christmas presents at the eleventh hour .
Never had she seen such a stir in the usually sleepy town .
A woman hugging a huge fir-tree , with its branches sticking out in all directions , actually came knocking up against her without so much as an `` I beg your pardon , ma'am . ''
Ladies , with nothing visible about them but their eyes , passed like black dominoes across the snow , attended as often as page : 185 not by men or maid-servants bearing unwieldly lanterns in one hand , and capacious baskets crammed with toys and sweetmeats in the other  street boys d girls , yelling and screaming with pleasure , shot , one after another , like so many human cannon-balls along slides as smooth as glass , to the endangering not only of their own necks , but of that of every chance passer-by  and here and there the thoroughfare was half obstructed by casual stalls , where old women , by the light of a flickering tallow candle , haggled about the price of apples and gilt nuts , with faces like that of the weird sisters themselves .
These various hindrances served not a little to exasperate the fine lady , all unused as she was to go about on foot .
At last she caught sight of a solitary vehicle standing at a corner , its driver continually beating his hands together , and stamping now with one foot now with the other , after the manner of his kind , to keep the blood from freezing in his veins .
Hailing him impatiently , she ordered herself to be driven to the hotel , `` Zum Englischen Hof , '' where she had put up on her arrival .
Three or four officious waiters , loitering in vacant self-importance about the brightly illumined entrance , bestirred themselves with more than usual alacrity to attend on the Countess as she stepped from the conveyance .
She no sooner reached her private sitting-room than , calling for pen , ink , and paper , she scrawled a few hasty lines , and addressing them to Professor Sontheim , directed her note to be taken there immediately by the commissionnaire , with the injunction that should the page : 186 Professor be out he must inquire where he was to be found , and , wherever that might be , deliver the note safely into his hands .
Having settled this business , she went into her bedroom and betook herself to the important business of dressing , with the assistance of her maid , who found her more than usually difficult to please  and who - pinning one of the Countess 's plaits a little too low down the nape of the neck , instead of arranging it à la Grecque , as she was told - received a sounding box on the ear , which implied more vigour than her mistress would usually have taken credit for .
So when Sontheim - who on receiving her note had hastily donned his gala attire - arrived in a chaotic state of mind , in which the most contradictory feelings and wishes were wildly jumbled , and was ushered into the private sitting-room of the Countess Ogotshki , he found not a soul present except the little fluffed-out lap-dog Succès , which barked at him rancorously , although safely barricaded amongst furs on a divan .
To the Professor , coming from the frosty air outside , it seemed almost suffocatingly hot on entering the richly but gaudily furnished apartment , with the double windows and heavy red damask curtains keeping out every touch of cold , while two or three tall lamps covered with shades diffused a subdued glow over everything .
When the folding-door presently swung open , and the Countess came into the room with the slow , gliding step peculiar to her , Leopold Sontheim was , as it were , surprised afresh by the beauty of this woman , much as he had dwelt upon it in absence .
The perfection of art had imparted a certain negligent page : 187 grace to her weeds - nay , to the very folds of the black lace , which enhancing the white statuesque contour of her throat and arms , looked as though mental preoccupation had excluded matters so trivial from her thoughts .
`` Ah ! ''
she said , in a voice so feeble as to be almost inaudible , `` Ah , my dear , dear friend , we meet again under very trying circumstances . ''
Sontheim had risen to his feet and was looking at her with all his eyes , and when she held out her hand to him with a smile that had much of sorrow in it , he seemed to forget to let it go again .
`` It is truly comforting , dear friend , that you have come to me in my distress , '' she continued .
`` I shall look to you for aid , advice , counsel  your strong judgment will - ah - - '' but here she broke down utterly , and half supporting herself by a chair she , with the assistance of Sontheim , sank down on a sofa , and her head drooped amidst its cushions as though she had no strength left to hold it up any longer .
The Professor , leaning over her in deep concern till he almost touched her pale cheek , protested that she should command his services , nay , his life , if only she would tell him what it was she wished .
`` Ah , '' sighed she in a whisper , gradually unclosing her eyes , `` I am faint , I have hardly breath left to speak  the fatigues of this long , sudden journey - forgive me , my friend - some Eau de Cologne , perhaps - - '' The Professor had to put his ear quite close to the lady 's lips to catch what she was saying  at the last suggestion he jumped up hastily and was going to ring the bell , but that from a faint motion of her hand he understood page : 188 it to be close by , slung indeed from her bracelet in a richly-chased silver bottle .
With fumbling hands , all unused to the fingering of such feminine articles , the Professor at last managed to unscrew the stopper and dash some of its contents , rather more than was quite pleasant perhaps , in the Countess 's face , for a little rill went trickling by her ears down the back of her neck .
However , it had the effect of considerably reviving her , and though she did not sit up , her voice had a little more strength than heretofore .
`` Ah , Sontheim , '' she murmured , for the first time fixing her eyes full upon him - and , strange to say , they had lost none of their extraordinary brilliancy , in spite of grief , weakness , and anxiety - `` Ah , Sontheim , you see in me a much-wronged woman ! ''
Sontheim was so much taken aback at this that for the moment he did not know what to say , and therefore held his tongue .
He had come there thinking to reproach this fair demon for her double-dealing course  for her treachery all round  and might he not awaken her remorse for the past , and perhaps - who could tell ?
But the tables were so completely turned upon him that he was fairly nonplussed - not being anything of a man of the world - however he might pride himself thereupon , but a bookworm , a sentimentalist , a very enthusiast , in spite of the flesh that encumbered him .
`` But , '' continued the Countess , `` I might have borne everything in silence , I might have swallowed my tears , had I not had a duty to perform - yes , a duty by that sweet , darling child , whom , as you know , I loved from the very first .
Oh , it was providential , that ! ''
page : 189 Looking at her in quite a bewildered fashion , the Professor said : `` I do n't understand : I do n't quite understand - - '' `` Of course not , my friend .
You may have heard - what do I know ?
When men 's passions are enlisted in one cause they are not always quite scrupulous , quite - what shall I say ?
I am but a poor , weak woman , you know , and when a person of genius and such imagination chooses to put things in one light - - '' `` Pardon me for interrupting you , '' said the Professor  `` I have known Emanuel from childhood , if it is of him you are now - - '' `` Dearest friend , will you not even hear me out before you judge ? ''
said Countess Ogotshki , tremulously .
`` It is to you I look for guidance  with your powerful intellect , your penetrating judgment , your clear sense , you are his match !
But if you have judged already , then I - - '' But she could not finish  she was so overcome that she lay back half fainting , and Sontheim , in deep concern , could do nothing but utter exclamations of dismay , and confound himself in excuses and entreaties to be forgiven , and fan and sprinkle her anew with Eau de Cologne .
After the lapse of nearly ten minutes , she whispered , `` I am almost too exhausted to go on with what I had to say , but perhaps if you were to ring for tea I might get better by and by , and more capable of proceeding with my painful task . ''
`` Thé à la Russe '' was presently served with caviare and other delicacies , and while the waiter went in and out of the room some ordinary conversation was kept up , chiefly sustained by the lady , however , who page : 190 seemed to have herself more under control than her guest did .
When the things had been removed , Countess Ogotshki suddenly laid her hand on Sontheim 's arm , and said , in a voice which the tea had evidently rendered quite strong again , `` You would not have Mina Lichtenfeld ruined and dishonoured , would you ? ''
`` By - - '' cried Leopold Sontheim , only with difficulty suppressing the oath that rose to his lips  then suddenly looking full at his beautiful interlocutress and changing his tone , `` but my dear lady , forgive me if I appear rude : are you or are , you not the Countess Ogotshki ? ''
A very faint tinge of colour showed itself for an instant on her pallid countenance , and then , instead of answering , she burst into a passion of hysterical weeping .
Under such circumstances it was difficult to pursue inquiries , and Sontheim , distracted between the unreasoning passion he felt for this seductive creature and the claims of honour and friendship , was almost beside himself .
Seeing her in this state he could not help putting his arm round her , and almost weeping himself for very sympathy .
`` You , indeed , you have a man 's heart , '' she said at length , wiping her eyes , and there was no mistaking what the emphasis meant to imply  `` and therefore I will confide in you .
You shall judge , you shall act for me , only do not suffer innocence to be led astray - as I was , '' she sighed  `` I who was a poor , ignorant , peasant girl , but honest , Herr Sontheim , honest - but what am I now ?
If I have sinned , was I not more page : 191 sinned against ?
Am I married to Emanuel , or am I not ?
How can I tell ?
( Her voice was constantly interrupted by sobs as she said this . )
It was when tortured by this doubt that I fled - fled with Count Ogotshki , surely I would never have done so had I not had hints thrown out to that effect .
But here was a great , an honourable name offered to me  while there I was living in infamy - for I thought then they had tricked me , he and his friend , with this sham marriage . ''
C `` No , no , '' said Sontheim , soothingly , `` not tricked you , but some blundering mistake , some flaw such as may occur in these mixed marriages  '' and again stealing his arm round her waist , he added , `` And after all , now that it is all over , may it not have turned out for the best , dearest Countess ? ''
and he bent a little forward , while his eyes glistened with excitement .
`` Ah , '' she sighed , returning his look , and then casting down her eyes , `` as you say , things might have turned out for the best , could I - dared I - indeed consider myself free : for our tastes change , and now that I know the world better there are qualities that would have stronger attractions for me , sterling qualities of character rather than talents , however brilliant .
But that is not to the point - for on receiving a certain letter , of which you may or may not have heard , I wrote to Rome for the opinion of a most upright , honourable lawyer , and he , on going thoroughly into the matter , assured me that he found it , on careful investigation , to be a bon , fide marriage according to the laws of the Papal States  and so , and so - you see ! ''
Leopold Sontheim , on hearing this , started up , and page : 192 his blood seemed all to have rushed to his head , from his strange look , as he cried : `` Oh no - it can not be - you must be mistaken - he would never - - '' `` Very well , '' said Antonella , as if exhausted with talking , lying back languidly amidst the cushions , `` I have said - you must not - or , if you will , why let that poor innocent darling drift into a position which will ruin her reputation and break her heart - which will leave it doubtful whether she is a mistress or a wife  for at the best it is only a passing fancy such as he has had before , and when the intoxication is over he will come back to me as is his wont , for he never can give me up , never , whatever he may say or do at this moment ! ''
And she drew herself proudly up with flashing eyes , as much as to say , `` Can there be a doubt as to who of the two has the superior attractions , par exemple ? ''
Leopold Sontheim was fairly staggered at the tone of deep conviction with which all this was said .
What to think , what to say , what to do , was more than he knew .
The only conclusion he could arrive at was that he must stop this marriage by hook or by crook , at least till things were cleared up .
And , then , his own hopes and wishes were so deeply involved in this matter !
But a minute ago that look , those words , had given him an access of pleasure such as he had never yet experienced , and now he was once more replunged into cold wretchedness  in this one minute his very aspect was changed , his eyes looked bloodshot .
At last he said , turning to her abruptly , `` Well , something must be done - what is it that you wish ?
Is there aught but suffering left for all of us ? ''
page : 193 Antonella , again laying her hand on his arm , said , mournfully glancing at her weeds : `` For me , my friend , my dear friend , there is nothing else !
But Mina , she is young , she will get over it  the great thing is to get her out of his way , to hide her till the first shock is over , and then - why , we shall see . ''
`` But , '' said the Professor , blankly , `` will she come ?
What a scene it will be !
Where shall I take her to ? ''
`` There will be no scene , '' said the Countess  `` she knows everything , and is determined to break it off of her own accord .
She will let her mother know , no doubt , that there is to be , can be , no wedding .
So all you have to do is to take my carriage and as many horses as may be , and take her somewhere out of harm 's way . ''
`` But had I not better go and explain to Emanuel first ?
If things are as they now appear , I shall call him out  but before that - - '' `` First get Mina out of the way , '' interrupted the Countess , getting impatient , `` and afterwards explain at your leisure .
You do not know the man  yet surely you should from his playing !
He is the very devil when his passions are roused !
He will carry her off by sheer force , as he did me once .
But when he has had time to cool down one can reason with him .
I myself will write or go to him to-morrow before he starts for church - - '' `` Well , '' said Sontheim , `` time brings counsel !
I will take her away for the present .
There 's an old abbey in the recesses of the Black Forest , quite solitary , hidden amidst fir-trees and half shut in by a stream , where some sisters of mercy reside at present - - page : 194 I know one of them : Mina will be safe enough there . ''
`` Yes , yes , '' said Antonella , `` that is the very thing , the peace of such an abode will soothe her .
But give me the address , I may have to communicate with her - who knows ? ''
While Sontheim was doing so , she saw that his hand was trembling like that of a drunken person .
`` Will you start at once ? ''
asked Antonella .
Sontheim , after a minute 's silence , said : `` No , no , I could not take the child through such a freezing night as this  it might kill her almost .
Before daybreak to-morrow will be time enough .
Let her sleep in peace to-night - if she can . ''
`` Yes , let her sleep in peace , '' said the Countess  `` and I too , dear Sontheim , I too would rest a little , for I have been travelling all through the night , though it has been freezing . ''
Sontheim , in a wild fit of passion , suddenly seized her in his arms and kissed her , and pressed her to his heart in quite a delirious way , so that she could not , if she would , have extricated herself .
`` Once , if never , never again , '' he stammered at last , and then , without daring to see what she would say , rushed out of the room .
page : [ 195 ] CHAPTER XLII .
`` WHAT HAS ONE DONE , THOU HAPLESS CHILD , TO THEE ? ''
MINA , when she had been left alone , remained just where she was , leaning against the wall as though all force and motion had alike forsaken her body .
Apparently she neither thought nor felt anything , but , like a person who has been thrown down a precipice , a long time elapsed before she even remembered what it was that caused this numbness of her faculties .
They say that the sharpest throb of agony is that of the bird pierced in mid-flight by a bullet , which contracts and stiffens the nerves while yet palpitating with the intensity of life .
Such in kind is a great sorrow , if it unexpectedly overtakes the young .
Their very plenitude of existence lends it an additional sting , a keener anguish  and to them there is , or seems , no end to it - it is infinite as their sense of time .
Afterwards sorrow may become a habit like other habits , and be borne with more or less good page : 196 grace  but at the first it strikes the heart as though it would crush it at one blow .
It was harrowing to see the change that had come over the hapless child when she turned round at last .
Youth can not suddenly turn to age , it is true , yet in a few short hours , no more , such a change had come over Mina 's sweet face that , seeing her , one could have imagined how she would look when she came to be an old , old woman , so drawn and pinched were her features  indeed , the flesh seemed to have shrunken on her bones .
Only her eyes had grown preternaturally large , but the light had gone out of them - as the light had gone out of the world for them  they were dry , and dull , and vacant , as though seeing they yet did not see .
All at once , as if by accident , they alighted on the bridal dress .
Then with a sudden abruptness she drew her hand across her forehead , as one who thinks that perchance all this frightful anguish and misery have been but a hideous dream , a loathsome nightmare , to be lifted from the oppressed heart with the darkness of the night .
But no , the dream did not pass away - it was true , all too true !
She had been taken up as a makeshift by one who preferred another - who had dallied with her as one would with a child - who had taken her love as one would pluck a flower - who had mocked her with a semblance of passion when the reality had long ago been spent on - - .
With a violent , irrepressible shuddering she threw herself on the bed , and bit the bed-clothes with her teeth  but there was no tear , no sob , only this silent shuddering that now and then swept over her whole frame .
Presently she raised herself again and stared round , page : 197 and all at once she cried out to the walls , as though they could understand and answer her - `` No !
no !
no !
It can not be !
It is a lie !
He loves me : he said he loved me - I know , I feel that he does ! ''
Then with a sudden impulse hurrying to the window , she threw it open , and called piteously into the wintry night , `` Emanuel !
Emanuel !
Oh , come to me , Emanuel ! ''
as though her cry of anguish must reach his ears .
But it rung out unheeded of the sleeping children , of the bustling mother below .
There was a dead , unresponsive silence - he was not singing under her window now !
All at once she caught sight of the spectral snow-bride that stood there instead , and slammed the window to with a shudder .
She was roused now to the fullest realization of her situation .
The cold rush of air had acted upon her with something like an electric shock .
She tried to think it all out now - to think what she must do - what was right !
Strangely enough , in all the agony of her mind she had never yet reproached her lover - accused him as the cause of it all  that woman , it was that woman .
Ah , and she was so beautiful !
What was she but a little insignificant thing in comparison .
But she loved him so .
She would die for him , and more - she would live in eternal misery so that he were but happy .
But if not happy - what then ?
She would go to him  she would tell him so !
But no - that woman had said if he were to see her in such grief he would never , never own to the real state of his feelings .
And there was that letter which she had seen - never to her had he written such words of fire  and she pressed her hands into her dry eyes as though the words were literally still burning her there .
page : 198 She would go far , far away - hide herself in some dark wood  never come back to this place where the children would point at her with their fingers to-morrow as the false bride of their fairy-tales .
The other woman would be the bride now : she would take off her mourning and don the white dress instead .
Or was she indeed his wife already ?
She had said so too - strange , strange , very strange indeed !
But stop - let her think .
Could no one help her , advise her , find out everything , make her course plain , help her to do what was right , what was best for him ?
That was it !
- of course , Sontheim , Professor Sontheim , why had she not thought of him before ?
Her father 's old friend - he would not deceive her , he !
Mechanically she moved about , putting on her cloak , tying on her bonnet as usual , and the gloves , too , were not forgotten  but she thought not to protect herself with extra wraps from the unusually severe cold that had set in .
Softly , very softly , she crept downstairs , trembling almost like a malefactor , and on the landing she delayed , as though in doubt about something  then she peeped in at the door of the family sitting-room , which stood slightly ajar .
The maid-of-all-work was cutting-out yards and yards of green and yellow and crimson paper , while Frau Lichtenfeld , standing on a chair , twined and wreathed the strips about the dark-green branches , to which she had already fastened the gilt nuts and Adam and Eve apples which form such an indispensable adjunct of this festival .
She was just then rating Sabina in her shrillest octaves as being `` too wasteful by half with that paper  just look at all the snippings page : 199 strewn about the floor - why it 's as good as throwing a silver groschen out of window !
But what 's the odds to you so long as it 's not your maw that suffers the dearth !
Give here the scissors , I 'll do it all myself  and go you and see after the gingerbread . ''
Mina started with a heavy sigh , and then stole down the remaining flights of steps and out of the house .
The clock of the old Minster struck ten as she passed into the cold frosty night .
A great many people were still abroad , and the roads were unusually light and lively considering the lateness of the hour .
Mina kept as close as possible to the dark side of the houses , for fear any one should recognize her .
Mina walked some way down the Silberstrasse , which was as long as the town itself , one end terminating in the fields and gardens near the Lichtenfelds ' house , and the other at the Grand Ducal gardens .
Presently she took the turning to the right , and after going down several side-streets rang at Sontheim 's door .
The slatternly servant who after some delay came yawning to open it , answered her inquiries as to whether Professor Sontheim was at home with a stare , and then deigned to inform her that he and Frau Scherer were both from home : the latter she knew had gone to the Frau Obertribunalprocurator 's , where there was a Christmas party  but as to the former 's whereabouts , she was sure she could n't say .
`` Perhaps he had gone to the ' Wirhshaus Wirtshaus ' and might be he would be back shortly , and might be he would n't come home till morning , '' she said , still sullenly staring .
To the servant 's still greater amazement the wretched girl bade her tell the Professor that she would call page : 200 again .
This the former promised to do if she should not be in bed and asleep by then , `` for it was n't just likely that she would sit up for him , not she ! ''
Feeling more heart-sick and helpless , if that were possible , than before , Mina turned away from the house .
And then there came over her , like some unreasoning blind hunger of the heart , the imperious craving to look once more on the face , the beloved face , that she might thenceforth never behold again save in dreams .
Yes , just to look on him once more !
It seemed as if that were the goal of her utmost desire - all that she could conceive or think of now .
Behind that the future stretched a mere formless void .
If Sontheim told her it was even as that woman had said , then `` farewell , love , for ever farewell . ''
But there could be no wrong , no harm to any one , if she just peeped through the window into the room she knew  where he sat composing and playing this very evening , while she - - Without giving herself time to think , drawn as it were by invisible cords , she hurried blindly along the thoroughfare , past the market-place and its Minster , and the street grew more and more deserted as she drew nearer the park .
Only now and then a solitary figure , with its vague shadow gliding weirdly across the snow , passed rapidly by .
Otherwise all traffic appeared to have ceased .
But in all the windows of the street what a glow and light there yet was .
For in almost every house the Christmas-tree was kindled , and the lights of the gaily coloured tapers twinkled through the curtains .
Gay groups of children would stand there , and with page : 201 happy eyes blink up at the lights , and the bewildering wealth of presents , and the `` Christkindchen '' on the topmost twig in its shimmering golden dress and crown .
Yea , she could almost see the people with their loved ones around them in those happy homes - as , indeed , she could hear their laughter ringing out .
She might have called to them and they might have answered  but she , out here , belonged to the night and its shadows , as she stole on , now and then moaning unconsciously , `` My love , my love , my lost love - oh ! ''
But when she came to the park , behold the gates were locked !
She had never contemplated such a possibility .
For a moment she remained blankly staring at the iron-railing barring her progress  but she was not so easily to be turned from her purpose .
In another instant she began clambering up the tall ornamented bars , and as it was not so long ago since she had left off climbing up the fruit-trees and swinging herself for hours on one of their boughs , she accomplished the feat without great difficulty - only that , she grazed her left hand slightly at one of the foliated scroll-works as she let herself down on the other side .
She was in the park now , the wide , white , desolate park , where the grey Rococo Palace , with its empty windows , seemed vacantly staring down the long , leafless avenue , its ornamented roof and projecting lintels covered with snow sparkling like crystal beneath the glittering starlight sky .
How phantom-like , and unreal did it all look !
But then the whole world had grown unreal and phantom-like to this forlorn child .
To her bewildered brain there seemed to be nothing solid above or beneath her  page : 202 for since love was a mockery , her whole moral being tossed and floundered helplessly like a ship cut adrift from its moorings .
For the first time , too , she vaguely apprehended the terrible and sinister side of nature , and where she had hitherto only loved a universal mother , there met her now , in her direst need , but a pitiless indifference that added to her desolation , had it been possible .
Now and then the ghostly stillness was broken by a sharp , sudden noise , when some branch or twig too heavily laden broke with its weight of snow .
Thus she moved on , a little solitary figure , herself like a ghost stealing through a ghostly world .
The air was almost as cutting as a sharpened razor , but as though she were indeed a visitant from another sphere she seemed to have grown unconscious of all sense impressions .
Only when she came in front of the pond , now a sheet of ice , where the statues of Venus , with the snow lying on their marble hair and shoulders , looked forth from amid the shrouded rose-trees with a ghostly glare , she involuntarily checked her course , as the scene of that June evening flashed upon her memory with a more than life-like vividness .
Oh , yes !
now she understood the look and the action , and the muttered `` No more , no more , oh never more on me , '' which had then for an instant jarred the rapture of the hour .
Her poor heart seemed to contract in her bosom with the pain of it , and she looked up to the heavens as though in a mute , instinctive appeal that help might be given her from above and the strength to endure .
There , indeed , the infinite , unnumbered multitude of the stars shone down on her in pitiless and supernatural page : 203 beauty .
Like the unfurled standard of an angelic host , the milky way streamed right across the firmament , swarming , as it were , with lights of greater and lesser brilliancy , emitting some a mild lustre , some flickering restlessly as if blown hither and thither in a gale of wind , while others , mere phosphorescent sparks , seemed to vanish even as you looked at them .
And there betwixt the glittering tree-tops , in the rear of the dancing stars , followed the thin form of the wasting moon .
Suddenly , close at her elbow , distinct as in life , she heard her father 's voice saying , `` That is Orion . ''
Once when she was a little girl of five , the gentle , abstracted scholar had called her attention to the sky , and pointed out to her the three fiery stars of this constellation .
To the child , impossible to say why , this name opened out a whole enchanted region of fancy .
And now grief , acting on her brain as a chemical on secret writing , was bringing out in abnormal freshness this thing so long ago obliterated .
But the voice , which seemed to have been outside of herself , sounded so startling in the frightful stillness , that Mina , uttering a low scream , fled down the avenue towards the homely glimmering light of the Pavilion , which she presently reached .
Dreading the very cracking of the snow , she ascended the shallow flight of steps which led all round it , till the uppermost step brought her on a level with the casement where she might look in upon her love unsuspected , unheeded .
Ah , even now it was heaven to be so near him !
At that thought the heavy , icy grief suddenly gave way , and her very heart seemed dissolving in a flood of tears .
page : [ 204 ] CHAPTER XLIII .
WITHIN AND WITHOUT .
SHE could not see him at first .
She could only catch the wavering reflection of his shadow in one of the tall mirrors as she stood with straining eyes looking through the carelessly drawn pink-and-white lace curtains into the warmly-glowing interior of the circular room .
A large wood fire was blazing on the open hearth in French fashion , and the shadows cast by its vacillating light wavered restlessly along the walls and the vaulted ceiling , with its gaily painted , chubby cupids fluttering amidst garlands of lilies and roses .
Emanuel , in an attitude of profound absorption was sitting near a small table of carved rosewood  he had apparently partly finished the composition of the piece on which he was engaged , as it was littered by sheets which seemed to have been flung there one after another as they were done with .
Some wax candles in the meanwhile had burnt down to the socket without page : 205 attracting his attention , for now and then the expiring flame of one of them still flared up .
For Emanuel , like an experienced swimmer who luxuriously abandons himself to the flux and reflux of the element he loves , was floating in the spirit on those rhythmically balanced waves of sound audible to him , in the silence .
He had just finished his fantasia .
In it he had striven to sum up , to focus , as it were , the leading points of his inner experience  to give a final expression to the past with its storm of headlong passions , while indicating by a soft transition the shining vista opening out into a future glorified by love .
Suddenly , in his hasty way , he rose , walked to the fireplace , and stirred the great logs till the blue-green opalescent flames shot crackling and roaring up the chimney .
Then he took the violin from its case - placed in the warmest corner , like the pet it was - and went back to the table where his score lay .
He was evidently going to play over the piece in its completed form  for he took some of the wax candles from their sconces over the mantleshelf , and stuck them over the still flaming remains in the candlesticks .
Mina could see him distinctly now .
A radiance almost like light seemed to stream from his visionary eyes , and pale , thin features , as he began playing  for all the time the idea of his love hovered like a spiritual presence before his sight .
Even this drifting back into the past could not cloud or overshadow the vivifying joy he felt .
At first he struck into a low , veiled prelude , stealing upon the air , and indicating the youthful awakening to page : 206 life which as yet withdraws itself coyly into a semi-obscurity , only tenanted by the fairy forms of fancy .
These sounds insinuated themselves on the ear with a delicacy , a tingling freshness , such as bluebells and hyacinths might emit , could the elves , indeed , set their bells a-ringing .
Mina almost forgot her sorrow !
All the nerves in her body seemed listening !
It was as if his soul were speaking to hers through the violin .
Yea , that might still be hers , that ecstasy of feeling his music pouring through and through her in a flood of melody .
Then with a change he began striking the strings and swift , sharp , piercing notes leapt from under his fingers like sparks from the anvil when the iron glows to its stubborn heart .
A magnificent form seemed to evolve itself and to wind once more through the mazes of a fantastic dance , as the network of sound now branched out in the most complicated harmonies  for the old tarantella motive , with its weird trills , flitted in and out of the long-drawn yearning sounds , which , as by a miracle of execution , formed the dominant theme .
Here the music seemed the expression of that implacable passion embodied by the ancients in their `` Venus Pandemos , '' which fevers the blood , hardens the heart , and seems to drain the very sap of vitality out of man  the passion which would drag him back , as it were , into the chaos of those elemental forces from which he has slowly , painfully worked his way up by infinitesimal steps in the course of the centuries  the passion which would defeat and mock and , laughing his moral law to scorn , lead him a captive in the triumph of Eros .
page : 207 When Mina heard that clash and tumult , as of the very sea of passion lashed into fury , and those tarantella notes that with their irresistible sorceries all at once brought the eyes of Antonella so vividly before her , as though she saw them glittering through the darkness , she feebly clutched at her heart and staggered .
It was not of her , but that other woman , he was thinking then , even at that hour - his music said so plainer than any words could .
All doubt was over !
Strength suddenly forsook her , as if her very blood were actually oozing from some physical wound .
Stunned and dazed with the overpowering emotions that had crowded in upon her on that terrible day , she let herself sink on the step on which she had hitherto been standing , and her head drooped wearily back against the door .
She was scarcely concious conscious now of what it was that made her heart so heavy within her  there was only an overwhelming sense of drowsiness weighing her eyelids down like lead .
* * * * * * The violin now seemed to utter a kind of shrill cry as of a thing in the last extremity of pain  and then the tempo changed again to a very slow andante - a weary dragging succession of staccato notes , as of some wanderer , it might be , toiling alone along a bleak highway , worn and deadly tired , a worn-out , forsaken wanderer .
Tired - tired !
Oh how those tones were chiming in with the semi-conscious sensations of the prostrate girl outside .
They seemed almost to proceed from within her own bosom , and the real and the illusory page : 208 began to get curiously blended and confused in her brain .
* * * * * * There was a pause of a minute or two , and then followed a soft , rippling , gliding of the tune into an entirely fresh movement .
It was sweet as the dropping of dew on parched-up pastures , or as the slumber which now closed the eyelids of the unhappy girl .
So winningly tender and caressing were these honeyed sounds , that a mouse actually stole from its hiding-place , as if irresistibly drawn forth by the music , till it came quite close to the violinist at last , where it remained some little time with brightly peering eyes - till the fall of a burning splinter on the hearth sent it scrambling back to its hole .
Another form seemed gradually to detach itself from the background of this magically tender adagio , an etherially lovely form in which the virtuoso now expressed the exquisite , regenerating sentiment in which his whole heart was steeped that moment .
Nothing in music had ever given such divine expression to the love which emancipates and exalts , to the love in which the body itself becomes transfused with soul , or so finely rendered the best moments of the best natures , the supreme aspiration of man 's heart towards ideal beauty - which music , of all the arts , is best adequate to interpret for us here .
Occasional fragments of these heavenly sounds still came , borne like whiffs of fragrance , to the half-numbed senses of the girl , and her soul seemed floating away , far away , on them , till no sense of sorrow or separation remained  but her very life - merged and melted in his - page : 209 seemed reuniting to its primitive essence , and to soar on the wings of music into an ocean of illimitable beatitude .
Conscious no longer of where she was , reclined on the snow she slumbered as softly as on a bed of down - the snow , of which the children say , when its flakes come whirling to earth as they then did , that the Virgin Mary is shaking out her feather-bed .
And still the night grew cold and ever colder .
A cutting north-east wind occasionally swept through the trees with a thin , sniffing sound , dislodging the snow with which they were so heavily laden .
Now and then the stillness was broken as before by a sharp , sudden noise , when some branch or twig snapped under its burden , or when the body of some starved and frozen sparrow tumbled dead from its perch .
Presently , however , a great wave of sound burst on this silence .
From the Gothic Minster , and from every steeple and spire in the town , the bells pealed out , clashing and clanging together far through the frosty midnight the glad tidings of the breaking of Christmas Day .
And while the chimes still resounded , a lambent star shot from the very zenith with a trail of fire , and was engulphed in night .
There is a superstitious saying amongst the people of those parts , that whenever a star shoots a virgin dies somewhere on the earth .
Emanuel at length put down his violin , and throwing himself into a chair , worn-out with his exertions , fell asleep where he was .
page : [ 210 ] CHAPTER XLIV .
THE MARRIAGE MORN .
WHEN Professor Sontheim had left the Countess Ogotshki in the abrupt manner we have seen , this lady several times twirled herself round on her high-heeled black satin shoes  then , with a flash of triumph in her black eyes , muttered something between her teeth about `` It must and shall be . ''
When she had quieted down a little she began pacing the parqueted floor rather more sedately , all the drooping languor of her previous attitude gone , and replaced by an imperious look of decision , while her knitted brows betokened that she was still busily planning her further course .
So far she had indeed succeeded admirably in her machinations .
She had met with but little resistance , and she doubted not that the power of her beauty would exert its old witchcraft over Emanuel if she could only get him all to herself once more .
The great thing was to get Mina safely out of his page : 211 way for the present .
After all it was impossible that he should care so much , so very much , for a little half-fledged chick like that .
Well , at any rate she would be harmless to-morrow - time would be gained - her own presence would soon serve to efface what impression had been made .
Indeed , who could tell - coming upon him unawares might she not take him by storm ?
And perhaps - stranger things had been known to come to pass - if he was so set on being married to-morrow , why not wed her over again when everything was ready to hand ?
And as to that child Mina , why she would look out for a nice young man to console her for the loss of one who was n't at all fit for her .
But if she should prove refractory and refuse a good settlement in life , there were ways and means - ways and means  people were sometimes blind to their own best interests , and a little gentle force - when one has lots of money at one 's back !
Like a spider balancing itself in the centre of its web , now and again shooting out a cunning thread where the meshes seem weakest , she was weaving , weaving the most subtle of stories , wherewith to entrap Emanuel on the morrow when she should come upon him unawares .
She had settled that she would go to him quite early , as nothing told so much with these impressionable , hare-brained men as a woman 's actual presence in the flesh .
And her lips , her eyes flashed into a smile of insolent triumph as she walked , with a dancing step , closely up to the full-length looking-glass , surveying herself from every side , now in profile , now full face , now bending a little forward with a languished page : 212 air , now looking over her shoulder in the attitude which the ancients so often gave to their Venus .
And she seemed well pleased with the reflection which met her gaze  for , after carrying on this kind of dumb show for about half an hour , she threw a kiss at her reflection in the glass , and then laughingly turned away .
Could there , could there be the shadow of a doubt as to what would be the result when , coming in her beauty , backed up by an enormous fortune , she flung it all down at the feet of the man for whom she felt this quenchless desire !
Indeed , had not that been her intention from the very first ?
Had she not risked much peril to herself in order that some day Emanuel might reap the benefit of her dubious conduct ?
Could self-sacrifice go farther ?
Surely , surely he must understand it now , if only she could once explain quietly that from the first - when he might have considered her most guilty - his welfare had been the chief mainspring of her actions .
Absorbed in these meditations , she now passed into her bedroom , luxuriously leaning back in a chair while the maid was undressing her .
But when her long , blue-black hair had been well combed and brushed out , streaming like a dark veil over her ivory shoulders and grandly moulded arms , she said out loud , after being left alone , `` What need , what need of it all .
I defy him not to love me ! ''
and , satisfied with that conviction , she laid her head on the pillow and fell sound asleep .
Nor did she awake till , quite against her habits , she was called according to orders before daybreak .
As she page : 213 was being dressed she saw , to her great satisfaction , that she was looking splendid that morning , if indeed she could ever look anything else .
When the long process of attiring herself was at last over , and she had donned a most bewitching fur cap and pelisse , she stepped into a carriage , well warmed throughout ( not her own , however , for that she had placed at Sontheim 's disposal ) , and ordered herself to be driven to the Pavilion in the Palace Gardens .
The heavy snow made it a tedious drive , though the distance was but short in reality , and it was quite early still when she stopped the carriage at some little distance , not wishing to startle the unconscious Emanuel by the sudden approach of a vehicle at this unexpected hour .
But what was her surprise when she saw her own carriage stopping in front of the pavilion and almost blocking the passage .
An uncontrollable fit of rage and anger blazed up in her at this sight foreboding the miscarriage of her schemes  but she crushed it down again , and , boldly advancing to the door , glanced hastily in before entering .
Good God !
was it - could it be Emanuel lying there on the floor with his arms twined and clinging round something - somebody - on the low divan there , something wrapped about in white , something quite still and motionless !
Suddenly she started back with a quick thrill of horror - she had caught sight of Mina 's blanched , unearthly face .
After standing there for a minute with staring eyes she ran back , threw herself into her own carriage , and page : 214 ordered the coachman to drive back to the hotel with all speed .
* * * * * * Emanuel , with his habitual impatience , had got dressed that self-same morning long before there was the slightest occasion , and was starting for a ramble in the grey whirling snow , of which since a boy he had always been passionately fond , when he stumbled over something lying across his very threshold .
Astonished that snow should be so hard and unyielding , he bent down to examine the cause of the obstruction , and with his hand began clearing it away from whatever it was that obstructed his passage .
While doing so he was first startled by the sensation of a woman 's shoulder , though so caked with snow that it was indistinguishable on this dim winter 's morning  next , shocked to find a woman 's chesnut hair the colour of Mina 's  and then , O God !
what mad phantasmagoria was it that reeled before his straining vision ?
What demon had invested this phantasmal body with the form of Mina ?
`` Mina !
Mina ! ''
he shrieked wildly at last , and had he not by this time been on his knees he would probably have fallen like a senseless block himself .
The scream brought the servant to the door , who arrived just in time to steady his master 's tottering frame .
Looking in utter bewilderment at his convulsed features , he at last said stupidly , `` How could a beggar have come to this lone place , and on such a night ? ''
And still holding his master , he stooped as though about to examine and move the body .
But Emanuel seized him almost with the ferocity page : 215 of a wild beast , and then said in a strangled voice , `` A doctor , a doctor - quick , a doctor ! ''
The servant stared for one instant in his master 's face , and then silently obeyed him , disappearing down the avenue in the falling snow as fast as it would allow .
Emanuel , left alone with the motionless figure , clutched hold of her in a semi-demented state , and half carried , half dragged her into the room , with the snow still clinging to her and dropping piecemeal all about the place , as , kneeling down , he desposited deposited his burden on a low couch with the tenderness of a mother .
With this one supreme effort , what remained to him of clear reasoning seemed exhausted , and still on his knees , he stared blankly about as though at his wit 's end .
The servant was gone , the fire was out - the utter helplessness of his situation came over him with overwhelming force .
He had not even sense enough left to shut the door , through which the cold wind , mingling with occasional snow-flakes , came drifting to the very sofa where he had placed her .
Suddenly throwing himself down on the floor beside the snow-cold , angelic form of her he loved  he clasped her in an immovable embrace , he pressed his mouth to hers , he covered her lips with burning kisses , and strained her against his breast till it seemed that her slight form must have been crushed in his arms .
Was not that the flutter of returning pulsation in her frozen veins ?
Was not that the breath of reviving warmth on her icy lips ?
It could not be but that the passion of his love should send the hot life-blood once more through her chill body .
Yes , yes !
was not this page : 216 the thrill of reawakening life as he cried , `` Awake , love , awake , for this is our marriage morn ! ''
When the servant returned with a physician they found him still in this position , his dark form stretched beside the snow-figure of the bride , his tangled hair mingling with her luxuriant curls matted with the snow , which covered her in lumps except where , between their two breasts , it was melting and trickling down the floor .
The doctor , with his shrewd eyes , glanced at the group before him , but with that wonderful professional calm which never deserts the man of science , he said nothing for a moment .
He keenly scanned the maiden 's blanched features , and slightly raised his eyebrows on recognizing them .
Then , without disturbing Emanuel , he touched one of her delicate hands : it was like marble , and as rigid .
He then , not without compassion , shook the agonized lover by the shoulder and said : `` Come , come , my dear sir , you must please move aside if I 'm to be of any assistance .
There 's no time to lose . ''
Then addressing the servant , who was standing in the doorway shaking the snow from his clothes , he said : `` Have you any spirits in the place ?
Light a fire directly in another room  hot blankets may be wanted later . ''
Emanuel , without removing his arms , only half rose , still keeping quite near , while his eyes remained fastened on Mina 's face as though , were he to remove them for an instant , she might dissolve like the snow-figure of yesterday .
Then he whispered with almost a wandering air : `` Strange , strange !
very strange indeed ! ''
page : 217 This time the doctor , again turning to the musician as he bent over the patient , said frankly , almost rudely : `` My dear sir , I must beg you to leave the room at once  you understand , of course , that you can not remain here while I examine the young lady . ''
Emanuel , thus adjured , went reluctantly out of the room , muttering , `` Very strange - but life is returning ! ''
In the meanwhile Leopold Sontheim arrived .
According to his arrangement with the Countess he had driven up to the Lichtenfelds , where , on arriving , he found the household in a state of utter confusion and wild dismay .
For when the early-stirring widow had gone up to call her daughter , she had found the room empty and the bed not slept in .
Since then she had been distracted by running from one room to another , wringing her hands , and still searching in all most unlikely places , while calling upon her daughter , till it was a wonder she still had any voice left to call with .
On hearing a carriage driving up , therefore , she flew downstairs , and as the Professor was rushing up they came into violent collision .
`` Mina will have explained everything , '' he said hurriedly  `` is she ready ?
There 's no time to lose ! ''
`` My daughter !
where is my daughter ? ''
cried the widow , scarcely heeding him .
`` Give me back , give me back my child ! ''
Sontheim retreated a step or two down the stairs - `` What do you mean ?
I do n't understand ! ''
he exclaimed .
`` What has he done with her , Sontheim , what has page : 218 he done with her ? ''
screamed Frau Lichtenfeld , quite beside herself .
`` Oh , I always feared that these - - '' `` Do you mean that Mina is not in the house ? ''
asked Sontheim , sternly .
`` Herr Gott , how should she , '' cried the weeping mother , `` when I 've been hunting for her ever since daylight in every cupboard and wardrobe !
Wolf must have missed you  I sent him - - '' Sontheim stamped on the floor in a towering rage as he cried : `` He has found out that I know all , then , and ran off with her - - '' `` Ran off with her , when he was to have been married to my daughter this very morning - impossible ! ''
exclaimed Frau Lichtenfeld , incredulously .
The Professor in a few brief sentences then explained how matters now appeared to him ( for he no longer doubted that Emanuel had meanly practised on his credulity and good faith ) .
While doing so he tried to soften the blow as much as possible to the poor widow , by saying that if she would leave matters with him he yet hoped to be able to overtake the fugitives , and bring her daughter back to her unharmed .
Frau Lichtenfeld , utterly thunderstruck , could only find breath for once to say : `` Go , go at once , for heaven 's sake , as you value our good name , and let us keep it as quiet as we can ! ''
And even before she had finished the Professor had started off again .
He directed the coachman to drive to the Pavilion , in the hope that he might come upon the traces of the fugitives .
On the way he was a prey to the most painful reflections .
He no longer entertained the shadow of a doubt that everything which the Countess Ogotshki page : 219 had told him was the exact truth , and that Emanuel , finding that imposition would answer no longer , had taken the bit in his teeth , and carried Mina off - to what a fate , good God !
Which ever way he looked there was equal bitterness .
Emanuel , whom he had trusted and loved , had shamefully deceived him  Mina , who ought to have found a protector in himself , was , partly owing to his foolish gullibility , being carried off to her ruin  and the Countess , the beautiful , ravishing , irresistible Countess , who had proved less black than she had been painted - well , she was not , could not be a widow in that case !
By this time they drove up in front of the Pavilion .
The Professor , flushed with anger , and relieving himself by a volley of the most terrific oaths , got out here to make inquiries of any person whom he might discover about the premises .
Finding the door ajar , he walked in without further ceremony .
To his astonishment the room was not empty as he had expected .
A doctor , whom he knew slightly , was violently rubbing the bare feet of some one whose face he could not see owing to the position of the sofa .
But before he could approach or make any further inquiries , Emanuel himself came softly peering into the room  but oh , how strange , how haggard was his look !
On seeing Sontheim , he apparently took his presence there as a matter of course , and said in a wild , hasty whisper - `` Life is returning , Leopold , life is returning ! ''
Sontheim with quick strides moved to the side of the couch .
A groan escaped him on seeing his old friend 's daughter in such piteous plight the fair , innocent child , so full of life and love but yesterday  the page : 220 little child that almost insensibly had turned into a maiden under his eyes !
`` What is it ?
what is it ? ''
he asked the doctor in a husky whisper .
`` How came she here ?
Where was she found ? ''
and he groaned again with a dim compunction that his reason hardly yet confirmed .
The doctor , glancing significantly at Emanuel and then at him , begged the former to fetch him some more snow , and the instant he had darted off he bent towards Sontheim with the whisper : `` Go , go , break it to him gently - I can do nothing here  but how can this have happened ?
Frau Lichtenfeld 's daughter , is it not ?
Was n't she to have been married to-day ?
What does it mean ? ''
Sontheim burst out : `` Is it true ?
Do you mean that she is dead ?
It can not be - one does not die like that !
But yesterday she was in the bloom of health ! ''
`` That may be , '' said the doctor quietly - `` for you see she has been frozen to death . ''
The Professor struck his fist against his forehead .
Something like a glimmering of the real state of the case , of the desperation of the hapless child on hearing what she must have heard , faintly dawned on him , and he cursed himself for a fool on remembering how he had wished to let her sleep in peace - sleep in peace , indeed !
When Emanuel came rushing back with the snow , and breathlessly inquired how she was going on , Sontheim , grasping his arm , said : `` I want a word with you  Dr. Furka is doing all he can for her , you see . ''
And leading his friend into the next room he closed the door , making a sign as much as to say that page : 221 he did n't want to be overheard .
`` In heaven 's name , how has it happened ? ''
he whispered .
Emanuel , shaking his head in a piteous manner , said brokenly : `` Good God !
as if I knew !
It 's past all comprehension !
The dear angel out on such a night - alone - in the cold - at my very threshold  it will drive me mad to think of .
But I must go back , I must go back now  life is returning , she will be well soon . ''
`` Wait a minute , '' said Sontheim , detaining him by the arm  `` you were not going to run off with her , then ? ''
`` Run off with her ! ''
echoed Emanuel , `` are you going out of your mind too ? ''
`` I mean because the Countess Ogotshki arrived here yesterday , and might have - - '' `` Antonella ! ''
hissed Emanuel , `` Antonella here ? ''
`` Yes , yes , '' cried Sontheim , `` I thought you knew .
She was with Mina yesterday  she told her - - '' `` Oh , oh ! ''
moaned Emanuel , in an agony of despair , `` then she has - ah - let me go - I will dash her brains out - I will - - '' He struggled violently to free his arm , but his friend detained him by sheer force .
`` Emanuel , '' he said , and there were tears in his eyes , `` wait a minute - oh , my friend - how shall I tell you ?
- Mina is - is - dead . ''
Emanuel shrieked , even as he had done on first finding his dear love in the snow , and bursting from his friend 's grasp he darted back into the room where she lay , when again flinging himself on the floor beside her , he took his snow-bride in his arms , looking a more woeful spectacle than the corpse which he clasped .
page : 222 * * * * * * Leopold Sontheim and Dr. Furka looked on with the profoundest pity  and as grief , like love , seeks ever to shroud itself in obscurity , these two stole out of the room on tip-toe , leaving the unfortunate man alone with her who was to have been his wife that day .
What consolation could avail ?
What comfort could they offer ?
page : [ 223 ] CHAPTER XLV .
RETRO ME SATANAS .
THE day on which a merry wedding was to have been celebrated , turned out one of dire misery and confusion to every one concerned in it .
It was by downright force that Dr. Furka and Professor Sontheim succeeded in extricating , the dead bride from her lover 's arms .
He refused to believe that she was dead  and , like one beside himself , threatened them should they dare to bury her .
She looked indeed but as one that is sleeping .
Her lips were red , and there was a faint tinge of rose on her snow-white cheeks , while her hair , as if with a life of its own , fell in golden-brown ruffled locks about her smooth temples and soft round throat .
All her old loveliness had come back to her , indeed with a something beyond it .
On her face seemed yet to linger faint reflections of that divine harmony which had rocked her spirit into its long sleep .
page : 224 But when they had once carried her out of the house Emanuel fell into a deadly stupor , and suffered them to do anything they liked .
For man can not suffer beyond a certain point  after that comes a blank , a nothingness , an oblivion as of death itself , till his energies be sufficiently restored to bear a renewal of torture .
The thought , the maddening thought , which lent an additional poignancy to Emanuel 's anguish , when he once more fully realized what had happened to him , was the conviction that this tragic issue was in part the outcome of his own conduct .
When in his reviving consciousness he conceived the meeting between these two women , and how it must have taken place and what might have been said between them , he could have screamed aloud for pain and rage , and he fiercely struck his head against the wall near which he lay , as though he would have dashed his brains out .
This dastardly stab aimed with the skill of a devil , was it not a murder ?
Yet what redress from the law for the slaying of this sweetest soul ?
He himself , was he not guilty too ?
Had he not helped to bring about this catastrophe ?
Why , why did he not tell her the truth , the whole truth , and leave her to act according to her own delicate perception of honour and right ?
Was he not a coward - a common coward ?
In the evening , when Dr. Furka and Sontheim returned they found the musician seething in a fever  and the former , after carefully examining his patient , seemed alarmed at the symptoms .
He was a physician of high reputation , this Dr. page : 225 Furka , and even consulted by the Grand Ducal family itself , though his blunt , outspoken , and brusque , nay , at times , rude manners , did not recommend him much to the patronage of the aristocracy , who only called him in when compelled to do so .
He had not the slightest pity or sympathy for the ailments and vapours of fine ladies  instead of making a good thing out of them , physicking and coddling them up to the top of their bent , he would shrug his shoulders , and , by way of a prescription , sarcastically suggest a course of scrubbing their own floors or washing their linen .
It was even reported that one high-born young lady who suffered from a complication of nervous disorders , after trying every doctor in the town and calling in Dr. Furka as a last resource , could get nothing out of him for her trouble but a lecture .
He had actually twitted her with her aches and pains in the most barbarous manner  and pointing to the yellow leaves outside - it happening to be autumn - asked what business she had at her age to have a complexion like them .
`` But my advice , '' he had ended with , `` you would not take - namely , that you should leave off parading a waspish waist and wafer-like boots , dancing till day-break and nibbling sweetmeats in order to have no appetite left for a hearty meal  so being no charlatan , it only remains for me to wish your ladyship a very good morning . ''
This was not the way to thrive in the world , it must be admitted  but the patients whom Dr. Furka did take in hand got on all the better , perhaps , for his not getting on .
A middle-aged , under-sized man , Dr. Furka was of page : 226 thin but wiry make , with a determined , military sort of air .
His head and face , too big for the rest of his body , were anything but handsome , reminding one of a shaggy skye-terrier  but this plainness was redeemed by a pair of deep-set , dark grey eyes which , overhung by black , sharply-cut eyebrows , seemed to pierce the person he might be looking at to the core .
With these eyes he was now regarding the sick virtuoso , when he suddenly said - `` What strength there is in this weakness ! ''
and he took one of the thin hands and examined it admiringly .
It fidgeted nervously in his own .
Turning to Sontheim , he said - `` Do you know that this hand alone would tell me how to deal with our patient  for human beings are in truth like so many instruments - some very much out of tune , I admit - but a physician to deserve the name should know how to manipulate each according to its construction .
I wo n't disguise that this is a grave case , Professor , a very grave case indeed , but I trust he may weather it with such nervous power as this superb hand here betokens : to be plain with you , I can do but little , only soothe , only pour oil on these vexed , overwrought nerves , that I could almost fancy I heard vibrating in shrill discords .
But what can have brought about such a tragedy ? ''
Sontheim shuffled about uneasily , hardly knowing what to say , or do , or think almost .
Such knowledge as he possessed he was chary of  to communicate it now to any one could but occasion fresh evil .
Dr. Furka , keenly glancing at him , said : `` A physician ought frequently to know the whole story of his patient 's page : 227 life to do him any radical good , though in this case it 's not necessary  but I can not help surmising this and that - another woman at the bottom of it all ?
Just the sort of man to set them by the ears !
And that poor child !
I never came across a sadder business in all my experience .
I knew her well by sight too  she was always a pet of mine because she looked so natural , and fresh , and blithe  and I never saw such a clear eye in a human head , more like a seal 's for that .
But to our patient - the one thing he will need is good nursing and quiet . ''
Sontheim , who himself looked as harassed and feverish as could be , here said that he himself would attend his friend .
The doctor shook his head with a slight smile as he replied : `` No , no , Professor , forgive me for saying so , but you wo n't do .
Your pulse is over ninety at this minute , I bet you  and what we want here , above everything , is a cool , calm hand , and a presence that shall act as a moderator .
A professional nurse is required , and with your permission I will send a person who will prove more efficacious than all my medicaments . ''
Sontheim readily acquiesced , but expressed a hope that there would be no objection to his spending part of his time with his sick friend .
`` None whatever , none whatever , '' answered the physician , as he quickly wrote , or rather dashed off , a prescription , and then took up his hat  `` but do not keep too close about him - be in the next room if you will .
I assure you the physical influence of one person , or even body , upon another is a thing far too little taken page : 228 account of in medical science .
You are too electrical , too electrical by half , '' he added , nodding his head as he took his departure .
The nurse recommended by Dr. Furka entered upon her functions within an hour of his leaving .
She was a woman of about thirty , in the garb of a sister of mercy  so fair that she might have passed for an Albino , and so noiseless in her movements that she stole upon you unawares , like a moonbeam almost .
This lady , in her scrupulously neat black dress , with her pale hair tightly gathered under a small white cap , now began administering to Emanuel a dose of the medicine that had just arrived .
Sontheim , after exchanging a few words with her about the patient , seeing his friend in such good hands , now left him , in order to seek some rest himself .
Some days passed without any change for the better in the musician 's most precarious state .
It was terrible to see this man fighting with the spectral delusions of fever .
The teeming fancies of his naturally imaginative brain seeming to turn upon and rend him as the fabled hounds did Actæon .
In his delirium Mina and the snow-bride were being constantly confounded , while the sun , assuming the shape and aspect of a blood-red , bloated spider , shot out flaming threads near and nearer towards the spot where she stood , till the heated air grew thick and suffocating like molten lead .
Then , like another Atlas , he would frantically exert himself to keep that burning cobwebbed sky from falling down on the earth  but , behold , his arms shrivelled up like blazing straw , and before his very eyes he saw his lovely , snow-white love , page : 229 outshining the morning in fairness , melting , melting away , like a waxen image dissolving in flame .
But again and again this unwedded bride would return .
He would hear her knocking , knocking , knocking , in the winter 's night , piteously crying upon him to unbar his door and let her in  and , behold , his feet had turned to stone , and he could not move , oh he could not move , frantic though his efforts were , as her faint wail , like that of an outcast child crying in the night , `` Hast thou quite , quite forgotten me ! ''
would reach his ears .
Then suddenly she stood by his bedside without a head , and the moon was shining through her diaphanous form , and he could see the heart in her bosom like a clock , and hear it ticking , ticking , ticking , through the ghostly silence  but the hour-hands marked the pangs his love had inflicted instead of time .
Suddenly it stopped , for the spring broke , and the head and face and eyes of Antonella laughed at him with insolent triumph from Mina 's figure  and her compelling arms choked even in enlacing him as she whispered , `` Time is over  now , love , let us love each other throughout eternity  '' and then he himself was metamorphosed into a fly , struggling in the web that enmeshed him in a living death .
* * * * * * The news of the wedding turned into a funeral , of the mysteriously awful death of the intended bride , of the precarious state of her betrothed , spread like wildfire through the little town .
Nothing could stem the tide of gossip , nor the fabulous and wildly-conflicting stories that were rife in all quarters .
page : 230 No one , however , connected the Countess Ogotshki , the wealthy Russian widow , who had been staying in the hotel `` Zum Englischen Hof , '' with the tragedy in the Silberstrasse .
No one had seen her enter or leave the house on that Christmas Eve , and she went away on the following day without stating the place of her destination  so that Sontheim , who had rushed there in a state of frantic distraction to gather further particulars from her as to what had passed between herself and the unhappy girl on that fatal evening of the twenty-fourth , was completely baffled .
Owing to Emanuel 's terrible state , he had found it impossible to have any explanation on the matter - though all explanations could avail nothing now  but he felt morally convinced that matters had stood even as his friend had represented them to him , though he did not , or would not , admit to himself even yet , how far the Countess Ogotshki might have been deluded or deluding .
But his state of mind for the present was one of great wretchedness .
He felt that he had committed a piece of signal treachery , in that he had not gone straight to his friend after the accusations that had been made , and , in taxing him with them , given him a chance of self-defence .
In that case this terrible catastrophe would never have occurred , in all human probability .
This reflection was acutely painful to the Professor  indeed , his conscience whispered that had he not been so blindly enamoured of this woman , he would probably not have yielded such absolute credence to what she had told him - and yet - and yet - he still shrank from accusing her of having wilfully misled him and Mina .
He still hoped and longed that much might page : 231 be cleared up to her credit and his own as far as she was concerned , and lift this burden of self-reproach from his mind .
In this state of gnawing uncertainty concerning her , joined to intense anxiety for his sick friend , and the envenomed grief for Mina 's death , he had at present to remain .
Frau Lichtenfeld , when she had recovered from the first violence of her grief , which being of a vociferous nature spent itself all the more rapidly , put everything down in a vague manner to the ill-luck of the Lichtenfelds generally : it was like the bankruptcy and the rest of it .
And then , alas !
or perhaps luckily for her , the preoccupation with the necessary mourning to be provided for a family of five , besides herself , acted as a safety-valve for her feelings .
An inquiry had of course been instituted before the proper Court , and in the report that was drawn up , `` found frozen '' was the only explanation given .
Two days afterwards Mina Lichtenfeld , the child of eighteen , was buried beside the grandmother of eighty-six .
Many were the ladies of rank and fashion ( such as the place contained ) who drove up in their carriages to inquire after the great musician 's state of health .
Every day , at this unseasonable time of year , there arrived splendid gifts of fruits and flowers , although it must be confessed that the irritable doctor often threw the latter out of the window , saying that they might as well poison his patient at once as send those night-polluting hothouse flowers .
Every morning there arrived amongst the much abused nosegays one of unusual magnificence , page : 232 composed solely of roses .
Oddly enough , it seemed as though they varied with the varying symptoms of the fever .
When the malady was at its worst they were of a mortuary white , and as the severity of the illness diminished or augmented they changed from cream-colour to pale pink or crimson , as it were out of sympathy .
No one could find out where they came from , but they must have cost the donor something like a small fortune .
One evening , about a fortnight after the terrible blow his patient had sustained , Dr. Furka went away , and , to Sontheim 's great relief , pronounced Emanuel to be , as he believed , out of all danger .
He assured the Professor that nature had made a colossal effort in conquering the disease , and that though his friend might still ramble in talk and see imaginary forms , there was no cause for alarm , as his fancy was naturally more vivid than that of ordinary people .
Sister Marie , who had hardly ever been out of the sick-room , asked leave therefore to go on an errand for a couple of hours , and Leopold Sontheim agreed to stay in the adjoining apartment till her return .
But the wear and tear of constant anxiety , the watching at night , and the hopeless passion , futile regret , and vague surmises which he devoured in silence , had begun to tell on the Professor too .
So he threw himself on the sofa , and fell unawares into a kind of doze .
Just as Sister Marie opened the front door , a tall , imposing lady in deep mourning was coming up the steps of the Pavilion , and asked the nurse how the patient was .
She then said , in low broken tones , that she was a relative , who , although ill herself and en route page : 233 for Italy , had stopped on her way , and would give anything could she only see the sick man for half an hour .
Sister Marie was not a little embarrassed as to what she ought to do - fearful lest the sick man should be excited , and yet unwilling to refuse a request the lady seemed to have so much at heart .
`` He is asleep now , '' she said , in a hesitating voice .
`` I would not wake him , '' replied the lady  `` indeed I would only look to see with my own eyes how my cousin is , and then proceed on my journey , as I have no time to lose . ''
`` In that case , '' answered the nurse , `` I have not the heart to refuse you  but please , Madame , not to excite him , as you care for your relative 's life , for he has only just turned the corner . ''
Thus , holding the door open for the lady to enter , she went on her way .
With a hesitating , gliding step the stranger entered , casting cautious glances around her , and then very noiselessly she sat down , at the foot end of the bed , on a chair that stood very much in shadow , for there was only a dim lamp burning in the sick-room .
When , she caught sight of the sleeping man 's face , however , she could only with the utmost difficulty , apparently , repress the hysterical sobbing that rose to her throat .
He looked indeed terribly emaciated - the bony framework of his features showing through the drawn , sallow skin , and his hair , his beautiful thickly clustering hair , had grown quite grey .
It was as if years and years had passed over his head in those few weeks .
The horrified stare with which she looked at him seemed to have magnetism in it , for the sleeper grew page : 234 restless , turned upon his pillow with a sigh , and quite unexpectedly opened his hollow eyes and stared upon her in his turn .
He did not utter a sound , however  he evidently considered her as one of his fevered visions , and with a gesture of loathing he quickly covered his face with his hands .
Antonella started from her chair , and , falling on her knees by the bedside , said faintly - `` Oh , forgive me , forgive me , Emanuele , I meant not to do her any harm .
Let me stay and take care of you !
Only say that you forgive me ! ''
she sobbed .
`` Is it - no , it can not be - you would not - you dare not show your face here ! ''
cried Emanuel faintly , suddenly rising up in bed and looking at her with wild eyes almost starting from their sockets , still doubtful whether this was the creature of his diseased brain , or a detested reality .
`` It is all , all coming back , '' he then moaned , striking his forehead  `` the horror , the - - '' `` Hear me - only hear me !
I am that Tolla , indeed , whom you once loved , '' sobbed Antonella  `` let me explain , let me justify myself  do not condemn me unheard - even a criminal has that right !
Say , what have I done ?
Could I know that you were going to be married when I came to this place after the Count 's death ?
Remember I had been living here before - had come here , indeed , because it was your birthplace and had memories connected with you  and then I had made a friend of her . ''
Emanuel , who had sunk back on the pillow overcome with weakness , started up once more , and the expression in his eyes would have frightened a more timid woman from the room , for he looked as though page : 235 he would throttle her if he could .
But she persisted in saying - `` Nay , hear me , only hear me , Emanuele !
I came to see her , ignorant that she was to be married to you  and in the surprise , the bitterness of the discovery , the secret escaped me in spite of myself - or I would never , never have breathed it to her , although I love you myself as no other woman can , '' she cried , moving a step nearer , as though to cast her arms round his neck  but he , with a frantic effort raising himself on one elbow , lifted his other arm with the strength of desperation and flung her from him like some poisonous creature , crying hoarsely , `` Murderess , avaunt !
However it has come to pass , before God , her blood is on your head !
Oh , I could throttle the life out of you , '' he groaned , flinging his arms in the air and trying to rise , but falling back a second time on his pillow .
`` Kill me !
Kill me , if you like ! ''
she exclaimed , with gleaming eyes , coming near once more , and offering him a dagger in her outstretched hand , while she looked the picture of despair .
`` Death were better far at your hands than such words as these - nay , if you but bid me , I will kill myself - for without you , Emanuele , life is worse than a thousand deaths .
You , you alone , are the desire of my eyes , and the breath of my life , and my hope of hereafter  if I have sinned , it has been for your sake , and for your sake I would be damned eternally !
Say , only say , that you will let me stay with you - or if not - nay , look not daggers at me , for this dagger shall accomplish what you wish ! ''
She raised the weapon in the air with a flourish , then aimed it at her heart .
Emanuel screamed feebly : the door flew open , Sontheim burst into the room , and page : 236 striding up to Antonella , violently struck the blade out of her hands , muttering with a deep imprecation , `` Will you kill him next ? ''
For a moment the two eyed each other in silence , with all the intensity of concentrated rage .
Sontheim , who , with bated breath , had for some time been an involuntary listener , could scarcely trust himself to speak owing to the frightful revulsion of his feelings .
His love had , indeed , in that short time , turned to burning hatred  and on discovering how utterly he had been this woman 's dupe , he could only point to the door in silence .
But she faced and braved him resolutely , even yet determined to fight her ground inch by inch .
`` He is mine ! ''
she cried  `` I have the best right to be here - I am his wife . ''
But Emanuel , seized afresh with delirium , suddenly threw himself out of bed , and in his white night-shirt , with glaring eyes and lifted hand , came rushing towards her , crying - `` Get thee behind me , Satan . ''
His gaunt appearance , attenuated frame , and grey , shaggy hair , with the horror as of madness in his look and accent , were so dreadful , that the woman fled , screaming , out into the wintry night .
page : [ 237 ] CHAPTER XLVI .
RESURGAM .
YEARS had passed since the night when the unexpected entrance of Antonella had thrown the sick man back into the height of fever , so that his life for many days after had been despaired of .
But the elasticity of Emanuel 's constitution , the really profound skill of Dr. Furka , and the indefatigable care of his nurse , helped him a second time to outlive the crisis .
When Emanuel was quite recovered he visited the grave of his dead bride , where , for the first time , his sorrow vented itself in tears .
There he ordered a tombstone to be erected of the whitest marble , with nothing , besides the name , but the word `` Resurgam '' to be engraved on it in letters of gold  and violets to be planted there , only white and purple violets , such as she had held when first she gleamed upon him in the vernal wood .
By and by the old round of his life had to be resumed once more .
The constant claims made by art on any page : 238 man devoted to its service , especially when that art is music , do not suffer him to yield himself up to sorrow , however strong and abiding that sorrow may be .
It must sooner or later become as the muffled under-current of a constant flowing in of fresh effort , care , triumph , even delight - for without that there can be no creative work , or great performance of any kind  and yet beneath this luxuriant sprouting forth of new life a heart may lie in ruins .
Once more the celebrated virtuoso hurried from capital to capital , from concert-room to concert-room , and his advent wherever he appeared drove the multitude half-wild with enthusiasm .
His mastery of the violin had , indeed , become something almost incredible and savoured of morbidity .
New chords , unknown accents , secrets , and miracles of music , seemed to spring into being under his fingers .
And his very appearance heightened the spell exercised by his art .
He resembled an apparition rather than a man , and his long , snow-white , floating hair , bloodless face , and haunted-looking eyes , riveted the attention before the bow fell on the strings .
But what availed the enthusiasm of the multitude when again and again one face and form would emerge from among the crowd and poison the very air for him ?
Wherever he might be - in Leipzig or London , Breslau or Berlin , or Madrid , on the banks of the Neva or those of the Danube - presently , as he played , his eyes , amidst the indistinguishable throng , would light upon a tall , lean woman , still conspicuous in her ruined beauty , whose cheeks , as the months rolled by , grew gradually more sunken and rouged , whose eyes gleamed page : 239 with ever unsteadier fire , and whose attire by degrees became tawdry even to shabbiness .
At last , the sight of this person filled the virtuoso with such physical repulsion and anguish , that he began to hate the concerts and musical festivals , at which he knew beforehand that he should be confronted by the colourless face , with the wavering eyes constantly meeting his .
This feeling became so uncontrollable at last , that playing itself grew hateful to him , and suddenly , to the amazement and vexation of a world that idolized him , it was announced once for all that Emanuel Sturm would never again appear in public .
The Countess Antonella Ogotshki from that day forth sank ever lower in the social scale , till she disappeared in the most disreputable circles in Paris , the associate of gamblers and sharpers .
The wealth for which she had betrayed herself as well as the man she loved , had not been suffered to remain long in her hands .
It is true that Count Wenceslaw Ogotshki , after learning from his wife herself in a fit of ungovernable rage that he had been doubly betrayed , was yet so blindly enamoured and dishonourably weak , that although slowly dying from the effects of the corroding shame inflicted on him , he yet recalled her to his side , forgave her , and when in a state of semi-dotage was so overcome by her witcheries and the new version she gave him then of her conduct , that on his death he bequeathed to her the whole of his enormous property .
And all might have ended there happily enough for the Countess had she but been able to bide quiet for a year or two , and to wear her weeds with some decorum or appearance of sorrow  for the will was too plain page : 240 and straightforward for her husband 's relatives to dare dispute it .
But a demon possessed Antonella Ogotshki .
The more unattainable Emanuel Sturm 's love became , the more frantically did she desire it  vanity , caprice and obstinacy , stubborn passion and a morbid , hysterical temperament - over which so early in life the despotism of this man 's genius had , as it were , asserted itself - all conspired to make it appear to her that the goal in life was to reconquer and enslave him afresh .
But when , after getting back the fatal ring from Mina and instituting secret inquiries , she found that he thought to wed another , her fury knew no bounds  nor would she at first have recoiled from murdering one of the three .
If she did not  the wish of her heart at least assumed an outward form which bore fruit .
Her movements at that time , however , could not be kept a secret .
Rumours got abroad , and her husband 's relatives , incensed at being defrauded of what they considered their rightful inheritance , watched her only too narrowly .
She could not stir an inch , say a word , write a letter , without its coming to their ears , for her maid , who hated her , was a paid spy in their service .
They at last got wind of this early doubtful marriage in Rome  they moved heaven and earth to prove it a legal one , and as she herself had declared it to be such to Leopold Sontheim , whose evidence was of great importance , the Emperor of Russia pronounced a decree of exile against her , confiscated her estates , and deprived her of every rouble of the wealth she so dearly prized .
page : 241 Emanuel , when he retired from the world - for he did so completely on giving up playing in public - bought himself a half-dilapidated but noble Italian palazzo , situated amidst the Volscian hills , not far from the ruined town of Norba .
A wilder , a more melancholy site , it would have been difficult to fix upon perhaps anywhere in the world  but it suited the musician 's mood , and there he lived secluded as a monk of old .
A rough path skirted by precipices led to his abode - perched like an eagle 's nest on the giddy verge which terminated the ascent  and eagles , indeed , might often be seen soaring majestically above these sublime and solitary summits .
From here an immense panorama stretched out far below into a distance as remote as the world which he had left behind him .
His eye embraced the encircling sea with its flower-like islands , and the vast sweep of coast skirted by miles and miles of dusky forest land , and the endlessly rolling verdure of the Pontine marshes , gleaming with many a star-like lake and silver stream , and dotted with the time-worn towers and storied ruins of past centuries .
With the large fortune which the virtuoso had amassed in the course of years , he was enabled to fit up this old mansion as a palace of art in its way .
Pictures by old and new masters adorned the walls  the modern French romantic school , Delaroche , Delacroix , and his own friend Leroux , being especially well represented , Oddly enough , owing to its want of colour perhaps , he had a whimsical and most unpatriotic horror of the last new Romano-German school of painting  but his instinct was so subtle , that many of the sketches of Renaissance or recent times which he then collected , page : 242 must since have become of almost priceless value .
In the finely-proportioned hall and on the curved staircase , wood carvings and sculptured marbles alternated with orange and lemon trees , in tall pots of coloured Italian ware  and tapestries , whose half-faded colours , dear to the connoisseur - yet evinced their original boldness of design - decorated spaces of which the old frescoes were obliterated , and replaced or concealed the doors .
The furniture , if neither abundant nor the most noticeable part of the collection , was still conspicuous for quaint variety and old-fashioned beauty , and was supplemented everywhere by musical instruments of every epoch and variety , from the most primitive flutes and bagpipes to gigantic lutes and delicate mandolins of exquisite Italian and Spanish workmanship , and pianos from the earliest virginals and spinets to the latest perfection of Broadwood , on which to try his chromatic effects  added to this was a library stocked with the rarest old music and with curious folk-songs , to which Emanuel was very partial , he having began collecting these himself in his many rambles amidst the wild recesses of the mountains he inhabited .
Two trusted male domestics , moving noiselessly about their work , sufficed to keep this Patmos of art in sufficient order .
Nor was the musician utterly secluded from human intercourse , though his door was strictly guarded from the invasion of idle curiosity-mongers and lion-hunters , who not unfrequently besieged it in spite of the remoteness of the place .
For having disappeared from amidst the scene of his former triumphs in the very zenith of his reputation , he had well-nigh become a legendary character during his lifetime , and page : 243 in distant countries he was even said to have played two wives to death by his violin .
Tourists at all bitten with the musical mania , especially if American , would lie in wait for hours to get a sight of his face , or even of his back , being of opinion , no doubt , that to see a celebrity even from behind is a sop to curiosity .
But if by any chance , from some ambush or other , they could catch the sound of his own inimitable violin playing , however faintly a casual breeze might waft the sounds to them from some upper window , their rapture would know no bounds , and the report of what they had heard gradually increased in proportion to the distance between them .
But to all true musicians and lovers of music , who came to him from the most distant parts of the world , Emanuel would still display his vaunted charm of manner and the witchcraft of his bow .
Amongst others , his old friend Leopold Sontheim - who had taken part in the Revolution of ' 48 , but after some years ' imprisonment been pardoned - paid him occasional visits during the summer months .
Sontheim was not yet married , though going on for fifty , and one of the results of his last visit had been that Emanuel determined to provide for the education and , settlement in life of Frau Lichtenfeld 's two youngest sons , Conrad and Otto , who , according to Sontheim , were clever lads - the former having a certain faint resemblance to one who was no more , and both bent , much to their mother 's disgust and remonstrance , on devoting themselves to the study of the natural sciences  whereas Wolfgang and Hans , like true `` mother sons , '' had evinced their common sense by giving up all thoughts page : 244 of such `` breadless '' studies , and began life as commercial travellers in a highly respectable mercantile firm .
Lulu , too , walked dutifully in the maternal footsteps , and promised soon to bestow the blessings of her thrift and tongue ( the latter being the only thing of which she was by no means thrifty ) on Lieutenant Knapp , who had been promoted to the rank of captain , and who , it was to be hoped , would duly appreciate the blessing of her housewifely qualities .
The musician provided Sontheim with a letter of credit to a banker in D - - , empowering him to draw such a sum or sums as would enable the two young men to prosecute their studies at the University of Heidelberg , which was then even more noted for its courses in physiology and comparative anatomy than for the slashes which its students bestowed on each other 's noses .
Emanuel , moreover , promised to befriend these two brothers in their career when they should leave the university .
Dr. Furka , of whom the reader may perhaps have occasion to hear again , had also found time to pay his former patient a visit during Professor Sontheim 's stay there .
While sitting together one moonlight evening on the terrace overlooking the magnificent view described above , the conversation happened to turn on the primitive manners of the Italian peasant , when the man of science could not resist this opportunity of probing Emanuel concerning the Tarantismo or dancing mania , in spite of having his toes trodden upon and being frowned at by Sontheim .
The musician winced visibly at having his past history touched upon  but once launched , and stimulated page : 245 by the influences of the hour , he confided to the doctor all his experience on this subject .
The latter , who had listened intently , after smoking for some time in silence , said : `` The only way in which I can at all reconcile the extraordinary phenomenon , of which you are probably the last authentic witness , with the possibilities of nature , is , that what you saw was nothing but one of the protean manifestations of hysteria working on a survival of the superstition common in Italy during the seventeenth century .
Since having my attention called to it , I have been studying ` Ferdinando , ' who in his time wrote an exhaustive treatise on this subject , and I myself think of including the results of these investigations in a book on nervous affections which I have long been meditating . ''
Emanuel , impressed by the doctor 's peculiar insight into the occult workings of the human machine , could not help delicately hinting the surprise he felt at his not having made a greater mark in his profession  but Dr. Furka only shrugged his shoulders , saying , with a short laugh : `` Though I may understand a little more than some do of the mechanism of human nature , I can not play on it , you see  no , I can not play on it - and that 's the science of sciences , and the art of arts , if you will .
The fact is , '' he continued , `` that , as often as not , I have no patience with my patients , and then I must out with it  or if not , my manner suffices !
I act on the reverse plan to hating the sin and loving the sinner , for , while devoted to the study of a disease , I half the time contemn the person who is its subject , for I know well that were it not for self-indulgence , page : 246 sloth , greed , and drunkenness , and all such low sensualism , half the ailments by which we doctors live would vanish like smoke .
Unfortunately these vices do not always exact retribution from the sinner chiefly concerned , but they will send in their unpaid bills even unto the third and fourth generation , as the Bible hath it .
`` On the other hand , there are the sick that I almost venerate , that I willingly would treat for nothing , if necessary - such as the diseases incident on maternity , and those maladies I dub heroic , to which the toilers of the brain daily lay themselves open by a too constant concentration of all the juices and nerve-forces on a given point .
Talk of Christian martyrs , indeed !
Daily around us there are young men who have as certainly sacrificed their lives in a too ardent pursuit of an art or a science as if they had gone to the stake .
I could name dozens to you , but indeed your own experience must be much vaster than mine - - '' `` Oh yes , '' said the musician , with a sad smile , `` I could amply illustrate what you are saying from my own profession alone .
One in particular I remember , a glorious French fellow he was , a boy almost , who fell an early victim to the passion of music .
He was warned , told that he must give up his excessive study and practice of the pianoforte , or die , in all probability .
He replied with utter insouciance , like Napoleon 's old guard , ` On meurt mais on ne se rend pas ! ' ''
But the man who came to see Emanuel oftenest , and ever was most welcome , was his old comrade Raoul Leroux , now a close-shaven , dignified man of the world , with grey moustache , and a tightly buttoned-up page : 247 black coat , with the rosette of the legion of honour so coveted by his younger rivals .
He , indeed , was the only person ever fully admitted to Emanuel 's confidence .
Their common devotion to art , which though different in its manifestations is the same at root , bound them with the closest ties of fellowship , and the very opposition of their temperaments seemed to form a fresh bond between them .
Towards Emanuel , indeed , Raoul sometimes manifested a care , a tenderness , such as no one else would have suspected in the gay , brilliant , energetic Frenchman , who now served as a link between the secluded musician and the select few who still obtained access to him - the Pope himself having been known to send complimentary messages on some of his latter compositions through the same channel .
For on ceasing to be a virtuoso , Emanuel , so far from abandoning his art , devoted himself more assiduously to the higher flights of composition .
He might be said to have struck out a new vein in a certain dramatically-musical development of the symphony - and there was an upward soaring , heaven-aspiring quality in some of this later work , suggesting those rapt Madonnas which the Italian painters loved to depict as borne aloft on a cloud of love-illumined seraph faces .
Indeed , you might have thought yourself listening to a picture of Raphael 's , if a picture of Raphael had sound in it .
This was Emanuel 's musical rendering of her whose loss had altered the current of his career .
The pure-hearted , angel-eyed child was not really dead to him  she lived , she moved , she floated an adorable presence athwart the woven chords and harmonies thrown off page : 248 in ever more transcendent beauty from the composer 's brain .
Death had crystallized her into his ideal : whereas , had she lived , the coarse and common place requirements of everyday existence might possibly have dispelled some of the tender bloom of his first feelings - he now loved in her the very fountain-head of his inspiration .
It seemed to him as though her lovely soul had verily breathed its heavenly innocence into his compositions !
No , she could never pass away - for , like those gossamer creatures of a summer 's day , which we sometimes marvel at seeing embalmed , with every fibre yet intact , in the imperishable spar or amber - even thus the quintessence of her being had passed into music : music which at last altogether ceased to be the medium of personal desire and became the purest expression of the blended yearning of infinite human hearts , flame-like aspiring towards that sublimation of love and beauty and delight which has haunted our vision since the dawning of man , and which the universal heart expresses in the words - `` I shall arise again ! ''
THE END .
UNWIN BROTHERS , THE GRESHAM PRESS , CHILWORTH AND LONDON .

