
Dramatis Personae


Daracardin , Prince of Armenia ( 3 ) Morad ( 4 ) Giobar ( 5 ) Achmet , Sultan of Georgia ( 6 ) Acba , Black chief of the Harem ( 7 ) Iskouriah , an Evil Genius ( 8 ) Nainda , a Female good Fairy ( 9 ) Illidia , Princess of Georgia ( 10 ) Zara , a Black Slave ( 11 ) Ambassadors and ( Suite from Armenia ) ( 12 ) Ladies of the Harem ( 13 )


Act I


Scene 1


[ A Storm  at the end of which Nainda descends and makes the Storm cease . ]


1st Song .
( 14 ) Avaunt , ye Storms !
nor check the aerial Car .
In other Climes your forky Lightning bear  In other Regions vent your Clamours loud , Nor rend the fleecy mantle of this Cloud .
Free from Strife , from Anger free .
Calm , and Concord dwell with me : Hence for ever !
dark brow'd Storm  Nor Heaven 's azure Sky deform .
Blue-eye'd Zephyrs , in thy place , Breathing soft thro ' airy Space , Hail me , as I peaceful rise , The Halcyon Genius of those happy Skies .


[ Iskouriah enters and prostrates himself at her feet .
She turns away .
He takes hold of her robe . ]


Iskouriah Oh stay mighty Fairy , nor thus indignant turn from me those powerful eyes , rather let them fall on thy Slave with looks mild and Benignant as the Dew of Heaven .


Nainda Why wilt thou impede my Steps , wicked Spirit ?
Hast thou done aught in this night of Horrors , can give thee a right to stop me thus ?


Iskouriah I have , I have .
Deeds worthy of her , whose power I kneel before have I Executed .
Saved from the Lightning 's fury , the Peasants ' lonely , only Shed  restored to weeping Mothers , infants , which the flames might have destroyed  waked from fatal Sleep , whole families , surrounded by fire and Perdition .


Nainda [ Frowning . ]
Peace wretch !
Boast not of deeds which humanity alone wou'd dictate to Mortals .
Tell me , base Slave , dids 't thou in the midst of Charitable acts , dids 't thou feel thyself urged to them by Repentance ?
Repentance , the only Virtue , which can tempt me to Exercise any mercy towards thee .


Iskouriah Oh give me back my power , and my Liberty , and I Swear -


Nainda Swear not , Monster of Iniquity .
Say - hast thou yet erased from Earth the Mischief thou alone hast committed ?
Say , Arch Fiend , didst thou not bewilder the mind of Man by Horrid spells ?
Hast thou not made him value all that he shou'd most despise ?
Hast thou not added Tyranny to power , avarice to Wealth - Deceit to Love - Plunder to War - and held up to all mankind from the King to the Peasant , Licentiousness under the lovely , but Specious name of Liberty ?


Iskouriah I have , I have , I confess it all , nay more .
The misery of Mankind was all my joy .
But now , deprived by you , of all my Magic power , tho ' I can do no ill , I have not the means of fulfilling all your Commands in doing good .


Nainda This sprite reasoning will not do .
Like a Snake thou wou ` ds 't twine thyself about my heart to sting it to the quick .


Iskouriah Oh no !
- If I cou'd bring thee all thou dost desire , If [ Pauses.Aside . ]
a Woman may be tempted when entreaty fails -


Nainda Why dost thou pause ?
Speak thy meaning .


Iskouriah This night , as I was passing over a large Garden , within the Walls of the Capital of Armenia , I saw a lovely youth whose glorious Beauties arrested my hasty flight .
How often , and how vainly , have I sought one for you , whose matchless form and face cou'd match those of your beloved Pupil - the Princess of Georgia .
I now have found him , and I claim your promise .
If Virtue of the Heart lends Beauty to the Countenance , his must be formed to create perfect bliss for her whose Happiness is so dear to you -


Nainda [ With scorn . ]
Much I doubt thy judgement as to personal Charms .
Thy Corrupted mind has yet preferred Vice to Virtue , may ` st thou not then mistake Deformity for Loveliness .
Say - what is manly Beauty ?


Iskouriah I will -


2nd Song .
His Limbs may shame th ' Arcadians bounding Roe  His Skin , the fam'd Olympus purest Snow  His Hair outshines the raven 's jetty plume , His Lips of Roses breathe out their perfume  And if by dreams his senses are possessed They sure are those of Angels when at rest !
Smiling , he Sleeps - around his features hang That joy express'd when Hafis youthful sang  Each Dimple in his Peach-down cheek , a Cell , In which Love , Innocence , and Graces dwell .


Nainda 'T is well .
Pray Heaven thy hopes of reward may not make thee Exaggerate .
If this Mortal is worthy of my pupil , and they are happy - if thou art the cause of their bliss , and can Witness Felicity on Earth without desiring to disturb it , thy Power shall be restored to thee .
Hasten to bring him to the Royal Georgian Harem .
There will we compare his beauty to that of my Illidia .
And to encourage thee in the Pursuit of Virtue , henceforth thou shall be invisible to every Mortal Eye .
But remember and beware the least Deviation , from the Path of rectitude .
The Slightest Symptom of returning malice Shall betray you to the gaze of trembling Man and in Horrid Torments shalt thou howl out thy Eternity of misery .


[ Song . ]


Nainda Away , and bring that Vermil ' cheek  Those Winning Looks that softly speak That melt a spotless Virgin 's heart  Those Graces bring with Master Art , Those Graces , that - by Angels wove - Entwine two Souls in Constant Love !


Iskouriah Away I fly , and softly bear My precious charge thro ' realms of Air .
A Charge shall win thy Virgin heart , My Task I 'll do with Master heart Those Graces shall , by Angel 's wove Entwine two Souls in Constant Love .


[ Both together ] Those Graces shall , by Angel 's wove Entwine two Souls in Constant Love .


Scene 2


[ Anti Chamber with Doors .
Enter Acba with Matress and Keys . ]


Acba [ Locking Doors . ]
Well , Mahomet be praised , all these Women are asleep and what is better - Under lock and Key .
I wish the Ambassadors from Armenia were come , and my Princess married .
I wish all the Women in the Harem were married , and the Sultan , my Master wou'd give me my Liberty , and a little Flower Garden for the rest of my Life .
Women they say are like Roses - but by Mahomet like Roses , too , they have thorns , for them that come too near them - and I am doom'd I fear to feel their wounds for Life , for when our Princess is gone , there is some Sister , or favorite to Watch left behind .
I wish Princes were oblidged to be their own Jailors , for the Females they lock up .
I 'd rather have the care of Savage bears , for these do n't talk , and I cou'd not hear their complaint nor see their fears .
[ Groans . ]
Ah !
If I do my duty I must be detested by all these pretty soft looking animals , who speak so prettily - and look so fair , that they are made methinks more to fly about and adorn the World than to be shut up from it .
Ah !
Ah !
[ Locks the last door . ]
There you are .
All like Chickens in a Coop - well fed , plump , and very much tired of roosting on the same perch .
And so Women are Watched in every Country , I find , because of Love and his tricks .
Well , I know nothing of Love for -


Song .
( 15 ) I 've read of Love , and all his Tricks , That he with Gall with honey mix  But I 'm a Bust with Heart of Steel That can nor Pain nor pleasure feel .
And let me still unmov'd remain  He wants no joy that feels no pain !
Oh no !
Oh no !
Oh no !
He wants no joy who feels no pain .
My undisturbed repose I take , While Cupid keeps all men awake , While he with Sighs annoys each Breast I sing and nightly take my rest .
So let me still unmov'd remain , He wants no joy that feels no pain .
Oh no !
Oh no !
Oh no !
He wants no joy who feels no pain .


[ He lies down on his Matress and hums himself to sleep .
A Pause - a Knocking at one of the doors .
Zara speaks thro ' the door . ]


Zara Acba !
Acba !
open the door .


Acba [ Starts up . ]
It is that little Black Devil 's Voice , and I dare not refuse her now .
Mahomet Choak thee for waking me .
[ Opens the door and salutes bowing . ]


Zara Good Acba - do tell me , now my young Princess is asleep - what they say of the Prince of Armenia , who is to be her Husband .
Is he Handsome ?
Is he good natured ?
Is he generous ?
Is he sensible ?
Is -


Acba [ Interrupting . ]
He is asleep at this hour most likely , and so shou'd you be .
I never saw him , I know nothing about him and never shall - praised be our Prophet .
Go to your rest and leave me to mine .


Zara Do n't be so Cross , good pretty Acba .
Now do tell me about the Ambassadors , and the Procession tomorrow -


Acba Tomorrow !
Today you mean .
It 's almost Morn .
You 'll wake the Princess with your talk .
Go to Sleep I say - or I 'll complain to the Sultan -


Zara Sleep !
I ca n't Sleep for thinking of the Show I am to see .
I shall go and walk in the Court of Roses 'til I am called by the Princess -


Acba This is so like a Woman now - that can keep nothing to Herself .
You ca n't Sleep , so you will not let me .
Go , do go , now -


Zara Well , I wish good Acba - but I - the whole Harem want to know .


Acba What !?


Zara Why , what you know about the Ambassodor , and when I know I can let them and the Princess know -


Acba No , no , no - I tell you , unless the Princess herself sent you , I wo n't say a word .
Did she send you ?
Zara


No , no , and no , I tell you .
Lord bless her Loveliness , she has been asleep these three hours and is likely to be so three more - [ Acba leads her to the door . ]


Acba Well then , do you go and sleep too .
If I am disturbed again - none of you shall go into a Kiosk , an arabet , or a Bath these six weeks .
[ He pushes her out , draws his Matress to the side .
Doors fly open then Exit . ]


Scene 3


[ The inside of the Harem .
Nainda enters . ]


Nainda Thou lovely Flower committed to my Care , by a Dying Mother 's last request , no interest of State , no royal policy shall transplant from thy native soil .
'T is Love alone , and Mutual Love shall lead thee from a Parent 's Care and my Superior Watchfulness .
[ Iskouriah Enters with Daracardin in his arms  he lays him facing the Princess  Nainda observes him and exclaims . ]
Allah !
be praised .
Iskouriah has spoken the truth .
[ Kneels . ]
Oh , Mahomet , may the Heart concealed within that lovely Bosom warm , like the Glorious Sun with Impartial Benificence , his Admiring Subjects who look up to him for Comfort and delight .
And may the partner of his joys , like a Secondary Planet , defuse her mild ray thro ' the Medium of his reflected Lustre .
Thus shall they both be blest as beautiful .


[ She retires , waves her hands over them .
They both begin to wake , sit up , and look at each other .
Daracardin takes hold of his arms by turns . ]


Daracardin Yes I am awake .
[ He retires . ]


Illidia [ Smiling . ]
Oh what a Pleasant dream .
[ Looks at her Slaves . ]
Yes , they Sleep .
Oh , we will Sleep thus forever .


[ Daracardin goes and takes her by the hand and brings her to the front . ]


Illidia I never dream'd of you before .
I wish this dream wou'd last for ever , for when I wake , I shall lose sight of you , and 't is so sweet a sight .
[ Looks at him . ]


Daracardin Never , Never lose sight of me , for I shall gaze at thee for ever .
[ Stares at her . ]
For comest thou like the Sapphire from the Entrails of the Earth , or like the Morning Star from the Chambers of East , thou art more welcome to my sight than the first rays of the Sun to the Benighted traveller .


Illidia That is spoken after my own mind .
Yes , you speak Exactly what I feel .


Daracardin Now let me ratify my words .


Illidia Are not your words truth ?
Truth wants not to be ratified -


Daracardin What innocence -


Illidia [ Laughing . ]
Do not mind what I say  I am talking in my sleep -


Daracardin Oh , no , we are both awake , see this ring - this hand - it presses thine .
[ Puts his Hand to his Heart . ]
This Heart beats for thee .


Illidia [ Puts her hand to her heart . ]
And mine keeps time with yours .
This is comical indeed .
It never beat so when I was awake -


Daracardin Oh !
Heavens !
How shall I persuade her this is no dream ?
Let us Exchange our rings .
Then shall we be betrothed to each other .


Illidia [ Going to give hers , pauses . ]
But the Fairy Nainda gave me this , with a Charge not to part with it but to my Husband .


Daracardin So much the better , for I swear , waking , or sleeping , living or dying to have no other Wife but you -


Illidia Indeed !
Oh Charming !
this dream becomes more pleasant every Moment .
Well - then - [ Gives him her ring and takes his . ]
now you are my Husband , that is every night in my dreams , so tho ' my father has promised my hand to another - No matter .
I shall be yours half of my Life for I 'll Sleep all night long , and every night , on purpose to belong to you more than to my other Husband .


Daracardin [ Furious . ]
Other Husband !
How now !
What means this terrible Language ?


Illidia Nay , do not frown so young Man !
I am terrified - you will frighten away Sleep and with it this pleasant Dream .
Do not look so stern .


Daracardin Stern - look Stern at thee ?
Impossible , but can I see thee , hear thee , be certain that I can never be happy without thee , and not tremble with rage to hear thee talk of another ?
Come , let us away , and live only for each other .


[ He puts his arm round her waist to lift her away , when Nainda waves her hands over them .
They both fall back asleep : Illidia into Nainda who lays her down and advances  Daracardin into Iskouriah 's arms , who carries him away . ]


Nainda Soon will she wake to disappointment , but under the semblance of this faithful Zulime , I will be near to give tranquility to her agitated mind .
[ Puts on the Governess ' Dress , approaches the Princess who starts up and exclaims . ]


Illidia Zulime , Alyiza , Fatima - [ They all rise and surround her . ]
Where is he ?
Zulime -


[ Enter Zara . ]


Zara What voices did I hear ?
It must have been the Morning Zephyrs whispering thro ' the Bowers for they all sleep .
Yet me thought I cou'd distinguish the Princess ' Voice - nay , that I heard her Laugh , but it can not be .
[ Looks at her . ]
Sleep , calm and Undisturbed as her mind possesses her .
[ Lays down . ]


Illidia [ Starts up . ]
Zulime , Alyiza , Fatima - [ They all rise . ]
Where is he , Zulime ?


Nainda [ As Zulime , the Governess . ]
Whom ?
dearest Princess .


Illidia The young Man I have just seen .


Nainda Young Man !
in your Dreams perhaps .


Illidia [ Sits confused . ]
Is it true ?


[ Zulime kneels to her . ]


Nainda Is my dearest Pupil quite awake ?
or has some horrid dream disturbed her mind ?


[ Illidia rises , comes forward with Nainda , makes a sign for the rest to retire . ]


Illidia Not horrid , Zulime - a Charming dream .
Oh Zulime !
but soft , it was no dream .
See this ring , 't was his , Zulime , he gave it me , and I gave him mine .


Nainda ( 16 ) Oh dreadful event !
That ring the Fairy gave you is gone .


Illidia But you know I cou'd only give it to my Husband .
Yes , 't is gone , [ Looks round . ]
but he is gone too .
Bring him to my sight instantly , or never see me more .
Now I know I was awake .
Why do you stand thus looking like a Petrified Statue ?
Bring hither my Lord my Husband !
I can not live without him .


Nainda Heavens and our holy Prophet what does she mean ?
Zaphira let thy melodious voice , like that of the plaintive Nightengale restore her Soul to Harmony .
[ Zaphira sings a Plaintive air .
Illidia Weeps . ]
She is much soften'd .
The Chords of the Harp may Vibrate on her heart , and wake it to reason , and her Natural sprightliness .


[ Fatima plays on the Harp .
Illidia rises . ]


Illidia Away !
Away !
Music is Diseas'd to my Ears .
And the rising Sun can not dispel the Dark Cloud that obscures my Light till he returns .
Where have you concealed him ?
Why did you let him go ?
Answer me , Zulima .
Do n't you Value my regard ?


Nainda Oh , what can I say to what I can not comprehend .
Consider that this very Morning , you are to receive the Ambassadors from your intended Lord .


Illidia My Lord !
I have a heart 's Lord already , and hear one Heaven .
[ Kneels . ]
Him whom I have seen this night is the Life of my Life , and Master of my thoughts .
Oh , Gracious Prophet !
in thy Sacred Record , where truth and faith are engraved , receive my first , my last , my only vow : never shall this Hand be plighted to anyone but him , who sits enthron'd by Love within this breast .
No entreaties shall persuade , no threats shall terrify me , from keeping this my vow , which if I break may I live in Wretchedness and die in Torments .
[ Remains in thought . ]


Nainda Oh , gracious , dearest Princess , these Words , these dread resolves , who shall bear them to your Father ?


Illidia My Father !
you do well to name him .
I know his affection for me .
He surely Conveyed this youth into the Harem .
I will fly and thank him directly .
Give me my Veils .


[ Some fetch the Veils - others Sing :]


Oh , Allah !
give us means to bear Her mind from Love 's corroding care !
Give Peace within this Virgin breast Where nought but Peace and joy shou'd rest Nor let her thoughts like tempests move In wildest Labyrinths of Love .


END OF THE FIRST ACT


Act II


Scene 1


[ In Armenia .
A street at the End of the Port , an Old Tower .
Enter Giobar and Morad in disguise .
Giobar looks uneasy . ]


Morad Well - now that I have left the Plains , my Hawkes , my Greyhounds , and all my merry friends , to meet you here in a shabby Cloak , hired of an old Jew , and a Ladder of Ropes hid under it , and am arrived here at a Minute 's Warning , you will perhaps have the goodness to give me your reasons for making me do all this .


Giobar I have hardly time , Morad , but know that our Prince , our Honor'd friend Daracardin -


Morad He is not dead sure -


Giobar Dead ?
No not dead , but worse !


Morad Worse !
that can not be .
Death is the only Misfortune I know of to which there is no remedy .


Giobar He is shut up in that Tower .


Morad Is that all ?
Patience , Vinegar , and rubbing will sever Iron bars , and with these he may get out .


Giobar Yes , but this is not all .
He is desperately in Love -


Morad That is rather Extraordinary  surrounded as he is by Beautiful Slaves  but he 'll get out of this love con [ dition ] ( 1 ) for you know he is to be Married  and Marriage you know is a Certain cure for Love .


Giobar Psha !
Ca n't you be serious for a Moment ?


Morad I am serious , always serious when I think of Marriage for I 've been Married these five years .


Giobar Will you hear me and be dumb for a few Moments ?


Morad Of that you may be sure , for Marriage puts me in mind of my Wife , and of her talking which Strikes me dumb for some time .


Giobar You know our Prince Daracardin is promised in Marriage .
[ Morad nods . ]
The Ambassadors are gone to fetch his Bride .
This morning the Prince told the Sultan his Father , that no power on Earth shou'd make him marry any person , but a fair Creature that he saw last night , and with whom he exchang'd rings .
The Sultan in vain represented to him the Consequence of his refusal - a Long and bloody War , between two neighbouring kingdoms .
The Prince remaining inflexible to all his Entreaties , he has shut him up till he choses to change his mind .
But he charged me to be here at this Hour , under that Window through which he intends to escape .
The Night draws on apace .
I believe we may venture to give him the Signal that we are ready .


Morad Signal !
what Signal ?
If you fling a Stone against the Tower , some of the Guards may hear us .
If you Hollow the Watchman will come .


Giobar Guards ?
The Sultan knew no Guard wou'd resist the Intreaties , nay the Winning looks of his son .
He has no Guards and I have brought a Guitar .
If we sing he will know our Voices -


Morad Sing !
Why all the Harmonious Musicmen will come and knock us o'er the Head for Screech owls : for I am frightened I shall sing horribly out of tune .


Giobar Fear not , Morad .
None of the Sultan 's people will come this way .
Tho ' our beloved Prince is the Sultan 's Eldest Son , a Prince who offends so good a Father is treated by his people as a rebellious Subject , and avoided by every one .


Morad Come , come , sing .
Your Poetry is fiction and may be pleasing [ to ] your prose truth and of course dull - ( 2 )


Giobar You may sing as low as you please .


Morad Most basely I assure you -


Giobar What shall I play ?


Morad Play that old Moorish air you are so fond of .
Set it to some Words of my own .
Such an occasion exactly suits my Genius for Extempore Poetry .


Song .
On the high Top of an Old Mould ` ring Tow ` r , An angry Eagle , perch'd his fav ` rite Son  Then frowning said - `` there pass each lonesome hour Nor till I give you leave can you come down -


Duet .
Can you come down .
Can you come down . ''
The youthful Eagle lov'd in woods to play With Birds of Feather bright or softest down  So much abash'd , he to himself did say `` Unhappy royal Bird , you must come down - - You must come down .
You must come down .
Your own determin'd will must set you free Inactive , here you can not sit and moan , Courage Secures to man his Liberty And youth , Courageous youth , may venture down .
May venture down .
May venture down . ''
Then opening quick the rusty shutter wide , He hail'd the friendly Lustre of the Moon , With royal Fortitude and manly pride , For Love of Freedom , soon he ventures down - He ventures down .
He ventures down .


[ They throw Daracardin the ladder  he descends and Embraces them .
They are going when Nainda disguised as an Old Woman Enters and stops them . ]


Nainda Pity !
Charity !
Charity good Young Man - Old - Sick - Your Charity .


[ Morad pushes her , she falls and faints .
The Prince supports her . ]


Morad Do n't Stay to assist her , Sir .
We shall certainly be taken .


Daracardin So old , so hideous , so helpless .
Who will assist her if I do not .
Run , my Friends , fetch some Cordials .


[ Soft Music .
Morad and Giobar go out .
The Old Woman raises herself and sings . ]


Old Woman I 'll tell you your Fortune away from all Art , Plain Truth ever flows from my Tongue Yet I carry like Bees , the kind Honey at Heart To heal where my words may have Stung .
My Power 's unbounded , whate'er I may seem My Dwelling is in the blue Sky , Tho ' oft on the Back of a tranquil Moon-beam On Earth for Diversion I fly .
Let other good Fairies use Circles and Wands A future Event to foretell  Trace lines in the Palm of a True Lovers Hand Exhaust all the Powers of Spell .
'T is alone thro ' the Eyes I descry Fortunes sight See only to rectify Fate , Like the Sun I dispel the Black Vapors of night Then listen before 't is too late .


Giobar and Morad Oh !
give us leave to go with you It is our Wish and Duty too .


Old Woman No no !
No no !
it can not be  He is secure , who flies with me .


Giobar With you !
Ha !
ha !
ha !
He go with you .


Morad Oh , oh , oh , oh !
This is quite new .


Old Woman It may be Strange , it may be new But still believe me it is true That what my Will is , that must be And he 's Secure that flies with me .


Daracardin Those Melodious Sounds - the Sense Conveyed in them , strikes powerfully on my afflicted mind .
Speak - what wou'd you ?


Nainda Accompany your flight - lead your Steps to Happiness , to love .
But do you feel no remorse at the thoughts of the despair your flight will Occasion in the breast of your father and Sovereign -


Daracardin When a Father only employs his power to make his Son perjured and wretched , then is that Son justified before Heaven to fly from it .
Yesterday my heart at Liberty was devoted to my father 's Commands - but now - my hand - my Life - my whole Soul is promised , and shall I lead one Woman to the Altar , and there pronounce words , sacred and Inviolable , while all my ideals ( 3 ) are bound by Adamantine ties to another - forbid it , honor , Constancy and truth .
Impossible !
Impossible !


Nainda But that unfortunate Princess , who comes to be your Bride , what Disappointment -


Daracardin She knows me not , and therefore can not Love .
I have Brothers , and my Father may give her hand and his Kingdom to one of them .


Nainda And are you sure you will not request either ?


Daracardin Quite sure .
Alas !
can sovereignty be desirable ?
Evil Spirits possess the minds of Men .
They reject alike the Power of a Tyrant , and that of a Father of his people .


Nainda What !
in your Royal Education learnt you aught cou'd make you prefer Obedience to Command ?


Daracardin I had a Virtuous Mother , Good Woman , who from our sacred Koran taught me , the Principles which guide my thoughts .
I wou'd always obey - if to Command is not to make others happy .


Nainda But your birth - your long train of Royal ancestors - Did she teach you to forget them ?


Daracardin Oh no !
but she held them up before me , only as the sacred claims , Mankind and Posterity have upon my Care for their Welfare .
But why this delay ?
If you can lead me to her I love -


Nainda A little Patience yet .
Supposing she is of low birth -


Daracardin Thank Heaven !
that matters not .
By our Asiatic Customs , it is the Husband enobles the Wife , and we are not like European Princes obliged to entail on our descendants the deformities of human Nature , with the Pedigree of a Princess -


Nainda But Supposing she is poor - you have no Wealth -


Daracardin Golconda 's treasures are found in Youth , health , and Liberty .
I have Strength to earn my Subsistence .
I have these too - these Arms to weild in the defence of my Country when her injuries shall call me , into the field .
Good Woman - think not because I was brought up in an Asiatic Harem 's Soft delights , that I am Effeminate .
No .
My Mother taught me that to fill a throne with justice , and propriety , I must first learn to be a Man - and she made me feel all the hardships and Labour attached to human Life - that I might understand the duties attached to humanity .


Nainda


You have bestowed them on me , you shall be rewarded and happy .
Daracardin To be happy is to be free .
See the Winds Propitious Court the Unfurling Sails -


[ Enter Giobar and Morad with bottle and glass . ]


Nainda Thank you , young Men .
Your friend 's care has restored me to life , and I will restore him to Love .


Giobar and Morad To Love !


Nainda Yes , he goes with me -


Giobar With you !!


Morad I am not at all Surprised that a Young Man 's Attention shou'd bring an Old Woman out of a fit - but that -


Giobar Gracious Prophet , will you leave us and go alone with her ?


Daracardin I will .


[ Exeunt Daracardin and Nainda .
Giobar and Morad remain Petrified . ]


Morad What are we to do ?


Giobar Follow our friend certainly .


Morad Yes certainly - and first there goes one Witness to what we have done .
[ Flings the Ladder into the Sea .
They pull of their rags . ]


Giobar These wou'd create Suspicion -


Morad That Old Hag , did you hear her ?
Leads him to love - and with her .
[ Laughs . ]
Well , she thinks she has made a conquest , I suppose .
Well - Wrinkles do n't always give a Woman Experience !
Hoa !
a Boat !


Giobar But time , in giving Wrinkles , often gives that Wisdom and Eloquence to Women which the mind of Man listens to with Complacency and often rewards with affection .


Morad Poo !
Pugh !
Ah !
was you ever in love with an Old Woman ?
A Boat !


Giobar Did you ever think of Age when a Woman Smiled at you ?
Hoa !
A Boat -


Morad I never look'd in any Woman 's face for a Smile , that was not Young .
Hoa !
A Boat -


[ Scene Closes . ]


Scene 2


[ Scene Changes to the Interior of the Georgian Harem .
Acba unlocks the doors . ]


Acba This day , my fair Prisoners may all have their Liberty - that is to go as far as the Audience Chamber - and then to go back again .


[ Enter Zara . ]


Zara Acba , you may as well lock all these doors again and keep these flowers for Yourself for the Princess swears she will not stir out .


Acba What !
does she persist in this Idle tale ?
And in wanting to persuade us all that she saw a young man and talk'd to him .


Zara She does .


Acba Good little Zara , go in and tell the Princess that if she persists in telling her Father of this young Man , he 'll believe it at last , and as no one can Enter her Apartment unless I let them in , poor old Acba will be hung - yes - my life answers for it .
What a dream - Alas !


Zara Perhaps some Evil Genius Unlock'd those doors while you Slept .


Acba What , you believe in Spirits do you ?


Zara I believe there are good Genii to take care of us and Evil Genii that torment us -


Acba Nonsense .
The good Genii that care about pretty Women are honest Men , and the only Evil Genii I know of , are cross old troublesome Women , or Black young ones -


Zara Black indeed !
Why I was chosen out of Eleven Children because I was the fairest of the Family .


Song .
When I am Marry'd , Mercies !
how I 'll talk .
And rule at home like any Potent queen Fair Creatures like myself shou'd never walk I 'll have a Gold and Silver Palanquin .
The Men shall all adore my angel 's face The Women fall before me as I pass I 'll ogle , I 'll sigh , I 'll smoke and I 'll spit  Tell many a Lie , now and then have a Fit And Study my Charms in a Glass .
I 'll have a thousand fancies in a day And change 'em every hour with the Wind I 'll never work at all but always play To chase dull fare and sorrow from my mind .
But I 'll go in and get the Princess to save your life - for if you are hung up - we may get a Worse in your place .
[ Exit . ]


[ A Knocking .
Acba opens the door .
Enter Morab and Giobar . ]


Acba What wou'd you Strangers ?


Giobar We are just Arrived and Straying about the Courts of the Palace .
We have found ourselves here by Chance - hearing the Ambassadors from Armenia are deliv ` ring ( 4 ) their presents this day , we want to know if we cou'd be in the Audience Chamber to see the procession .


Acba You may .


Morad But Concealed as we know these Amenian Ambassadors .


Acba [ Aside . ]
These are Spies of the Court sent by the Ministers to know how the Ambassadors behave , and how they are received .
[ Aloud . ]
( 5 ) Well , good Sirs , I will hide you behind the throne - but why shou'd you wish to be conceal'd ?


Morad Because we have followed a Master of ours , who has run away from his father , and he will not like to see us .
The same Wind blew us all hither - and a Strange breeze it was - twenty miles in an hour - that is good Sailing .
Our boat follow'd his - we saw him land .
We pursued him into this town and then lost sight of him .


Giobar [ Aside . ]
Ill fated friend !
That Old Hag has certainly betrayed him .


Morad Well , we shall see .
At all events , shou'd he appear in the Audience Chamber and require assistance , we have Swords and hearts to assist him , and the Devil is in it if we shou'd not be more than a Match for an Old Woman .


Giobar Hush !
we must dissemble .
[ To Acba . ]
Say , is the Princess of Georgia handsome ?


Acba Beautiful -


Morad Umph !
Friend - our young friend ran away with an Ugly Woman .


Song .
She is ugly and Old .
And looks like a scold ( 6 ) Her nose like a Spout to her head  Her Robe ragged and black Not a Shift to her back And must beg all the way to have Bread .
Well , if I go astray Or , like him , run away It shall be with a Girl like a Roe  With a Cheek like a Rose A small cock'd - up nose With arms and a Bosom of Snow .


Acba I am no Judge .
Had I my will - I wou'd run away - not with - but from the Whole Sex .
Stand aside .


[ Enter Zara . ]


Zara Good Acba , the Princess says she will not mention this Young Man any More but go herself to the audience , and save your life and her peace of Mind , which your Death it seems wou'd mightily disturb .
[ Aside . ]
I do not know why I 'm sure - such old nasty Black things might all be hung for me .


Acba Tell the Princess then it is time she shou'd go -


Zara I will .
[ Exit . ]


Acba Now I will place you in that Corner .
You will see the Princess and her Attendants pass .
[ Places them . ]


[ Enter the Princess with Attendants .
She stops with a rejected Countenance and looks at her Dress . ]


Illidia Horrid Magnificence - Ill fated Illidia !
Support me Allah !
and if I am forc'd to pronounce Vows that give me to another - Grant Allah , that at the foot of thy Altar , I may breathe my last Sigh - sad Victim of Obedience , and Disappointed Love -


[ Exeunt . ]


Scene 3


[ Scene changes to the Audience .
A Throne on one side .
Guards and People . ]


Iskouriah Thus far Nainda 's wishes have succeeded , and my Services are rewarded by only a return of half my Power .
I am invisible to all Mankind , but not to the piercing Eyes of that all powerful Female .
Perhaps she intends to restore all she has Wrested from me , when the Young people are united , and if she does not , by Degaval , I swear a Vengeance equal to my wrongs shall be Executed .
I saw the beautiful Daracardin disguised like an old Hermit , accompanied by a decrepit Woman hard by .
I will watch his progress and if he is made blessed before I am restor'd to the fulness of my Power - Oh what shall I here do to be revenged ?
He is only Mortal - and this Dagger - shall pierce him to the Heart .
Nainda is not here to stop my hand - I 'll away to the Harem and never leave the Princess till she gives her hand to Daracardin .


Song .
The Shipwreck'd Sailor cast from off the Strand Labours for life , and thinks it almost gone  More Welcome to his Sight appears the Land - More Cheering than the brightest Morning Sun .
But oh , to me , who can no lower fall , Revenge is sweeter far - Revenge is all !
[ Retires . ]


[ Nainda and Daracardin come forward disguised . ]


Nainda Now Prince - contain your joy - you will here see your beloved in the Princess of Georgia .


Daracardin Heavens !
what do I hear ?


Nainda Stay !
you shall hear her confess her Passion for you without knowing you are present .
Like a lovely Flower she is drooping under the Weight of Affliction .
Affliction to a Female Heart - like a rude Hail Storm that falls on the opening rose - beats down her beauties to the Earth .
But your presence , like the rays of the Sun , shall raise her blustering Head to hail each future day - with newer and more fragrant perfume .
Moderate your Impatience .
By degrees you must let her know who you are or the Sudden transition from despair to joy , might like the Soldier 's Instantaneous Wound cause suddent death -


Daracardin Who are you ?
All wise and good - oh , tell me how shall I reward you ?


Nainda Reward !
the sight of human bliss is my only joy , my only reward .
Let us retire - I will instruct you further - mix with the Crowd .


[ The Sultan and his Suit enter then the Princess .
She kneels to her Father , he kisses her forehead .
She sits on a Cushion at his feet . ]


Sultan Illidia , I hope you think no more of your dream .
This day all past care must be erased from our Minds - this day you are to give your hand by Proxy to the Prince of Armenia .


[ The Ambassadors enter with Presents .
Then a Young Turk with Jewels for the Princess Kneels and Sings :]


Oh !
fairest of the Fair !
whose spotless Charms Must Bless a lovely Prince 's youthful Arms Receive those Gems  that will but dim appear When Eyes so bright - Illidia 's Eyes - are near .


Acba Very Courtly Verse truly  made by the Poet Laureate I wou'd say -


Sultan Illidia - why this Indifferent Look ?


[ The Ambassador gives a Litter  he rises and the Iman advances with the Koran .
The Ambassador places his hands upon the Book.The Sultan leads his daughter to it . ]


Ambassador I Swear , in the name of our holy Prophet that Daracardin , Son and Heir to the Sultan of Armenia plights his faith to -


Illidia Oh , Hold !
Oh , Swear not - for -


[ Illidia faints .
The Sultan supports her .
Nainda and Daracardin come forward . ]


Nainda [ With a Smelling Bottle . ]
This Elixir mighty Prince will restore her to life -


Sultan To Life !
Alas , I fear her senses are disorder'd and who can restore them to her ?


Nainda This holy Hermit , Sir , with a few Magic Words can bring peace to her disorder'd mind .


Sultan Indeed .


[ Illidia recovers and turns to her Father . ]


Illidia Oh , dearest Father - hear me - I can not pronounce those fatal Vows .
My hand , my Heart , is devoted to another .


Sultan She is mad - some fever of the Brain .
Acba - wretch - Speak !
What is the occasion of all this ?


[ Acba prostrate . ]


Acba Your Majesty 's wisdom has pronounced it a fever of the Brain .
The Princess has been feverish these four and twenty hours -


Sultan And knew you this -


Acba Oh , , She has not spoken one word to me these two days .
When Females are Speechless they must be ill Indeed , as your Majesty well knows .


Sultan Why was not I appraised of this ?
The Ceremony must be Postponed .


Illidia Oh glad I am that in the presence of this holy Man , and before these Ambassadors I can declare that I am a lost Creature - lost Alas !
to Pomp , to Life !
to all but him , whom my heart has Chosen .


Sultan Peace !
foolish Girl .


Nainda Let me , Sir , speak one word , aside to the Princess .
[ She leads her aside with Daracardin  he takes her hand . ]


Daracardin See this ring .


Illidia Ah !
the ring I gave my Love .


Nainda Yes , and he is near to Claim you his for ever .


Illidia Oh , do not deceive me .
Who is this holy Hermit ?


Nainda See !
See !
who it is -


Illidia [ Sees him . ]
'T is he !
'T is he !


[ They fly into each other 's arms .
The Sultan angry puts his hand to his Sabre .
The Ambassadors surround the Prince calling out : `` tis the Prince of Armenia . '' ]


Sultan Is it possible ?
How comes this to pass ?


Daracardin Oh Gracious Sovereign , I know not - but where is she my Guardian Angel who conducted me hither ?


Giobar What ?
The Old Woman .


Sultan Prince , You are most welcome - and since you are the object of my Daughter 's ( 7 ) choice , let us not delay these oaths that are to united our Families and Kingdoms in bonds indisoluble for ever .


[ Sultan , Prince and Princess go up to the Iman .
Everybody kneel except Sultan and the Iman .
Enter Iskouriah . ]


Iskouriah This sight I can not bear .
Mortals bless'd by mutual Love , the poor , the friendless Mortals ' only joy , to be bestowed on Princes who , having every other earthly Blessing , from the Want of that alone are wretched - he the first shall be the last to taste of perfect bliss - Thus my revenge .


[ Draws out a Dagger to stop the Prince .
Nainda rushes out and Seizes his Wrist . ]


Nainda Infernal Genii , this is thy boasted repentance !
Go , Monster , and drag on in [ an ] Eternity of Misery Chain'd down below these Regions for ever .


[ He descends in flames . ]


Nainda Illidia , I brought this Prince to thee .
Sultan , Acba is honest to his Charge .
Prince , I was that Old decrepit Woman that Conducted your Steps .
And may your Love for Illidia , like holy fire , purify your heart , that it may resist all bad impressions .
A Violent Passion in Youth is the only Soil from which can Spring the fair Blossoms of every Virtue .
This for you , Illidia , will strew your path through life with Roses , and may your future Conduct teach you to avoid the dull , uninteresting path , ( 8 ) or the pointed thorn of Inconstancy .


Chorus O drive from hence remorse and fell despair , Be Love and constancy your only care .


[ Nainda ] To improve , to save mankind , our only toil Ours be the task to pity and reclaim !
Our only recompense a heavenly Smile , Disdaining Earthly Tributes is our Fame .


Chorus O drive from hence remorse and fell despair , Be Love and constancy your only care .


END OF THE SECOND ACT

