
COATS


Hazel EDITOR OF `` CHAMPION '' Mineog EDITOR OF `` TRIBUNE '' John A WAITER


Scene : Dining room of Royal Hotel Cloonmore .


Hazel : ( Coming in . )
Did Mr. Mineog come yet , John ?


John : He did not , Mr. Hazel .
Ah , he wo n't be long coming .
It 's seldom he does be late .


Hazel : Is the dinner ready ?


John : It is , sir .
Boiled beef and parsnips , the same as every Monday for all comers , and an apple pie for yourself and Mr. Mineog .


Mineog : ( Coming in . )
Mr. Hazel is the first tonight .
I 'm glad to see you looking so good .


( They take off coats and give to waiter . )


Mineog : Put that on its own peg .


Hazel : And mine on its own peg to the rear .


John : I will , sir .


( He drops coats in putting them up .
Then notices broken pane in window and picks up the coats hurriedly , putting them on wrong pegs .
Hazel and Mineog have sat down . )


Hazel : Have you any strange news ?


Mineog : I have but the same news I always have , that it is quick Monday comes around , and that it is hard make provision for to fill up the four sheets of the Tribune , and nothing happening in these parts worth while .
There would seem to be no news on this day beyond all days of the year .


Hazel : Sure there is the same care and the same burden on myself .
I wish I did n't put a supplement to the Champion .
The deer knows what way will I fill it between this and Thursday , or in what place I can go questing after news !


Mineog : Last week passed without anything doing .
It is a very backward place to give information for two papers .
If it was not for the league is between us , and for us meeting here on every Monday to make sure we are taking different sides on every question may turn up , and giving every abuse to one another in print , there is no person would pay his penny for the two of them , or it may be for the one of them .


Hazel : That is so .
And the worst is , there is no question ever rises that we do not agree on , or that would have power to make us fall out in earnest .
It was different in my early time .
The questions used to rise up then were worth fighting for .


Mineog : There are some people so cantankerous they will heat themselves in argument as to which side might be right or wrong in a war , or if wars should be in it at all , or hangings .


Hazel : Ah , when they are as long on the road as we are , they 'll take things easy .
Mineog : Now all the kingdoms of the earth to go struggling on one wrong side or another , or to bring themselves down to dust and ashes , it would not break our friendship .
In all the years past there never did a cross word rise between us .


Hazel : There never will .
What are the fights of politics and parties beside living neighbourly with one another , and to go peaceable to the grave , our selves that are the oldest residents in the Square .


Mineog : It will be long indeed before you will be followed to the grave .
You did n't live no length yet .
You are too fresh to go out and to forsake your wife and your family .


Hazel : Ah , when the age would be getting up on you , you would n't be getting younger .
But it 's yourself that is as full of spirit as a four-year-old .
I wish I had a sovereign for every year you will reign after me in the Square .


Mineog : ( Sneezes . )
There is a draught of air coming in the window .


Hazel : ( Rising . )
Take care might it be open - no , but a pane that is out .
There is a very chilly breeze sweeping in .


Mineog : ( Rising . )
I will put on my coat so .
There is no use giving provocation to a cold .


Hazel : I 'll do the same myself .
It is hard to banish a sore throat .


( They put on coats .
John brings in dinner .
They sit down . )


Mineog : See can you baffle that draught of air , John .


John : I 'll go in search of something to stop it , sir .
This bit of a board I brought is too unshapely .


Mineog : Two columns of the Tribune as empty yet as anything you could see .
I had them kept free for the Bishop 's speech and he did n't come after .


Hazel : That 's the same cause has left myself with so wide a gap .


Mineog : In the years past there used always to be something happening such as famines , or the invention of printing .
The whole world has got very slack .


Hazel : You are a better hand than what I am at filling odd spaces would be left bare .
It is often I think the news you put out comes partly from your own brain , and the prophecies you lay down about the weather and the crops .


Mineog : Ah , I might stick in a bit of invention sometimes , when I 'm put to the pin of my collar .


Hazel : I might maybe make an attack on the Tribune for that .


Mineog : Ah , what is it but a white sin .
Sure it tells every person the same thing .
It does n't tell many lies , it goes somewhere a near it .


Hazel : I spent a good while this evening searching through the shelves of the press I have in the office .
I write an article an odd time , when there is nothing doing , that might come handy in a hurry .


Mineog : So have I a press of the sort , and shelves in it .
I am after going through them to-day .


Hazel : But it 's hard find a thing would be suitable , unless you might dress it up again someway fresh .


Mineog : I made a thought and I searching a while ago .
I was thinking it would be a very nice thing to show respect to yourself , and friendliness , putting down a short account of you and of all you have done for your family and for the town .


Hazel : That is a strange thing now !
I had it in my mind to do the very same service to yourself .


Mineog : Is that so ?


Hazel : Your worth and your generosity and the way you have worked the Tribune for your own and for the public good .


Mineog : And another thing .
I not only thought to write it but I am after writing it .


Hazel : ( Suspiciously . )
You had not much time for that .


Mineog : I never was one to spare myself in anything that could benefit a friend .


Hazel : Neither would I spare myself .
I have my article wrote .


Mineog : I have a mind to read my own one to you , the way you will know there is nothing in it but what is friendly and is kind .


Hazel : I will do the same thing .
There 's nothing I have said in it but what you will like to be hearing .


Mineog : ( Who has rummaged pockets . )
I thought I put it in the inside pocket - no matter - here it is .


Hazel : ( Rummaging . )
Here is my one .
I was thinking I had it lost .


Mineog : ( Reading , after he has turned over a couple of sheets rapidly ) `` Born and bred in this Square , he took his chief pride in his native town . ''


Hazel : ( Turning over two sheets . )
`` It was in this parish and district he spent the most part of his promising youth - Richly stored with world-wide knowledge . ''


Mineog : `` Well able to give out an opinion on any matter at all . ''


Hazel : `` To lay down his mind on paper it would be hard to beat him . ''


Mineog : `` With all that , humble that he would halt and speak to you the same as a child - - '' I 'm maybe putting it down a bit too simple , but the printer will give it a little shaping after .


Hazel : So will my own printer be lengthening out the words for me according to the type and the letters of the alphabet he will have plentiful and to spare .


Mineog : `` Well looking and well thought of .
A true Irishman in supporting all forms of sport . ''


Hazel : What 's that ?
I never was one for betting on races or gaining prizes for riddles .


Mineog : It is strange now I have no recollection of putting that down .
It is I myself in the days gone by would put an odd shilling on a horse .


Hazel : These typewriters would bother the world .
Wait now - let me throw an eye on those papers you have in your hand .


Mineog : Not at all .
I would sooner be giving it out to you myself .


Hazel : Of course it is very pleasing to be listening to so nice an account - but lend it a minute .


( Puts out hand . )


Mineog : Bring me now a bottle of wine , John - you know the sort - till I 'll drink to Mr. Hazel 's good health .


John : I will , sir .


Hazel : No , but bring it at my own expense till I will drink to Mr. Mineog .
Just give me a hold of that paper for one minute only .


Mineog : Keep patience now .
I will go through it with no delay .


Hazel : ( Making a snap . )
Just for one minute .


Mineog : ( Clapping his hand on it . )
What a hurry you are in !
Stop now till I 'll find the place .
`` Very rarely indeed has been met with so fair and so neighbourly a man . ''


Hazel : Give me a look at it .


Mineog : What is it ails you ?
You are uneasy about something .
What is it you are hiding from me ?


Hazel : What would I have to hide but that the papers got mixed in some way , and you have in your hand what I wrote about yourself , and not what you wrote about myself ?


Mineog : What way did they get into the wrong pocket now ?


Hazel : ( Putting MS. in his pocket . )
Give me back my own and I will give you back your own .


Mineog : I do n't know .
You are putting it in my mind there might be something underhand .
I would like to make sure what did you say about me in the heel .
( Turns over . )
`` He was honest and widely respected . ''
Was honest - are you saying me to be a rogue at this time ?


Hazel : That 's not fair dealing to be searching through it against my will .


Mineog : `` He was trusted through the whole townland . ''
Was trusted - is it that you are making me out to be a thief ?


Hazel : Well , follow your own road and take your own way .


Mineog : '' - - Mr. Mineog leaves no family to lament his loss , but along with the Tribune , which he fostered with the care of a father , we offer up prayers for the repose of his soul . ''
( Stands up . )
It is a notice of my death you are after writing !


Hazel : You should understand that .


Mineog : An obituary notice !
Of myself !
Is it that you expect me to quit the living world between this and Thursday ?


Hazel : I had no thought of the kind .


Mineog : I 'm not stretched yet !
What call have you to go offer prayers for me ?


Hazel : I tell you I had it put by this long time till I would have occasion to use it .


Mineog : Is it this long time , so , you have been waiting for my death ?


Hazel : Not at all .


Mineog : You to kill me to-day and to think to bury me to-morrow !


Hazel : Ca n't you listen ?
I was wanting something to fill space .


Mineog : Would nothing serve you to fill space but only my own corpse ?
To go set my coffin making and to put nettles growing on my hearth !
Would n't it be enough to rob my house or to make an attack upon my means ?
Would n't that fill up the gap ?


Hazel : Let you not twist it that way !


Mineog : The time I was in the face of my little dinner to go startle me with a thing of the sort !
I 'm not worth the ground I stand on !
For the Champion of next Thursday !
I to be dead ere Thursday !


Hazel : I looked for no such thing .


Mineog : What is it makes you say me to be done and dying ?
Am I reduced in the face ?


Hazel : You are not .


Mineog : Am I yellow and pale and shrunken ?


Hazel : Why would you be ?


Mineog : Would you say me to be crampy in the body ?
Am I staggery in the legs ?


Hazel : I see no such signs .


Mineog : Is it in my hand you see them ?
Is it lame or is it freezed-brittle like ice ?


Hazel : It is as warm and as good as my own .


Mineog : Let me take a hold of you till you will tell me has it the feel of a dead man 's grip .


Hazel : I know that it has not .


Mineog : Is it shaking like a bunch of timber shavings ?


Hazel : Not at all , not at all .


Mineog : It should be my hearing that is failing from me , or that I am crippled and have lost my walk .


Hazel : You are roaring and bawling without sense .


Mineog : Let the Champion go to flitters before I will die to please it !
I will not give in to it driving me out of the world before my hour is spent !
It would hardly ask that of a man would be of no use and no account , or even of a beast of any consequence .


Hazel : Who is asking you to die ?


Mineog : Giving no time hardly for the priest to overtake me and to give me the rites of the Church !


Hazel : I tell you there is no danger of you giving up at all !
Every person knows there must some sickness come before death .
Some take it from a neighbour and it is put on others by God .


Mineog : Even so , it 's hard say .


Hazel : You have not a ha ` p ` orth on you .
No complaint in the world wide .


Mineog : That 's nothing !
Sickness comes upon some as sudden as to clap their hands .


Hazel : What are you talking about ?
You are thinking us to be in the days of the cholera yet !


Mineog : There are yet other diseases besides that .


Hazel : You put the measles over you and we going the road to school .


Mineog : There is more than measles has power bring a man down .


Hazel : You had the chin-cough passed and you rising .
We were cut at the one time for the pock .


Mineog : A disease to be allotted to you it would find you out , and you maybe up twenty mile in the air !


Hazel : Ah , what disease could have you swept in the course of the next two days ?


Mineog : That is what I 'm after saying - unless you might have murder in your mind ?


Hazel : Ah , what murder !


Mineog : What way are you thinking to do away with me ?
To shoot me with the trigger of a gun and to give me shortening of life ?


Hazel : The trigger of a gun !
God bless it , I never fingered such a thing in the length of my life !


Mineog : To take aim at me and destroy me  to shoot me in forty halves like a crow in the time of the wheat !


Hazel : Oh , now , do n't say a thing like that !


Mineog : Or to drown me maybe in the river , enticing me across the rotten plank of the bridge .
( Seizing bottle . )
Will you tell me on the virtue of your oath , is death lurking in that sherry wine ?


Hazel : ( Pulling out paper . )
Ah , God bless your jig !
And how would I know is it a notice of my own death has come into my hand in the pocket of this coat I put on me through a mistake ?


Mineog : Give it here .
That 's my property !


Hazel : ( Reading . )
`` We sympathise with Mrs. Hazel and the family . ''
There is proof now .
Is it that you would go grieving with my wife and I to be living yet ?


Mineog : I did n't follow you out beyond this world with craving for the repose of your soul .
It is nothing at all beside what you wrote .


Hazel : Oh , I bear no grudge at all against you .
I am not huffy and crabbed like yourself to go taking offence .
Sure Kings and big people of the sort are used to see their dead-notices made ready from the hour of their birth out .
And it is not anything printed on papers or any flight of words on the Tribune could give me any concern at all .
See now will I be put out .
( Reads . )
What now is this ?
`` Mr. Hazel was of good race , having in him the old stock of the country , the Mahons , the O'Hagans , the Casserlys - - . ''
Where now did you get that ?
I never heard before , a Casserly to be in my fathers .


Mineog : It might be on the side of the mother .


Hazel : It was not .
My mother was a girl of the Hessians that was born in the year of the French .
My grandmother was Winefred Kane .


Mineog : What is being out in one name towards drawing down the forecast of all classes of deaths upon myself ?


Hazel : There are twenty thousand things you might lay down and I would give them no leave to annoy me .
But I have no mind any strange family to be mixed through me , but to go my own road and to carry my own character .


Mineog : I would say you to be very crabbed to be making much of a small little mistake of the sort .


Hazel : I will not have blood put in my veins that never rose up in them by birth .
You to have put a slur maybe on the whole of my posterity for ever .
That now is a thing out of measure .


Mineog : It might be the Casserlys are as fair as the Hessians , and as well looking and as well reared .


Hazel : There 's no one can know that .
What place owns them ?
My tribe did n't come inside the province .
Every generation was born and bred in this or in some neighbouring townland .


Mineog : Sure you will be but yourself whatever family may be laying claim to you .


Hazel : Any person of the Casserlys to have done a wrong deed at any time , the neighbours would be watching and probing my own brood till they would see might the track of it break out in any way .
It ran through our race to be hard tempered , from the Kanes that are very hot .


Mineog : Why would the family of the Casserlys go doing wrong deeds more than another ?


Hazel : I would never forgive it , if it was the highest man in Connacht said it .


Mineog : I tell you there to be any flaw in them , it would have worked itself out in yourself ere this .


Hazel : Putting on me the weight of a family I never knew or never heard the name of at all .
It is that is killing me entirely .


Mineog : Neither did I ever hear their name or if they ever lived in the world , or did any deed good or bad in it at all .


Hazel : What made you drag them hither for to write them in my genealogies so ?


Mineog : I did not drag them hither - - Give me that paper .
( Takes MS. and looks at it . )
What would it be but a misprint ?
Hessian , Casserly .
There does be great resemblance in the sound of a double S .


Hazel : Whether or no , you have a great wrong done me !
The person I had most dependence on to be the most person to annoy me !
If it was a man from the County Mayo I would n't see him treated that way !


Mineog : Have sense now !
What would signify anything might be wrote about you , and the green scraws being over your head ?


Hazel : That 's the worst !
I give you my oath I would not go miching from death or be in terror of the sharpness of his bones , and he coming as at the Flood to sweep the living world along with me , and leave no man on earth having penmanship to handle my deeds , or to put his own skin on my story !


Mineog : Ah it 's likely the both of us will be forgotten and our names along with us , and we out in the meadow of the dead .


Hazel : I will not be forgotten !
I have posterity will put a good slab over me .
Not like some would be left without a monument , unless it might be the rags of a cast waistcoat would be put on sticks in a barley garden , to go flapping at the thieves of the air .


Mineog : Let the birds or the neighbours go screech after me and welcome , and I not in it to hear or to be annoyed .


Hazel : Why would n't we hear ?
I 'm in dread it 's too much I 'll hear , and you yourself sending such news to travel abroad , that there is blood in me I concealed through my lifetime !


Mineog : What you are saying now has not the sense of reason .


Hazel : Tom Mineog to say that of me , that was my trusty comrade and my friend , what at all will strangers be putting out about me ?


Mineog : Ah , what call have you to go lamenting as if you had lost all on this side of the sea !


Hazel : You to have brought that annoyance on me , what would enemies be saying of me ?
That it was in my breed to be cracked or to have a thorn in the tongue .
There 's a generation of families would be great with you , and behind you they would be backbiting you .
Mineog : They will not .
You are of a family does n't know how to say a wrong word .


Hazel : A rabbit mushroom they might say me to be , with no memory behind or around me !


Mineog : Not at all .
The world knows you to be civil and brought up to mannerly ways .


Hazel : They might say me to have been a foreigner or a Jew man !


Mineog : I can bear witness you have no such yellow look .
And Hazel is a natural name .


Hazel : It 's likely they 'll say I was a sheep-stealer or a tinker that went foraging around after food !


Mineog : You that never put your hand on a rabbit burrow or stood before a magistrate or a judge !


Hazel : They 'll put me down as a grabber that was ready to quench a widow 's fire !


Mineog : Oh , where are you running to at all my dear man !


Hazel : And I not to be able at that time to rise up and to get satisfaction !
I to be wandering as a shadow and to see some schemer spilling out his lies !
That would be the most grief in death !
I to hit him a blow of my fist and he maybe not to feel it or to think it to be but a breeze of wind !


Mineog : You are going too far entirely !


Hazel : I to give out a strong curse on him and on his posterity and his land .
It would kill my heart if he would take it to be no human voice , but some vanity like the hissing of geese !


Mineog : I myself would recognise your voice , and you to be living or dead .


Hazel : You say that now .
But my ghost to come calling to you in the night time to rise up and to clear my character , you would run shivering to the priest as from some unnatural thing .
You would call to him to come banish me with a Mass !


Mineog : The Lord be between us and harm .


Hazel : To have no power of revenge after death !
My strength to go nourish weeds and grass !
A lie to be told and I living I could go lay my case before the courts .
So I will too !
I 'll silence you !
I 'll learn you to have done with misspellings and with death notices !
I 'll hinder you bringing in Casserlys !
I go take advice from the lawyer !
( Goes towards door . )


Mineog : I 'll go lay down my own case and the way that you have my life threatened !


Hazel : I 'll get justice and a hearing .
The Judge will give in to my say !


Mineog : I that will put you under bail !
I 'll bind you over to quit prophesying !


Hazel : I 'll break the bail of the sun and moon before I 'll give you leave to go brand me with strange names the same as you would tarbrand a sheep !
I 'll put yourself and your Tribune under the law of libel !


Mineog : I 'll make a world 's wonder of you !
I 'll give plenty and enough to the Champion to fill out its windy pages that time !


Hazel : ( At door . )
I will lay my information before you will overtake me !


Mineog : ( Seizing him . )
I will lay my information against you for theft and you bringing away my coat !


Hazel : I have no intention of bringing it away !


Mineog : Is it that you will deny it ?
Do n't I know that spot of grease on the sleeve ?


Hazel : Did I never carve a goose ?
Why would n't there be a spot of grease on my own sleeve ?


Mineog : Strip it off of you this minute !


Hazel : Give me back my own coat , so !


Mineog : What are you talking about !
That 's a great wonder now .
So it is not my own coat .


Hazel : Strip it off before you will quit the room !


Mineog : I 'll be well pleased casting it off !


Hazel : You will not cast it on the dust and the dirt of the floor !
( Helps him . )
Go easy now .
- - That 's it - -


( Takes it off gently and places it on chair . )


Mineog : Give me now my own coat !


Hazel : ( Struggling with it . )
It fails me to get it off .


Mineog : What way did you get it on ?


Hazel : It is that it is made too narrow .


Mineog : No , but yourself that has too much bulk .


Hazel : ( Struggling . )
There now is a tear !


Mineog : ( Taking his arm . )
Mind now , you 'll have it destroyed .


Hazel : Give me a hand , so .


Mineog : ( Helping him gently . )
Have a care - it 's a bit tender in the seams - - give me here your hand - it is caught in the rip of the lining .


John : ( Coming in , puts pie on table . )
Wait now , sir , till I 'll aid you to handle Mr. Hazel 's coat .


( Whips off coat , takes up other coat , hangs both on pegs . )


The apple pie , Sir .


( Hazel sits down , gasping and wiping his face .
Mineog turns his back . )


John : Is there anything after happening , Mr. Hazel ?


Hazel : There is not - unless some sort of a battle .


John : Ah , what signifies ?
There to be more of battles in the world there would be less of wars .


( He pushes Mineog 's chair to table . )


Hazel : ( After a pause . )
Apple pie ?


Mineog : ( Sitting down . )
Indeed , I am not any way inclined for eating .


( Takes plate .
John stuffs a cushion into window pane and picks up MSS . )
John : Are these belonging to you , Mr. Mineog ?


Mineog : Let you throw them on the coals of the fire , where we have no use for them presently .


Hazel : ( Stopping John and taking them . )
Thursday is very near at hand .
Two empty columns is a large space to go fill .


Mineog : Indeed I am feeling no way fit to go writing columns .


Hazel : ( Putting his MS. in his pocket . )
There is nothing ails them only to begin a good way after the start , and to stop before the finish .


Mineog : ( Putting his MS. in his pocket . )
We 'll do that .
We can put such part of them as we do not need at this time back in the shelf of the press .


Hazel : ( Filling glasses and lifting his . )
That it may be long before they will be needed !


Mineog : ( Lifting glass . )
That they may never be needed !


Curtain

