
CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE .


IN TWO VOLUMES .


VOL .
I .


` Heaven first taught Letters for some Wretches aid : POPE 'S ELOISA . '
LONDON : Printed for WILLIAM LANE , Leadenhall-Street .
MDCCLXXVII .


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Countess of DERBY .


 MADAM .


THE veneration I have for your Ladyship , flows , from contemplating the preserved purity of your conjugal character ,  encircled by a court , whose general infidelity is sanctified by the licentious taste of the times .


You obstinately persist in the Gothic endearments of Domestic Constancy , though adorned with all those personal graces which provoke the impertinence of the most seducing solicitations : and you have fortitude enough to prefer family felicity to the etiquette of an elopement , or the eclat of a divorce .


 After such an acknowledgment , Madam , it sounds inconsistent to shield under your protection , a series of misfortunes , which arise principally from family differences .
This apparent objection to your Ladyship 's patronage , is , however , easily removed .
To whom can an unfortunate pair so properly apply for sympathy , as to the virtuous and sympathizing ?
CHARLES and CHARLOTTE are as singularly as pathetically  circumstanced - Their distress is directed closely to the feeling heart - they will meet many a scornful sarcasm from the pride of pretended virtue - but from real innocence - from the COUNTESS of DERBY , they invite the recompence of - a Tear !
-


I am Your LADYSHIP 's most obliged , and obedient servant , THE AUTHOR .


 CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE .


London .


I LEFT your house this morning , pre-determined never to enter it again  the shelter I have flown to promises me the utmost security : do not therefore seek after me  since I am obliged , in the sorrow of my soul , to tell you , that I  should be compelled to refuse even the supplications of my beloved Charles , should his vigilance detect my retreat .
May you be for ever happy , and have the philosophy and prudence soon to forget the unfortunate


CHARLOTTE .


P.S. I trust this to the penny post , to prevent its being traced .
Farewell .


 GOD of heaven !
Pre-determined never to enter my house again - And did the hitherto kind , gentle , affectionate Charlotte , form such a resolution  and has she had the heart to put it in practice - ?
Inhuman girl !
What am I to think of this ?
I will instantly fly to all your acquaintance , and never rest till I again have the fugitive Charlotte in the arms of the faithful


CHARLES .


 I BEGAN my pursuit at five minutes past eleven in the morning , and I continued it till within a quarter of twelve at night  the cloth and dinner all that time remaining untouched upon the table  for I sent your sister one way , while I went another : but the labour of both hath terminated in disappointment .


I now catch up the pen involuntarily to write to you , without knowing whither to send my letter :  and though convinced of this , I continue to write on .
My heart is full , and I must discharge some part of its load upon paper : surely your residence will not long be a secret , and then I will send it to you .


Soft a little - 'T is the dead of the night , and the least alarm is heard distinctly .
In the moment of expectation the soul sits in the ear , and listens to the approaches of her object - The sound of a coach wheel rolls remotely .
May it bring onward the treasure I have lost !


Flattering , fond imagination !
The vehicle has past my door , and 't was  in vain I threw up the sash of the window to wait its stopping .


Why , Charlotte , do you treat me thus ?
Ungrateful girl , I will retire into my chamber , and think no more about you .


CHARLES .


ACCURSED is the gift of sensibility .
'T is the smart that `` agonizes at every pore . ''
Ever wretched shall the lover be , in proportion to the fineness of his feelings .
 How little to be desired is delicacy of passion !
The higher degrees of tenderness are distracting  and , if the agitation I am now in should continue long , with what fervency of supplication should I pray for stoicism or apathy , or any other power that deadens the enervating softness of recollection !


I rise from my bed to pen this ejaculation before the dawn of the day .
Ah !
barbarous Charlotte , what a night have I laboured through ?
I had resolved to think of you no more , but my heart , unfaithful to its resolutions , will admit no other ideas but those which are connected with love and Charlotte .
Instantly sprang  the tear to my eye as I entered the solitary chamber : the late scenes of serenity and interchanged endearment were now altered on the sudden to every thing that is dreary , every thing that is desolate : unpressed was the pillow , which , but the night before , administered the balm of softness to the cheek of beauty  and I found something to awaken a distressful feeling in every object that the taper exhibited to my view - The toilet was not trusted with its suspended ornaments - the chair was unoccupied which used to sustain your day-dress - but the night robes were hanging idly , and full in view , at the side of the bed : there was nobody to take them  down - nobody to wear them .
Their mistress had deserted them .
I tost about for an hour , and fretted myself into fatigue  an unquiet slumber suceeded only to torture fancy by presenting you to me in dreams .


She gave you to me in colours the most glowing , attitudes the most atttacting , and situations impossible to be born .
I yielded to the pleasures of imagination , caught her dear figure in my arms , and imprinted upon it the visionary kiss .
What was my astonishment - what my anguish , when I awaked to the deception - ?
If the post of the morning does not bring me intelligence , or if affection does not prevail with you  to come yourself - ah , thou fair , returning fugitive - !
I shall either lose my senses , or have reason left , only to hope for its departure .


Farewell .


THE breakfast table has been covered and uncovered without the tea being made or any thing eaten , and it is near twelve o'clock .


Polly , your sister , has examined your trunks and drawers , out of  which she says nothing is missing  and , it seems , you are gone without either cloaths or money .
How shall I interpret this ?
Dreadful images rise before me  and yet - it can not be , - you have no cause .
Since the day that we met I have affectionately anticipated every wish , and , to the utmost of my power , protected you from every care - self-destruction - !
No , no , that can never be  you have too aweful a sense of deity - of duty - and you have no temptation to rob the world and me of an individual so inestimable - the more I think , the deeper do I dive into perplexities .
I will throw away the pen and think no more .
You do not imagine the peace of my soul  worth a single slip of paper , or one stroke of the pen .
Farewell :


You have injured CHARLES .


SOMETHING is due , I forsee , to the alleviation of that anxiety , which my absence will throw you into .
I am therefore hence induced to tell you that I am well and happy , and , upon your solemn engagement of promise never to come in person , will transmit to you my address ,  where I shall think myself honoured by your correspondence , the only connexion that can for the future take place betwixt Charles and


CHARLOTTE .


BARBAROUS as is the inhibition , I solemnly comply with it , and desire to have your address immediately forwarded to the forsaken


CHARLES .


 RECEIVE inclosed what you request , and God bless you .


Adieu , CHARLOTTE .


I Send , agreeable to your given direction , the packet I had written at different times since your departure , but I am too ill to add more to it than the now forgotten name of


CHARLES .


 I Received your packet , every sentence of which was calculated to afflict me - ah forbear my beloved Charles - forbear to charm me into a relapse !
you accuse me of barbarity , when you ought to encourage me in virtue .
I have made a sacrifice my dear friend - late as it is , I have made a sacrifice to devotion , and to duty .
That I may not however suffer any longer the imputation of cruelty , I will frankly reveal to you the motive - the only motive that could prevail with me to quit the society of Charles .


 To tell you the whole matter in a single sentence - I have seen a person who hath a greater right to Charles than Charlotte - I have seen - your wife .
Ah , sir , what an interview - ?
unprepared for the scene , how could I sustain it ?
I sunk under it  and your lady triumphed in all the dignity of privilege , and advantages of argument .
- Surely heaven threw her in my way to shew me in blushing colours to her and to myself .
- We had never met before , and as the meeting was delayed for more than four years , it was by so much the more aweful and insupportable .
Yet do not blame her Charles .
Whatever may have been your disagreements , and however multiplied the  causes that led originally to your disunion , she hath still the right of a married woman , and deserves to be heard .
Nor can I complain of her conduct even upon so trying an occasion - she did not insult , she did not execrate : but , pursuing a much nearer way to the heart , she appealed from my passions to my sense of justice , and from my tenderness , to my truth .
Oh !
Charles , Charles , her pleadings were too pathetic to be resisted - I took her hand and bathed it with my tears , and she followed the advantage she had gained till she obtained that promise , which I have at length had the fortitude to perform .


 Severe , I confess to you - severe , even to the verge of distraction , has been the conflict .
Long I hesitated , long I remained undetermined  and even at last I have been compelled rather to stifle the rising emotions of tenderness precipitately , than act upon the calm principles of deliberation .
- Yet I have now been almost a week absent , and am alive : though there is a stand of coaches opposite my window ( any one of which would carry me to the only man I love upon earth ) I have had the courage to see them drive off and return , without filling a place in any one of them myself .


 No longer therefore accuse a behaviour that challenges your admiration , even while it afflicts you .
My trunk , you may , if you please , forward to my apartment , and my sister ( who being ignorant of our real situation had better be still kept so ) I would recommend you to send home to her mother in the country , where the news , neither of our separation nor its motive , may ever arrive .
Be this as it may , return to you again I never can  and indeed , to shew you the impossibility of it , I have paid a voluntary visit to Cleora , your lawful lady , to assure her we are parted for ever .
Nothing therefore remains , but that you endeavour to emulate ,  till you surpass , the heroism of the determined


CHARLOTTE .


IN the agony of my heart I have equity enough to praise your heroism , though it is dashed with a romance that ascends to the very summit of enthusiasm .
I now see my fate , and the continuance of the misery that attends it .


 The claims of the wife , the lawful lady and the married woman , are all , I see , dancing their fascinations before thee .


Think not , Charlotte , I laugh at laws , or ridicule institutions held sacred and obligatory .
Dear girl , I do not laugh at them , but , in my particular case , and in others similar to mine , an ample apology is found in the dictates of nature , reason , and common sense .
I will not , nor indeed am I yet calm enough , to ramble into the detail of original grievances - those grievances which produced a separation from the wife of the law , who hath now separated the wife of the soul .
Suffice it to  say , it was a rash marriage , and soon repented on both sides : the bitterness of conjugal repentance is beyond every other poignant , and happy is it if disunion , rather than perpetuated disagreement , results from it .
Is this sophistry ?
- Is this casuistry ?
no Charlotte , it is simple , didactic argument , ratified by unprejudiced reason , and stampt with the sanction of unbigotted sense - I feel as nicely as yourself the force of virtue , and the elegant triumphs of unspotted character , but I see no reason why those , who , upon the evidence of more than two years experience , are unsuited to each other , `` join'd , not match'd , '' should live janglingly together , merely to pull the tight cord of a connexion  at different ends , and exist miserably under the same roof , for the meagre satisfaction of having it to say , we fight it out friendly , without parting .


Egregious folly !
and superstition and slavery in their extremes !
you know the whole matter : my situation has been often delineated to you , and I will only desire you to reflect attentively upon it , before I obey your cruel request in relation to your trunk .
Ah , Charlotte , how can I bear to see those several ornaments purchased by my own hand in the ostentatious fondness of shewing you to the admiring public as the property of your constant protector -  how can I bear to see these depart into any other dressing-room but that which belongs to you , and in which they are now waiting the return of her who honours them in the wearing .
My dear , dear companion , it must not be : the laws of love and life , and reciprocated conjunction of hearts and minds forbid it .
Think better - oh , think better of it - throw aside the rigour of those resolutions which can produce no good , and admit those receiv'd ideas which will soften this unnecessary severity , and direct you to the sighing bosom , and open arms of


CHARLES .


 YOU do sophisticate Charles , and you are a casuist .
Deny it not .
Your wife is a fine woman , and you ought to love her : she is chaste , and you ought to live with her .
But live with her or not , I have done my duty , and though it should shorten my life , I will still persevere , and fly the open arms of the late beloved Charles as sedulously as if they were filled with poison .


CHARLOTTE .


P. S .
If you refuse to send the trunk , make a compliment of it to my sister .
I can do without it .


 MADAM ,


I ASK your pardon for detaining any part of your property after it was so peremptorily demanded .
I have however now , though late , made restitution of every thing which either your sister 's industry or mine , could find about your apartments - I have seen , madam , the trunk containing your dresses , and decorations carried upon the shoulders of a porter , coffin like  and had it been indeed your coffin my despair would have been only one degree superior .
Heavy as it is ,  with what a joy should I have stooped to the burden , and been myself the messenger  while the insensible athletic animal who is now such , will be intent only upon the profits of his message , and view only with a vulgar amazement , the form of the fair tyrant who rejects her conquest , and and yet holds in chains her captive .


Your concluding sentiment enters a caveat against further argument , and shortens my letter .
It is not , I perceive , the force of virtuous principles drives you from me only , but the poison of aversion you have conceived for those open arms to which you were so tenderly , though I confess so officiously invited .
Fear not , I  beseech you madam , the shortness of your life upon my account  it is in no danger from that quarter , and I do not doubt but your health and spirits will continue to encrease in proportion to the length of your absence .


The point is plain enough , and I am sorry your delicacy and ingenuity have been put to such a strait for an expedient .
How extremely - · - propos was your interview with Cleora !
and how sincerely do I congratulate you upon the lucky crisis in which it has united inclination and duty .
I perceive they have gone in this affair , like friends , well , but unexpectedly met , hand in hand together .
Four  years possession , is I must own enough to poison any body , and it is only for such constant fools as Charles to increase his passion , by gratifying it .
I again beg your pardon , and promise to trespass no more upon that time , which you are no doubt employing in more agreeable engagements than reading the letters of a cast lover - perhaps the present hour is enlivened by the charms of a new acquaintance , and it may be , in the delirium of female vivacity upon the dear subject of liberty restored - that paradise regained to the soul of a woman - the name , I say , and infirmity of the neglected Charles may give additional zest to sprightliness , and enhance the  entertainment of a delicious tête - · - tête .


The victor , I must own , hath a right to imitate the barbarism of Achilles , and draw at the tail of his chariot the corpse of conquest .
At this I shall not pretend to cavil .
'T is the prescriptive right of the tyrant , and the slave must submit .
But if there exists any man in the creation hardy enough to partake your conquest , and to express the impudence of exultation over it - if such a one there is madam , let him tremble - for nothing but his life shall pacify my heart , or atone for the sport he has made of my weakness , or my sensibility .


CHARLES .


 NOW , indeed , Sir , you have nobly exerted yourself , and I ought to express to you my thanks for taking the only method that could make me forget you .
Were I not inexcusably weak I should do this , but I own you have wounded me : I own that your several sarcasms have gone where you directed them - into the recesses of my heart .
Most ungenerous Charles , to interpret that action into the most mercenary meanness , which , I summon the great God that inspired it , to witness , proceeded from principle .


 No , Sir  my spirits and health ( if I may judge of the future , by the present ) are not likely to be restored to me in proportion to the length of my absence : nor was the abruptness of my departure the effort of so much ingenuity as you may be pleased to imagine .
-


If you are yet capable of doing justice , I desire you to reflect on the various struggles I have at different times had since the commencement of our connection , upon the point that now carried me for ever from you !
Even before I saw the lawful Cleora I shed many a tear , and heaved many a sigh at the thought of that injury I was every hour  committing against her .
Nay , did I not twice before , even in the warmest transports of our tenderness , bring myself to the resolution of leaving you ?
You pursued , persuaded , prevailed , and brought me back to guilty pleasures .
Seeing the life of Charles bound up in the society of Charlotte , I endeavoured again to reconcile myself to my situation .
I even adopted , in some degree , the sophistry of your own sentiments .
I argued , as an apology , the innocence of my intention  the hearty desire I had to serve your family , the gratitude I owe to the man , who improved my understanding and adorned my manners : and , in short , I took refuge in a thousand plausibilities ,  rather than be torn on the rack of reflection , and leave a society so inexpressibly dear to me .


Auspicious to the scheme of forgetfulness , it was about this time you know , Sir , that we began our excursions , and took the different tours of England , Ireland , and Scotland .
The improvements I made in the course of these journies , the serenity of the seasons in which they were , for the most part , performed , and the attracting benefits of so ingenious a companion as Charles , suspended for a while the kneener sense of an illicit connection .
Yet , in the very bosom of bliss I was never so dull as not to know that it  was an illicit one  and therefore , proper to be broken .
To break it , nevertheless , was far beyond the feebleness of my power .
The idea of Charles and all his fascinating qualities , mixt with every image , and made the leading feature of every figure that was formed by the soul .
In repugnance to the conduct I ought to have pursued , I called to my aid all the seductions of imagination , and , when they failed , I derived the comforts of self-delusion , even from the pictures of truth - Is he not , said I , industrious to justify my error , while I soothed my passion  is he not the man , who took me up in a more than orphan state , and proved himself to me a father and a friend ?
 Did he not find me a ruined creature - a poor unfortunate wanderer , who had been just deserted by the villain lord , who , taking advantage of simplicity had robbed my innocence , and turned me unprovided upon the world - ?
Ought I not to bless the accident then that threw me in the way of this affectionate protector ?
From what irremediable misery may he not have saved me ?
How indefatigable has been his tenderness ?
How assiduous his efforts to support me ?
How anxious and unremitting his wishes and labours to place me in a way of supporting myself , against that day in which he might want life to exert himself ?
Was not this my first preceptor ?
 Wanting the attentions of a parent , and an early victim to my credulity , did he not find me stepping into the very border of female violation ?
Was not our first interview in the very momentous crisis of a woman 's fate  and was I not weeping , in the bitter sincerity of my heart , over the prospects of destruction ?


Surrounded by calamities like these , did not providence direct Charles to save me , as the guardian angel of an unhappy girl ?
and has not this very Charles preserved his friendship unbroken , and his fidelity consummate ever since the day of my deliverance ?


 Arguments like these , strongly seconded by the feelings of my heart , did I frequently exert , till , cooperating with the refinements of your conversation , and the charm I never failed to find in your entertaining company , I had almost brought myself to believe there was nothing extremely wrong in our intercourse .


Lulled , however , by this pleasing lethargy of the senses , and sung to repose by the syren of tenderness , I argued myself into a transient serenity , and indulged the softness which I perceived to be so soothing .
We compleated our designs , and returned from our rambles in the  English nation and its neighbouring countries , in order to visit together the continent of France .
Preparations you know , Sir , were making for our route soon after our arrival in London , and the beginning of the next week was fixed for our departure .


In the interim I met with the injured Cleora , who told me in the most affecting manner , that , though she never wished a re-union with you , it would give that peace to her heart which was long lost , if I would tear myself from your embraces .
Agonized by her pleadings , and stung by the sense of having wronged her , I fell upon my knee , and , solemnly in that situation engaged to do what I have done .


 I have nothing to do with your family differences Charles , nor shall I listen to the story of either party .
Duty and conscience are both concerned in the measure I have taken , and I shall not be made to repent of it , even by the severity of your upbraidings .
It was , nevertheless , too much descending from the native dignity of your disposition - too unlike the candour of Charles 's character , to suppose a connection of four years establishment , every day of which produced some evidence of its sincerity , should be sacrificed to the very grossest purposes in the first week 's separation .
A new acquaintance !
What would you insinuate ?
To what indelicacy do you allude ?
I  have a tear now falling upon that part of your letter , and I wish it had the power to blot both the sentiment and the recollection of it out of my memory for ever !
With great reluctancy shall I admit any ideas that disgrace the elegance of Charles 's sensibility .
Though duty commands me to quit his protection , my knowledge of his many eminent virtues , incline me to cherish his idea , and still love him for his excellencies .
I would most gladly consider him as a friend , a correspondent , and a conspicuous character : and , though we shall never meet again , the sense of my obligations to him , and his own merits , might be a constant source of innocent contemplation to me :  why , Charles will you rob me of so agreeable a refuge , perhaps the greatest the whole world has now to afford me .
Do you think Sir , then that I can so soon make a transfer of my affections ?
can I , think you , in so very short a space of time , command them from Charles to any accidental object ?
have I so convenient a heart - so obedient a versality ?
what do you take me for ?
but indeed I deserve it all  she who can bring herself to sleep upon an unsanctified pillow , four long twelve months , may well be supposed to perpetrate any thing that is wrong  and therefore I forgive you : although , in justice to myself , I must observe how I shudder , and how the blood runs from my  heart , at the bare suggestion of such perfidy .


Indeed you wrong me  and I can not bear you to entertain such ideas : even though by entertaining them yourself , my image would be the sooner obliviated .
Though you found me a fallen woman , I am not constitutionally a wretch of purchase , Sir .
Your many amiable lessons of morality have not been so egregiously misemployed .
The virtue you have inculcated , and the volumes you have put into my hand , have produced effects more salutary : nay Charles , it is to your own instructions - to your own cultivation of my head and heart , that I have been induced to  undertake the magnanimity of this action .
With respect to resources - such I mean as are necessary , merely necessary to the preservation of human life , it is impossible that I should be destitute of them , while I have health  and the power who encouraged me to a good action will not , I trust , suffer the sharpness of poverty to result from it .
But even if he should , I shall eat no longer the bitter bread of adultery , and considering that punishment proportioned to the offence , shall kiss the omnipotent rod without complaining , and supplicate the aids of penitence and patience till my sentence is softened , and the punishment remitted .


 For the support of life , I have no doubt but that industry will enable me to get a sufficiency .
You , Charles , have not suffered me to lead a life of idleness : I am skilled in the elegant labours of the needle : I can embroider : I have some little knowledge of those employments which may assist me from applying to the milliners - nay , and - such has been the effect of your instructions - I am not incapable of undertaking the elementary principles of female education .
Here , indeed Charles , I feel a severe stroke from reflection .
Who will put any children under the care of a free woman ?
what parent will trust its rising hopes to one who has herself failed ?
- how long , alas !
will it  be before the world can be convinced of my penitence , or my propriety !
let this be as it will , my resolution remains firm as at the first , and Charles must be eternally disunited from


CHARLOTTE .


P. S. I received the trunk , and thank you for your care .


Farewell .


 Too amiable CHARLOTTE .


WHEREFORE do you thus officiously labour to extort my approbation ?
and wherefore have you not left it in my power to censure you ?
were there any hard part in your character - had you charitably left me but one single cruelty , on which I might have founded a reasonable complaint , so that I might have ruminated upon it till I had argued myself into aversion , it might  have been more tolerable : but you are obstinately bent upon murdering me by your goodness , and every moment increase the admiration which I ought to feel daily diminishing .
The laws of the land and the prescriptions of custom have thrown the arguments so abundantly on your side , that 't is impossible to baffle them without seeming to sophisticate .
Fool and idiot that I was , to run into the shackle that galls for life , and to bind it like a volunteer slave , on my own leg !
and yet , Charlotte , you have assisted Cleora in acting contradictions .
Does she not by her own confession militate against a re-union ?
does she not declare the misery , of which she foresees , it would be productive ?
 to what end then - to what end , but the most cruel and unnecessary one , should she wish to effect a separation between Charles and Charlotte ?
Cleora and Charles entertain not for each other either hatred or love  indifference is the point between them .
And what virtuous purpose is likely to arise from the parting , in which she has been instrumental .


But you are , I see , too immersed in established ideas and the customs of a country , to admit a single exception to a general rule : although a minute 's reflection would convince you that my case and yours are such  as should be absolutely set apart from almost every other .


Ah , inflexible Charlotte , wherefore have you shielded your heart from the dear arrows of love under the bulwark of such venerable maxims - maxims , which , be their general tenor ever so admirable , must always allow deviation in certain cases .
How easy were it to prove that , in strict speaking , it would be absurd and irrational even to unite again with Cleora .
Nay , to put our of the question every other plea , and rely only on the energy of a single argument : the argument of our mutual indifference , is it not ( demonstrably ) ridiculous to live a loveless  life with any being ?
Peculiar circumstances , of temporal distress at the first occasioned my leaving Cleora : I left her with a heart utterly at liberty , and in situations in no degree worse than before I heartily invited , and hastily obtained her hand .
Chance , or rather surely the contrivance of some pitying deity , soon afterwards presented before my eye the image of Charlotte .
Every thing in human nature that corresponds with the pathetic , united to favour our first interview .
It was in the still hour of midnight : 't was in the hour of misfortune .
We were both sufferers : I mourned the barbarity of a mother , embarrassed affairs , and anxieties at home : you  were sinking under the sense of an equal injury .
Social sorrows soon suit themselves to the soul , and the impression that is made in such a crisis , is deep and delicate , indeed .


I see , methinks , the first scene  and I feel what language and sentiment denies the power to describe .
Ah !
Charlotte - Think a little upon it !
- Prepare for a Picture so particularly interesting .
Invoke the powers of imagination , fidelity , and fondness to do it justice .
- Lay aside every formal , every unnecessary punctilio , and give , upon so important an occasion , a full scope to the tenderness of nature .
- That tenderness , my dear , which was bestowed by the  great God of kindness to ` make the nauseous draught of life go down . '


I have , in preparing you for such a portrait inspired myself .
The subject is not to be withstood .
- I dedicate it Charlotte to your sensibility .
- I address it to your Heart .
Did I , in the first Scene , insult you ?
Did I insult you with any offer that could distress or confuse you ?
No , Charlotte - some secret impulse it was that withheld me from the deed : some god it was , which inclined me to be inquisitively exact in drawing from you the history of your unhappiness .
The tale was told with a simplicity and bewitching artlessness , that might have gained credit from  infidelity , and attracted attention from frolic .
Let the tears that I then shed , let the kindness with which I have since cherished you , witness the truth of my tenderness and protection .
How were we both affected ?
how did our sympathy incline us to approach till our cheeks were as the reposing , yet glowing cushions of each other 's .
Can you forget the trembling throbs that you felt as I pressed your making hand upon my bosom .
- I withdrew till you undrest , and I appeal to you , if I did not sit like the nurse of your chamber by the side of your bed till morning .
I found it absolutely impracticable to treat your misery in any other manner : even your beauty , dazzling as  it was , and in the most trying of all situations , was not able to betray me : I paid my court to your heart - to your situation - to your pathetic circumstances , and to every thing but your person : the charms of which , resplendent as I acknowledge they were , I had no leisure to reflect upon , till I had in some measure soothed the mighty anguish under which you were struggling .


I proposed a retreat in the recesses of the country .
Such a retreat , Charlotte , my vigilant affection , ( ever wakeful , ever indefatigable ) soon provided  and when I had smoothed your own situation , and related to you in the undisguise of my soul , the  particulars of mine , I then ventured ( and not till then ) to mention the wishes , which , after all the little delaying reluctances that endear ultimate consent , were successful .


Tell not me , Charlotte , of the prude 's unfeeling formality .
Do not suggest to me the sneer which outrageous virtue would cast upon such a transaction .
Spirits I know there are ( terribly holy , and formidably devout - punctilious as to the minutiae of ceremonials , and negligent of essentials ) which would ridicule the delaying reluctances of Charlotte , as artful pretences - What - say they , piously violent - shall she who ascends the nuptial couch to supply unlawfully ,  the place of the lawful - to fill the arms that are awefully preoccupied - who hath , moreover , forfeited her innocence to the seducer , and been reduced to irreputable refuges - shall she assume the character of chastity and all its coynesses , or , indeed , any of those marks of amiableness which ought to distinguish only married modesty , and maiden decorum - ?
Fie upon her !


Ah !
hard of heart , and shallow of head !
illiberal , contracted women !
Is it not possible for virtue to be independent of forms ?
is it not possible , in a case like Charlotte 's , for the most unspotted purity of mind to survive an accidental violation of  person ?
- But then , you reply , she lived , after all , publicly with the husband of another woman .
In any other exigence but her 's and mine , it might be impossible to offer a plea of palliation :


Let wealth and honour wait the wedded dame  August her deed , and sacred be her fame .
Far be it from me , far from the most unhappy Charles be it , to blast the laurels , or wither the roses of conjugal life .
` Twere impious , ` twere impracticable .
I am not audacious enough to say with Eloisa , '  Curse on all laws but those which love has made . '
Ah gracious , gracious heaven , that it had been permitted to blend in our connection the laws of love , and of the land , natural , with moral institutions !
- May never any pair , Charlotte , who love as we love , be reduced by the tyranny of their situation , to equal measures : may those whose hearts are equally tuned by nature into equal sympathy , find a friend in fortune to facilitate their union !
Happy - eminently happy they , who are thus assisted , and whose joys receive , in conformity to the custom of nations ,  their imprimatur of tenderness and possession at the altar .
- Our fates , Charlotte , were unfortunately peculiar , and our resolution to run them together was natural , and , set off as they were by ten thousand delicacies , irresistable .
Let not our conduct be proposed as an example to be adopted , where it is even possible for man and wife to live together : but let not our fidelity , after we had united , be censured too vigourously , or too incautiously .


Weigh these facts well , and they will tempt you to seek again your  long accustomed pillow upon the bosom ( the heart under which will swell to welcome your return ) of


CHARLES .


 HOW often must I repeat - how often waft it on the wings of the post , that I must never more repose on the bosom of Charles .
Cease , cease then , ah , my dear seducer , for pity 's sake .
Do not continue to croud upon me those images which it is pernicious to entertain !
Wherefore - oh thou ungenerous - wherefore do you oppose the most omnipotent of all human arguments , wherefore do you oppose yourself , betwixt the severely contending powers  of duty and passion - Ah inhuman !
it is not without exertions the most violent , and pangs the most accumulated , that I am able to sustain the conduct I have for the last four days observed .
Conscious as you are of the propriety of that conduct , forbear , I solemnly conjure you , to address my partiality again upon the only subject which it can not safely contemplate !


The sketch you have delineated of our intercourse , in its first dear , but unfortunate beginnings , is too boldly coloured , and bears too visibly the delicate touches of a master , for the eye of one , who can trace so lively a likeness betwixt the copy and the  original .
If then you have any regard to the peace of my mind - any to my prosperity - never present to my view again , so animated or so dangerous a picture : rather , I beseech you , turn that most powerful pen of yours into a chaster style : indulge it in the display of subjects more suited to our circumstances .
Direct your fine , but too persuasive genius into the proper channel , and let the strength and vigour of Charles 's understanding , rather prevent than debilitate the infirmity of Charlotte 's  and besides this , how unfair is it to avail yourself of that very feeling in your favour , which your reason tells you it is inequitable to indulge .


 The copious effusion of tender tears that flowed , as I suppose you cruelly intended they should , in obedience to the commanding sentiments of your last , have a little relieved my heart , at the expence of exhausting my spirits .


I have acquired once more sufficient composure to write to the man who seems resolved to keep me in constant agitation .


You did save me , Charles , from distress the most agonizing  from a state the most dreadful : you did unite in your character , all the relations  as a father instructed - as a mother admonished - as a brother protected  - as a sister entertained , and as a husband cherished .
Oh Charles , Charles , it is all well , all great , all a noble climax , till we get to the last expression .
It was only as a husband : it was like one , that you cherished me .
'T was out of your power - oh , the malice of fortune - to be one , and as that was the case , we should not have united .
I should have found that generosity in your friendship , which you ought to have denied me in your tenderness .
I might have been the object of your benevolence , without - I write the sentence with a blush burning my cheek - without sharing your bed .
How would it have redounded to the honour of my Charles , how officiously would the daughters  of distress have trusted his fame to the echo of posterity , if his bounty had been totally unaccompanied by guilt : if he had rescued an unhappy girl from misery , without bringing her out of one error to lead her into another .


Methinks I now see how Charles might at once have procured my honour , and my happiness : and I , who know the goodness of his heart , wonder the scheme , or something similar to it , escaped him .
Might he not have placed the unhappy female far from the delusions of the metropolis , in some sheltering part of the country , where the knowledge of her calamity might never arrive ?
 There , might she not , under the protection of some decent matron , have learned all the arts of useful life , even till the often transmitted bounty of her absent friend Charles , might be no longer necessary to her subsistance .
What room had here been for probation - what scope for innocence recovered : and what immortality - what undescribeable sensations must have attended an action so disinterested , so unmixt - so admirable !
Instead of which - but I can not , I ought not to upbraid you .
I acknowledge the delicacy of your deportment when it was the most essential , and when very , very few would have therefore bestowed it .
But let us drop the subject : assist me  not treacherously , to the recollection of scenes , which I wish , and ought to forget .
Surely , surely it is not now a time to receive them in the memory .
Ah , Charles , why did not heaven allow our first meeting to have preceded your union with Cleora : then , with what a transport , a transport sanctified by religion , should I - but it is unavailing to wish : we are parted eternally : nor can even such an epistle as your last , adorned as it is with all the glowing graces of language , and artfully addressed to every passion that alarms the sex , make me revolt from that steady principle I have fixt to myself , in the deliberation of my soul , as the rule of my future conduct .
If  therefore you set any price upon the pleasures of our continued correspondence - for I will forfeit even your letters rather than read myself into a relapse - let this ultimate , this repeated assurance , satisfy you once for all .
In a word , Charles , let it teach your heart to be contented with a gratification , somewhat less terrible than that which would terminate in the perdition of the afflicted , but , alas !
still


affectionate CHARLOTTE .


P. S .
You do not mention my sister , but you certainly have sent her to the arms of an innocent and expecting mother , whose want of knowledge  in my case , is , perhaps , the only thing that prevents bringing her grey hairs with sorrow to the grave .


Adieu .


INVULNERABLE , and unrelenting as you are , I have the right of a painter to finish my picture .
Hard would it indeed be , were I denied so trifling a liberty as that which the pen allows , when I obey your too rigid injunctions in keeping from the apartment which I know to  contain my treasure .
Think , madam - oh , that cold word - think , Charlotte , of the severe restraint I impose upon myself !
I know the very house in which you sleep - if you indeed can sleep - and yet I desist from going to make enquiries in which I am so much interested .


And are you alarmed by the faintly drawn sketch of our first week 's connexion ?
Alas !
how very poor , how very unequal was all which then past , when compared to the months , and years that succeeded it !
a dew drop to the deep , and main world of waters !
Carry your imagination in retrospect to the time when we first yielded to the exigence , and agreed  to live in the same house  when , in all tender respects , we agreed to consider ourselves as - united people .
Look back to the very night , ever precious to love-sick remembrance , when you first indulged the solicited embrace .
Till after the attention of many days , I did not dare to intimate the hopes of a conquered heart , nor even at last , till I had reconciled you to every part of my hapless situation - till we had both lamented the bar that prevented a public sanction .
Paint to your fancy the joy that was then realized , when you first permitted me , half consenting , half denying , to draw the curtain betwixt us and every interruption - I can say no more : I refer you to the powers of  imagination - It was not the unsoul'd debauch of a dissipated pair : it was not the delirium of two young people , sedulous to snatch the hasty revels of a night 's voluptuousness !
but it was the unaffected transport of sentiment and taste , of body and mind , consolidated : not a vein in our hearts that did not thrill to the emotions of sympathy : animated by the fire of real love , not a pulse about us that did not leap to salute its hindred pulsation .
Remember , above all things , our next morning meeting at breakfast : the sighs which we then wafted over the tea-cup : the tears which were scarce contained within their sluices of crystal : the various flushings of the countenance ,  and our aukward-enough endeavours to conceal the confusion which was thus rendered the more apparent , all gave silent , but delicious testimony , that the mutual approbation was compleat .


Perhaps you will say , that this might be the energy of juvenile desire : the mere enthusiastic riot of the agitated senses - the transient fever of inflamatory spirits .
How easy were it , in opposition to this , to prove its origin from a more pure and permanent source .
Reflect , I prithee , fair fugitive , on the scenes which succeeded .
Consider what diversity of events happened after , to cool the blood , and settle the senses .
Examine the train of misfortunes  which arose rapidly one out of another .
Did not my whole patrimony , and all my hopes of elevated circumstances , sink suddenly before me ?
did not the hardened creditor then take his advantage of my calamity , and hunt me with a blood-hound industry , from to place ?
was not my health invaded in consequence of my anxiety , and were we not both reduced to uncertain resources ?
was not this aggregate of affliction enough to quiet the impetuosity of mere animal inclination ?
surely it was  but they only rendered us still dearer to one another : the burdens were heavy , and each was therefore emulous to carry the greatest load of them : we had even a sort of jealousy  lest the one should encroach upon the share of the other .
Tenderness and transport presided over our very difficulties - Ah !
how often in the desolate moment , when the whole hemisphere of hope was clouded , have we watched the fall of the tear upon the cheek , and kist it away ?
how frequently have we caught the sigh while parting from the lips ?
great woes we reconciled into sentiments of moderation  and every gale of good fortune , from whatever corner of her compass it blew , was swelled by love into enchantment : the beauty of a flower  the paint of a tulip  the fragrance of a rose  the sudden lustre of the sun  an evening walk  or the morning prospect  over our breakfast , painted by the gay pencil of imagination , were more than a match for the empty purse , the ill-natured accident , or miseries of the greatest magnitude .
And , can those who have gone for the service of each other through the fiery trial , ever forget , ever ultimately separate ?
Of all paradoxes , it is to me the most irreconcilable .


I conjure you then by the memory of our past misfortunes , than which even the recollection of extacies is not more endearing - I conjure you by the memory of our pleasures , of which we have had our proportion - I conjure you by the wishes you cherish for my health  by the many  miseries of a situation that calls aloud for constant attentions  in short , Charlotte , I conjure , implore , and challenge you , by all that you hope , and all which you dread , to suffer me to enforce the pleadings of my heart at your own lodgings : I will obey every injunction - ah !
thou delightful tyrant - imposed upon me : the click of the clock shall bring me to the moment of your assignation : I shall enter your apartment with all the tremors of a lover , and yet I will not , till you permit me , speak of love : I will anticipate the commands of your tongue , and watch the time to depart from the waving of your finger , the nod of your head , or the turn of your eye - More than  than the power of a sultaness shall attend you in this interview - Only admit me once - to tea , to breakfast - to dine - to sup - I can not Charlotte - I swear by the heart you have carried forcibly away from me - I can not , any longer , support your absence .
Do not then hurry me into violence , but indulge , for this once , my passion , and trust to my prudence , and my promises .
Farewell , farewell .


CHARLES .


 IS this your solemn engagement ?
pressing for an interview already .
To what end do you think I left you Sir ?
Was it to give myself a few days unnecessary agony , to involve you in needless calamity , and then to repent upon my folly , and return again to the errors I have left ?
I am angry that you think me guilty of so much inconsistency .
What a child must you believe me ?
and yet how do you oblige me to be even with you .
For shame , Sir , for shame  you want the philosophy of  an infant .
You have devoted several of the years of your youth to the study of the sciences , you are deeply read in virtuous compositions , and yet you are more feeble than the babe .


To be outdone in a good action by a woman , by the very woman whose undemanding and heart have been , as it were , the work of your own hands : whom you have made what she is - To let her surpass you in fortitude !
Blush , blush , and rise into the ambition of excelling her .


From the very arguments that you draw as motives of my return ,  I can extract the most forcible reasons for my desisting from a reunion , even supposing that there was no personal criminality attending it .


Wherefore should I hang as a clog at the foot of a man already oppressed by the heavy hand of calamity ?
whatever you may think , it is no real testimony of regard to share your miseries without being able to relieve them .
To behold you struggling with your fate , without the power to better it , and rather adding to , than taking from , your embarrassments .
No , Charles  trust me , we can both do more tolerably alone , at least for the present : in the course of a little time , fortune  may be generous to one of us , which , is a point of no moment : our persons only , and not our purses , are divided : it will be the same thing whether the shower of prosperity falls upon Charles , or Charlotte : I hope neither of us shall at any time be capable of separate interests , and that neither of us shall be too proud to receive assistance at the hand of the other .
As to your part , your talents will recommend you , wheresoever or howsoever you exert them  and you can not long fail of conquering the inconveniences which at present surround you .
Charlotte 's society , however dear , was rather an impediment than any thing else , to Charles 's advancement , and he will now be  admitted into connections which were before impenetrable .
We may amuse ourselves , my dear friend , with the idea of despising the customs of our country , and the forms of our church : nay , we may attempt to soothe ourselves with the opinions of ourselves , and a narrow circle of our private friends , but if the voice of the public , and the established modes of religion are against us , it will be in vain that we receive a partial approbation .
It is not only politic , but morally just , that the general clamour should be raised against a couple in our situation .
The disagreements that pass under a man 's own roof , and the quarrels or feuds which divide the husband from  the wife , do not authorize an open defiance of either the laws of man , or the commands of God : nor will the world , however proper the separation , ever enter into the intricacies of circumstance , or pathetic of passion that throws the divided husband into the arms of another woman .
I am still willing to hope , Charles , that our offence will be mitigated by the God of mercy , upon account of the many peculiar temptations and exigences that belonged to it : in strict speaking , perhaps , there may not be any greater degree of guilt in our late connection , than if it had immediately succeeded a divorce from your Cleora : but when I am appealed to by a pleading wife ,  who charges me with seducing the the affections of a husband  when I am branded by that wife , as the artful and infamous cause of her child 's misery , and her own , amongst all her friends and acquaintances  when I am held up as the terror of married women , at the very time that I know I would have at any time yielded the society of Charles to to more lawful claims  how do you think I can bear to live under this load of half-merited ignominy , and half-undeserved reproach ?
the truth will break , like the sun , through all disguising interceptions : the delicacy of your passion for me , Charles , led you to conceal the fact in regard to my real situation .
Wherever you  went , the brilliance of your wit and the polish of your genius , together with the public evidences you have given of it , attracted notice , ensured popularity , and commanded curiosity - You took me by the hand , and presented me in all our excursions as your wedded wife : I did my best to support the character , I would have given worlds to have realized it : but even in my happiest moment , Charles , I felt a pang at my heart , and apprehended a discovery that would have overwhelmed me with the blushes of confusion .
In the course of our rambles , your sanction provided for me several amiable friends .
I had too much veneration for the name of wife to injure it by any  light , or unbecoming behaviour  and I have the felicity to reflect , that my deportment under this assumed character , was in all respects , conjugal and exact : well was it for me , nevertheless , dear Charles , that our passion for travel , did not allow us to stay long in a place .
Your situation must soon have been publicly known  even the political disguise of your real name must have been seen through  your fatal pre-engagement with Cleora would have been detected , and the endearing countenance that was before shewn me , while I lay under the shelter of a charming imposition , would be ignominiously withdrawn .
That this , in part has been the case , you can not  but remember : I have occasionally been met by an old acquaintance of yours , who hath officiously circulated the secret of our connexion , and my character became in an instant suspected , or at least ambiguous .


The industry with which I applied to those accomplishments in which it is the chief glory of women to excel , and the books and masters which you recommended to me for that purpose , soon polished simplicity into a degree of refined knowledge , and made me more deserving my Charles 's society .
And yet , my friend , the agonies of my heart increased with the instructions of my head .
Objects and actions  soon presented themselves to me in a different light from that in which I had been accustomed to behold them : the days of girlish giddiness were past , and the sedater reflections of the woman succeeded .
From a state of rusticity and village ignorance , I was able to think profoundly and compare accurately  a nicer sense of right and wrong began to take place  an aweful admiration for illustrious characters , and a more than enthusiastic ambition to reach them , seized upon my senses : proportioned to the augmentation of my intellectual powers , rose into greater lustre the sensibilities of my soul  and , under the influence of these cultivations , all flowing from the generous stream  of Charles 's fondness , think what I must in the cool hour undergo , at the thought of living in a state so palpably condemned by mandates above and below  and so forcibly reprobated by every law , divine and human .


It was not , Charles , over the exigences of a precarious fortune , it was not for the loss of your estate , nor was it even for the gradual declinings of your health , that half those tears were shed , which in different places , and at different periods , flowed from me .
Studious of your serenity , how often have I repress'd the sigh that was half ready to break its way through my bosom : arm in arm as  we walked affectionately together , amidst the perfumes of the spring , or the fragrant profusions of the summer  delighted too as I was with the faithful testimonies of the warmest passion that ever nature rendered mutual , even then , in seasons so sacred to composure , the bitter idea would overtake me , and I have been compelled to complain of some transient pain of the person , to hide from my companion the anguish of the heart .
Nay , Charles , I have often sought out a hiding-place when my heart was overcharged , to relieve it by tears .
That Cleora and you could not live amicably together , that I was the woman of your choice , that incidents perfectly uncommon united us , that  we both lived in the strictest fidelity , that our passion was as elevated as ever inhabited the human bosom , and that we were every thing that is precious to each other , were by no means counterballances to the censure of the world , the violation of moral obligations , the strokes of my own conscience , and the claims of Cleora , which my avow'd residence with you , seemed at least to intercept .


Collect yourself sufficiently Charles , to put these several sentiments together : consider them one by one , as you arrange them in due order , and form them into a whole .
When you have done this , quiet I beseech you the disorders of every rebellious passion ,  and let reason , in her robes of sobriety , sit in judgment .
The sentence which she passes will command your attention : methinks I see her from her aweful throne , in the center of the human heart preparing to speak - hark , Charles , I hear her voice , and it shall decide between us .
- Persevere Charlotte , persevere in these resolutions , she says .
`` Forbear Charles , forbear to throw thy temptations again in the path of the penitent . ''


The very force of the image of Charles invigorates my virtue , and gives me fresh spirits to persist .


Farewell .
CHARLOTTE .


 AWEFUL , admirable girl , I bow to the dignity of thy superior soul .
I yield to the sentiments it is impossible to controvert .
Yes , cruel world , I will henceforth bleed in silence a victim to thy circumscribed opinions .
Your resolves , Charlotte , are , I perceive , as the rock that defies the batter of the winds and of the waves .
Your virtue commands , and my passions shall obey :


adieu , adieu for ever , to CHARLES .


 THE struggles of conscience , have again prevailed over the tenderness of love , and I have lived a whole week , without the society , or even the sight of Charlotte .
Leave - I desire you , as soon as possible , and hasten to the apartments of the unhappy


CHARLES .


 YOUR last short letter was as a cordial to the spirits of a swooning creature .
Noble , noble youth , how agreeably you flatter me !
and is it possible that Charles can be a convert to the sentiments of Charlotte ?
has she been so happy as to vindicate her own conduct , and kindle in his heart the sparks of imitation ?
- imitation did I say ?
no  my dear friend has twice the power and ten times the goodness of Charlotte , if he will but exert them .
Have I not  known him melt and soften into sympathy at the pitiable circumstances of a distressed enemy ?
have I not seen the tear of gratitude in his eye , and his hands folded together , for pain alleviated , danger escaped , differences accommodated , and comforts multiplied ?
is he not the friend of all that want , of all that wish ?
hath not nature directed his hand to his purse to divide with the indigent or the soliciting , the last efforts of his liberality ?
doth not his own miseries teach him to feel for others , and suggest to him all the finer obligations of morality ?


And can such a character , can such an exalted spirit , long remain insensible  to a duty of the greatest magnitude ?
impossible , impossible !
'T is I , only I , have been to blame , in winding my fatal image , and destructive affections , round his heart , till it became entangled beyond the power of extrication .
Long ago would this excellent young man have recovered the dignity of his duty , had not I prevented it .
I should have slown before : since his delicacy was too great to quit me , my virtue should sooner have urged me to quit him .
Perhaps by this time , he might have quite forgotten me , or only at most have recollected me with the indifference I deserve .


 It is , however , some consolation , that I have at last been equal to the impulses of my reason , and I can not but hope the most salutary effects will arise from them .
Already my dearest friend ( for as such I shall ever consider him ) is open to conviction : to be so , is one great step towards every thing laudable and desirable : to see the path of virtue , and to be pleased with it , is a powerful inducement to pursue it without any suture deviations .
I rise every morning more reconciled to my separation , and I can command my thoughts from the image of Charles , when I find them wandering that way , with the cost only of a few tears : my slumbers are not indeed sound , nor  can I frequently close my eyes  but I can meditate without distraction , and know the direction of the only man upon earth whom I - I - I whom - whom - I - I say I can reflect upon the very spot , where I suppose Charles to be sitting , without passing by his door , or knocking at it for admittance : for that admittance , which I now hope , and believe he will , after the lapse of a few months , refuse me , except upon the terms of an ordinary acquaintance .
- No Charles , no : not an ordinary acquaintance neither .
I could not bear to receive from you the forms of compliment , or the cold civilities of a mere well-bred decorum .
If we ever do again see each other , let it be with kindness , with  attention , with friendship , and with any thing from the extremes either of relapsing fondness , or fashionable disregard : it would be extremely aukward - perhaps it would be utterly impossible for Charles and Charlotte ever to meet upon so ceremonious a visit : nor will it , I dare say , be necessary .
The passion will be altered , the sensibilities of love will be extinguished , but the sentiments of a pure and established friendship , may , and must remain .


You have now set my heart at rest  and the favours of your pen , upon more lively and interesting subjects , will indulge , while they improve , the now happier


CHARLOTTE .


 P. S. Not a word yet about my sister Polly  but you have been too much vexed with your own feelings , and I make myself satisfied she is an innocent cottager at - with her mother .


MADAM ,


I STILL remain steady in pursuing the measures I have taken : and though my endeavours were twice ineffectual before , yet I now feel myself equal to the sacrifices which my own conscience , and justice to you ,  require .
Your husband seems already to be sensible of my propriety , and ceases to talk upon a subject I am truly labouring to forget for ever .
I have heard your story and his  and I am utterly unable ( and a very improper person ) to say who is in the right .
It is most likely ( you will pardon me ) that both of you are in the wrong  family differences are much too delicate for one out of the family to interfere in them .
The injuries , however , I have done you are at an end , and Charles is at full liberty to repair the mischiefs , if indeed they are the heaviest on his side ) of Cleora .
That any thing not extremely substantial should disunite him from so much sense and  beauty , as you Madam , are possest off , would be such a repugnance to every part of his character , that I can not readily conceive it possible  and yet , it appears to me full as strange and unaccountable , that so accomplished a lady should not have the power to fix the affections of a man whose heart is extremely tender , and whose love of domestic happiness , is the manifestly first principle of his ambition .


These mysteries make it improper for me to say more , than that I cordially wish ( if it is for his felicity , and for yours ) that whatever has past may be obliviated  that a single trace of his connection with the most unfortunate  Charlotte may never interrupt you , and that , whatever becomes of me , you may pass the long remainder of your days in reconciled tenderness , and restored affections .


Although , Madam , I can no otherwise promote this than by my good wishes , and persevering in my good resolutions , yet I think it a part of my duty to tell you , that your husband 's present lodgings are at - .


There , either you or your letters will find him  and whatever you expect from him , may you receive it  from his justice , or his sensibility .


I am , Madam ,


the truly penitent CHARLOTTE .


P. S. I ought to give you the caution of directing to him under cover to his friend Mr. K. whose address you know , and who will deliver your letter immediately on the receipt of it .
Poor Charles 's situation renders this necessary to his personal safety , and neither you , nor I Madam , can be indifferent to that .


 I AM just informed , Madam , that your circumstances demand the attention of benevolence , and as I know the present situation of your husband ( were you both happily united ) could not allow him to assist you , I have taken the liberty , as a very old friend to your family , to inclose a modicum , which , though shamefully small , is I protest to you , proportioned to the immediate ability of


Madam ,


Your most obliged humble servant .


 A WEEK 's silence , my dear Charles , must sure have done great things : you certainly find it for your ease to lay down the pen which used so frequently to address Charlotte  and , therefore , I submit to the suspension of your correspondence .
Possibly I am by this time an object only of friendly , and undisturbed contemplation .
I will endeavour to rejoice at the supposition : 't is what I ought to do .
- Now then , my friend , summon yourself to the undertaking : I have made the first  sacrifice to virtue  do you collect all your strength to sustain a second !


Your wife is now in London , Charles , and the child , which you have so long and anxiously wished to fondle in your arms , is now blooming in beauty , by the side of her .
Your barbarous mother ( voluptuous in her age , and wicked in her weeds ) denies any longer to support or educate the babe , and the little fortune is at present locked up , and is likely to remain so till the sale of that estate of which you have been iniquitously robbed , is compleated .
In the worst dilemma , however , your talents are always a sufficient resource , for the subsistance of  human life .
She who indeed loves , will love in all circumstances : she who feels as she ought to feel , will follow her object into the worst of all possible situations - What say you to an interview with Cleora ?
can you not obliterate the idea of the subjects which parted you , and visit each other , without a past unnecessary reflection ?
I have been several hours in her company .
There is nothing in her person but what might attract a husband 's attention : her understanding is even masculinely strong .
She doats upon the child you have presented to her .
She denies the infamous charge that either malice , or wantonness brought against her fame : she is young ,  handsome , accomplished , well born , your real wife , and in distress , oh , heavens !
can such a heart as Charles 's remain hardened , or can he close his eye upon such a picture - a picture , glowing with the two principal portraits of his own family ?


Admitting , however , that you can not feel upon this occasion all the luxury of a love-match  admitting , that Cleora wants the power to delight  ought she not to be received as a married wife ?
and though you may want ability to be transported , yet can not you entertain enough of that friendship , which you always allow to our sex , to live within the limits of propriety ?
in fine , Charles ,  if you can avoid absolute aversion on the one hand , and altercation ( to which I am sure you are not by nature inclined ) on the other , it is a plain point of honour and conscience , to invite her again to your arms .


Believe me , my friend , she is the only woman in the creation I could bear to see there : but I have been the seeming instrument of keeping you from her - the real one I am sure I have not - and therefore it would give me a pleasure inexpressible to bring you together , even before I have totally conquered my own partialities .
Do Charles , do endeavour to give my vanity the gratification  of one distinguished action : let me have one opportunity to shew those who have aspersed me , that I had something like a soul at the bottom .
Exert yourself , I charge you  and let it be said , that Charles was capable of a dignity in conduct , which was not unworthily emulated by


CHARLOTTE .


AM I never to see my best friend , the amiable Charles , permanently happy ?
is he for ever  to be subjected to these anxious vicissitudes ?
and is one of the noblest of human hearts thus constantly to be tortured on the wheel of misfortune ?
If you bear as ill the third elopement of Charlotte , as you did the first and second , I shall dread to see you : sure never did a young man possess so unfashionable a fidelity : and yet I can not blame you : the value of the object justifies the constancy and violence of the passion .


If to her share some female errors fall , Look in her face , and you forget them all .
 The beauties of your Charlotte , both mental and bodily , are indeed too attractingly eminent to be easily worn from the memory of a man , who hath not only possess'd , but so greatly contributed to polish them .
I have long known her merit  long paid to it the tribute of my admiration  and as long lamented the bar that prevented the union of which she is so truly deserving .
From the ripening refinements of her mind , however , and from the ardent precipitation of her temper , tinctured as it is with a little both of enthusiasm and romance , I apprehended something of this sort would ensue from  the meeting of her and Cleora , should that ever happen .


How unlucky is it that the point is on all sides , too nice and critical to be spoken to .
I most heartily wish all wives well , and all lovers happy : above all other things I have ever wished it upon solid motives : their hearts were moulded for each other : the joys , sorrows , evil , and good , they have mutually sustained in the course of a long , and faithful interchange , must have bound them in chains of peculiar force .
And yet , as the matter has fallen out , what has my friend to do , but to exert his phi [ ... ] hy , and call all the powers of [ ... ] is assistance .


 I am heartily glad you are in London , where uneasiness of any kind may be whirl'd off , much sooner than in the country .
The shades are infectious : rural objects , and especially to a poetical mind , are absolutely so many distractions .
I would not have you by any means venture into those parts of the country where you have of late been used to reside .
The idea that should not be indulged , will obtrude itself in a moment : every thing you behold , from the leaves of the tree , to the husbandman at his labour , will revive the treacherous image you should eradicate .


Rather , my good friend , pursue a different course : however reluctantly ,  rush into mixt and multiplied society .
Indulge not the softness of relaxing solitude .
Engage for a short time in all the frivolous scenes of busy existence .
Let the great soul stoop a little , and condescend to be amused by innocent levities .
Superior as you are , I would now advise you to frequent the places of public resort - and , in short , I would advise every thing gay and airy , except downright dissipation .
Against that I would caution you  for you already know its ineffectuallity .
I shall be in town on Thursday , and will dedicate my time totally to you .
In the mean while , pray think of Charlotte only as a departed friend  as one who does , and must ever wish you  well , but whose present absence is necessary to her future happiness .
You see Charles , by the dull common-place of this letter , that it is a subject I really know not how to treat .
I am honestly the friend of Charles and Charlotte : what then is to be said upon this trying crisis ?
I will only say , that if the smallest degree of either 's happiness depended upon me , my power should be exerted before it could be solicited .
Be of good courage : look about you : think little , read less , sigh seldom , smile as often as you can , and God bless you .
Such are the hints of your ever faithful servant


HAMLET TEMPLETON .


 FOR the second time in my life I am absolutely inebriated - Dead drunk , Templeton , in the vain effort of drowning my distraction , and your letter was delivered to me over the dizziness of the third bottle .


Charlotte is fixt in the frost of her resolutions , and I have ceased to address her on my subject .
Heavy hung the hours upon my hand , and I have been endeavouring to shorten them by forgetfulness - Ah , Templeton !
 I have gone suddenly from the extremes of melancholy to those of madness .
I called upon a vacant acquaintance , who never felt a poignant woe in his life , who laughs at tenderness , and snaps his fingers at love , and , in the very stupor of my soul , strolled with him into a tavern .
I am this moment every thing but delirious , and I have compelled my colleague in dissipation , to drink prosperity to every step of Charlotte - at least at every second glass - In this state of capital elevation , what will become of me for the rest of the night , heaven knows  but as I am certain of being both sick and sorry tomorrow , I am resolv'd not to be either to night .
- Heigh - heigh - oh !
Templeton !
 Templeton , what machines we are !
obedient to the breath of every passion , tost into tempest by every gust of disappointment or desire .
What a fever we are in from fifteen to five and twenty  what an ague overtakes us soon after that , till we are frozen to death and good for nothing - Oh !
these violent transitions - I lay down my pen to pledge you in a bumper of good wishes for the health of Charlotte .
I would murder my brother if he refused the toast of my heart - Never was I so strongly inclined to break my promise , and go abruptly to her apartment .
I could now talk to her like an angel : I could charm her with  claret-caught eloquence , were she adamant from top to bottom .


`` Hot with the Tuscan grape , and high in blood , '' - by my soul , Templeton , I am just at this time a a match for every thing that could happen to me - I could smooth the wrinkles of her dear indignant brow - I could press her beloved hand with a tenderness so gentle - I could advance to her rosy lip with so pathetic an humility , a countenance so touching , and a sigh so delicate , that I should certainly conquer all her scruples , and allure her once more to the arms that are ever extending involuntarily , to embrace her .
The fellow who has been the companion  of my revels , is both too headless and too heartless to continue any longer - His dull eye twinkles in drowsiness , and he had rather , I perceive , hug his pillow , than the goddess of beauty - The wretch absolutely yawns .
Oh the negative - !
Whatever becomes of me I will never pray , no Templeton , ( though agony of soul were to mark every moment ) I will never pray for the lethargies of insensibility - I will this instant go to the arms of willing beauty .


CHARLES .


 CONFUSION and perplexity !
What a mistake have I blundered into !
Curse on the power of wine !
Curse on the folly that rushes into extremes .
In the giddiness of my cups , I hastily prest my seal upon the letter intended for you , and addressed it to Charlotte : addressed to her , what I had written in the libertine hour of drunkenness and intoxication .
The post-office happened to be hard by , where I had been accustomed to throw in my correspondence ,  and as I parted from my fuddled associate , I trusted my licentious epistle to the letter box .
Read the inclosed , Templeton , and execrate the stupidity of


CHARLES .


SIR ,


YOU have directed to one friend , what was , I perceive , designed for another : the letter I return to you under cover , will explain the  matter .
I shall only observe upon it , that the fair hopes I began to entertain are again destroyed , and I have the worst consequences to apprehend from your desperate , and dreadful conduct .
I do not doubt but you put into execution the scheme you projected , and practiced the odious purposes at which you glanced in the concluding lines of your letter to Mr. Templeton !
what , Charles , are you already capable of this ?
can you , with a more than brutal precipitation , subdue the boasted feelings of tenderness for one woman , and hurry away to make an offer of your person to another ?


 Indelicate and ungrateful youth !
separated as we are - could I have imagined - could I have even believed it possible , that a few days should so have prostituted , what I fondly took to be the most constant of hearts ?
rather than have committed so gross - so disrespectful - so barbarous , an action , why did you not even venture , as you threatened , ( wrong as such a step would have been ) to call upon me .
The condition you were in , would have , in some measure , excused you to me - I might have advised you to return home : I might have - as a friend , as a sister - as a parent , pointed out to you the palpable sin - guilt - impropriety - barbarity of such an action !
 not , Sir , that the action affects me : I have neither right or dominion over you .
I speak not upon my own account , heaven knows !
so far on the contrary , that in my very last letter , I promised your reconciliation with Cleora .
In her arms I could almost bear to behold you .
But what could lead you to this early violation ?
who knows what may be the consequence !
- who knows what multiplied mischief may spring from it !
Ah , my friend , think what a slight constitution you possess - think how long , and assiduously ( even with all the attentions and nursings of love ) your Charlotte laboured to confirm your health - Perhaps the unhappy female , whose favours  you have thus purchased , may be one , who - oh , Charles !
you have been much to blame  indeed you have .
I am so truly - so deeply affected at this rashness - for your sake - that I tremble as I sit in my chair  a sigh which I can not repress , bursts from my bosom , and a tear which I can not restrain , drops upon my paper .
If you look closely you will perceive where it fell .
But that is nothing  a friend 's health must ever be precious - were it not for your health 's sake , the rashness of your conduct would not so much vex me .
What though you bought a beauty - !
she was extremely handsome no doubt - 'T is very strange , Sir , that you can not be contented with having a pretty  wife for nothing  but you must - in your embarrassed circumstances too - ramble into houses a man of feeling should blush to enter .
Do not suppose I want to trace your favourites - I have no such curiosity .
Possibly the lady was your fair incog .
long before I left you .
But what indeed is that to me ?
you are your own master - we are utterly disunited , and , and , and - oh !
Charles , Charles , I begin to adopt the sentiment of Cleora , and believe , you never had the least affection for


CHARLOTTE .


 DEAR , and justly offended Charlotte , forgive me !
The agonies I have felt , and still feel from your reproaches , are even more insupportable than the absence which made me rush into the behaviour that deserved them .
And yet , ( so thrive my hopes for your felicity ) I am less guilty than you may be led to guess , from the declarations of a drunken man !


 Since the letter has fallen into your hands , I will religiously relate the unextenuated facts .


The lunacy of disappointed love , and the madness of wine , to which you know I am so little accustomed , hurried me , I must confess , into all the distractions of dissipation .


When the partner of my intoxication left me , I was in the street  scarce sensible in my head , and unable to keep my heels .
I stood supporting myself for some time against the pillars of a door in a state of irresolution : even then , the image of the relentless Charlotte presented itself  I would have died with pleasure  the next morning , to have part that night in your company .
The little likelihood of this drove me to despair , and calling a coach , I ordered the driver to carry me to your lodgings .
About twenty yards from the house I pulled the check-string , and alighted : the moon was in her meridian , and I walked on till I came opposite your window .
The shutters were closed  the streets were quiet , and not an object near , except the watchman , whose night-box was stationed within five paces of your apartment .
I twined my arms in a melancholy folding , and directed my eye , as I stood fixed , to that part of the mansion which I knew you occupied .
There is a lane which  leads to the back of the house , and I got staggeringly upon the wall that separated the property .
Here , Charlotte , as I stood upright on the ridge , I commanded the adjacent apartments .
- The extreme warmth of the night had induced the inhabitant to suffer the sash about a third part open , and the cooling breezes of midnight rewarded the design .
Ah !
God !
what were my sensations , when , levelling my eye to the casement , I saw , by the assistance of the moon-beams , ( at this time uncommonly bright ) a dress that I knew !
At the edge of the toilet lay that very hussive which I presented to you so very lately , and whose first employment was to contain the needles which assisted  in making the ruffles you left unfinished .
The spotted handkerchief , the cap , the hat , and even the garters you yourself knitted , were there .
Spread upon a chair , at a small distance , was a packet of papers , partly unfolded , perhaps the correspondence of Charles - and the curtain on the female side of the bed was undrawn : at the foot it was impenetrably and enviously pinned close together .
Imagine , oh !
imagine , my situation !
for I can not describe it .
The watchman neglected to inspect the lane , though he sat almost at the beginning of it .
Love 's auspicious god had surely charmed him to rest , for he did not even call his hour after the clock had struck .
I remained  still undiscovered , and could not persuade mvself to remove .
How shall I paint what followed ?
ah !
beloved woman , pardon and pity me !
I brought my ear even with the edge of the window-frame , and listened : what did I hear ?
even the balmy breath of my Charlotte , heaving somewhat interruptedly in slumber .
I opened my lips , if aught of the perfume would reach me , that I might inhale it .
Five minutes , or more than five , did I continue in this attitude  and then - mighty love assist me - then did I hear the dearest of women , starting from her sleep , exclaim - `` This should be his pillow - here should his cheek repose - ah !
 Charles , Charles , why did we ever meet ?
this parting will distract me '' - My heart at this time prompted me to discover myself , and I tremblingly put my hand to the sash , and heaved it higher - I could have stepped into Charlotte 's bedchamber with ease : another lift would have carried me into her arms  but the pullies rattled , you called loudly to know `` who was there , '' and I was compelled to descend from the walls of paradise .


The abruptness with which I descended , brought me headlong to the ground , I cut myself with pieces of broken glass , and other rubbish that had been thrown into the lane .
 I had just risen , when I once more looked at the window , where , to compleat my misery , I saw the disrobed , lovely , and beautiful Charlotte , pulling down the sash .


Agitated as I was , I dared not speak .
I kept my promise with you , even in drunkenness , and was silent under all these touching circumstances .
But what did all these efforts of honour cost me ?
I thought my senses would utterly have left me !


That nothing may remain concealed , I will disclose even the scenes which succeeded - And yet , why should I ?
to what end do I make you acquainted with more instances  of my weakness ?
- you wish me to hate you : you have annihilated my image , and you earnestly desire I should obliviate yours : you detest , you abhor , you laugh at the agonies of


CHARLES .


FOR heaven 's sake , my dear Charles , be more guarded : you will destroy the happiness both of Charlotte and yourself .
She is  palpably jealous of you : every syllable in her letter declares it .
Her tenderness for you is even greater than ever .
I conjure you , therefore , not to injure her : continue still to consider her silently as your sister , and I prophecy that something will happen in the course of a little time , to make her as essentially your wife , by the laws of the land , as she is evidently already by the laws of the tenderest love that can possibly be reciprocated .
At least give her the indulgence of a short period .
I still expect to see you happy together , and I am persuaded , if you let fortune take her own play , without unseasonably interrupting her , she will contrive matters in your favour , till  all shall work together for your good .
Persecutions and searchings after her at present , will only defeat your purposes .
View her , therefore , I again conjure you , as the dearest relation in the world , who can not possibly live in the same house with you .
Surely there is a most delicate consolation in believing yourself most passionately beloved by an absent friend .
That you are passionately beloved , and that you will continue to be so , there is not the smallest doubt : and , give me as a friend , leave to tell you , that , to suppose you are not , is a poor compliment to Charlotte : your incredulity , in this case , argues your want of confidence .
Depend upon it , if she  who has torn herself from you , ever finds it again in her power ( I mean in the power of her feelings ) to return , she will not hesitate to crown the warmest wishes of her amiable companion , who , both by habit and inclination , must be too dear to be soon forgotten .
Do you think she has forgotten you ?
oh , Charles , you can not be so ignorant of the workings of nature , nor can you be so insensible to the peculiarly soft heart of her , whose absence you are deploring .
Take my word for it , that were you to meet twelve-months hence , your first interview would not be sustained like persons who had buried the remembrance of each other .
I judge not romantically ,  but from a knowledge of you both : I judge from the scenes of lively , and lasting endearment you have both experienced : you can no more forget one another , than you can forget yourselves .
Many a sad hour does she feel , as well as Charles , and much anguish must she undergo to support and continue these triumphs of her delicacy .
Once more , therefore , I desire you to let things take their course , and , by some stroke of providence , Charlotte will assuredly be restored to you .
I am not able to settle my business here so expeditiously as I could , for your sake , wish .
But I must insist on your letters giving me all material occurrences , since it is impossible  any thing should happen to you , that can be matter of indifference to


HAMLET TEMPLETON .


P. S. I like not your scheme of indulging in wine  it is only one degree more excusable than indulging with women .
Neither of these will assist you at present  and therefore you would do better to avoid both .


 GOOD God , Charles , what a life do you make me lead !
and what real misery hath distinguished the night and the day since the arrival of your last !
how can you be so ingenious to torture your own heart and mine ?
Your scene at my window thrills me with horror .
What a time to be exposed to the open air : careless and intoxicated too as you were !
what wretchedness must attend your prospect !
How could the impetuosity of your passion suggest such  an expedient  dangerous in itself , and painful in its consequences ?
I hope , however , you have not cut yourself alarmingly : pray get the best advice : glass sometimes sticks within the skin , and gangrenes .
Oh !
for heaven 's sake , take care .
Had you staid till the noise brought me to the window , what would have become of us both ?
to have denied you admittance , would have been , in such a situation , impossible : to have admitted you would have been a fresh gall to those wounds of honour which I am trying to heal .
If you regard either my health , my happiness , or my life , never put me again to such severe trials .


 If , Charles , the scenes that succeeded this shocking one at my chamber window are such as an eye , not wholly abandoned , may dare to look upon , you may send it to me .
I can , however , too readily guess the scope of it : and yet it was , methinks , a strange heart , that could just quit the most pathetic object in the world , and find a gratification , the next minute , in the grossest .


Write , nevertheless , and faithfully write , the honest truth .
Tell me how happy you have been made by the miserable she whom gold allured to the man she possibly never saw before .
Oh !
Charles , where has been your delicacy !
or if your passions  rioted over your reason , why did you not seek to relieve them in the arms of Cleora ?
Farewell , you have planted a fresh dagger in the bosom of


CHARLOTTE .


HARD-judging Charlotte !
you think worse of me than you ought .
I have , as you will presently see , preserved my delicacy , in spite of my dissipation  did I not at this time feel too severely the effects of that dissipation , and was I  not sitting up in my bed , in defiance of a fever that almost parches the pen as I hold it , I would convince you of this .
But I am quite exhausted , and must defer this matter to a future opportunity .


I am your afflicted CHARLES .


 I HAVE met an adventure that I think may draw off your mind , in some measure , from its present fatal object of contemplation  and therefore I will describe it as accurately as my memory permits .
You can not too attentively apply yourself to those scenes which amuse the imagination and soothe the fancy .


 At the house of Mr. - where I now am on a visit ( from which I can not yet politely disengage self ) dined the other day , six people of both sexes  amongst them a stripling , who complained bitterly that he had been abused by the lady of his heart , who , after a courtship ( and all its costly consequences ) of five years , had left him in the lurch  kept his presents , stolen his affections , and turned him adrift , in favour of a stupid fellow with a smooth face , a laced coat , and a well-turned pair of legs .
This poor swain made a fool of himself all dinner time , could drink little , eat less , sighed every second , and at last solemnly declared he would renounce  the sex , and set out the next week to seek for indifference , in rambling round the habitable globe .


After this declaration , he sat silent and melancholy for a long time , and really infected the whole company : at length an old gentleman that sat next him , tapp'd him softly on the shoulder , and said , `` he was in hopes he did not know in what real misery consisted  and so , continued he , as we are all mighty English , and inclined to be pensive , I will tell you the heads of my history , from which you will be able , perhaps , to deduce a very useful lesson : namely , that happiness hates to be hunted , and is very seldom caught by those , who  violently pursue her .
She detests pressing , and must come a volunteer into the service of mortals . ''


`` All our misery , or at least the greatest portions of it , arise from the want of settled and consolidated sentiments - in other words , from submitting to the violence of various passions , without sticking to any one of them upon principle .
This has been my misfortune  take care that it is not yours .
I am now , you see , in the decline of life , and yet , from the time that I came to years of discretion , as indiscreet people too often call them , I have been chacing different shadows  and fluctuating , tempest-tost , betwixt opposite  opinions .
At my first coming into the world , a mere noviciate in all respects , ( as it were , in the very morning of exigence ) fancy , and curiosity threw before my eye a thousand gay and glittering appearances .
I could neither engage in a dance , or make one at a dinner , or attend a concert , or visit any place of public diversion , without receiving some unlucky impression in favour of objects either recommended by their novelty , or to which I was invited by the ardour of my temper .
I , like you , had a free hand , a liberal soul , and a susceptible heart : my spirits were lively , my ideas excursive , and fancy for ever on the wing .
The ruling propensities of my nature  were social , and , I cultivated with a vigour peculiar to young people , all the friendly and interesting connections . ''


`` To rescue my friend , or to prove my fidelity , to him , I set at nought hazard , embarrassment , and enterprize , with all the enthusiastical vehemence of a knight-errant .
My efforts were without the least mercenary mixture , and my opinions conceived and admitted without any suspicion .
Having indulged this luxury of the young man for some time , till certain tokens of insincerity somewhat cooled my ardour , I was taught by experience , the necessity of caution , and found it wholesome  to alter a little the system I had adopted : instead , therefore , of falling in love at first sight , of conferring indiscriminate favours , of fixing promiscuous friendships , or of lavishing offers of service to all men , without caution or distinction , I was tempted to enter into intercourses of a more stationary kind : my appetites were now less refractory : imagination had enjoyed her frolic , and the curiosity of a rambling , romantic heart was satisfied .
I now resolved to begin the world on a new principle : I courted a young woman eminently beautiful , and obtained her hand : from this moment I entertained notions , views and wishes , utterly the reverse of my former ones : fortune -  interest - children - family and posterity , all crouded upon me : the shilling , which in my late bachelor-state I should have toss'd carelesly away , I turned very deliberately , and placed it as an accumulated twelve-pence in my drawer . ''


`` At the end of a year my wife presented me with a similitude of herself  and the moment it came into the world , I imagined it gave so sacred an addition to my character , that , I remember well , on that very day I bustled into my barber 's shop with an unusual strut , and ordered a supernumerary row of curls to my peruke , the better to figure as the father of a family .
The succeeding  year gave me a son , with whom I was no sooner provided , than I became anxious to provide a fortune to support him .
To accomplish this , need I say , that I adopted the most circumspect maxims .
I gave nothing without knowing to what end .
I engaged in a good business , entertained but seldom , threw myself as little as possible in the way of pleasurable temptation , rose up early in the morning to the account book , and knowing my infirmity ( for you must know I always loved wine ) I kept the bottle out of sight .
Yet , in reward of this self-denial , I eat hearty , slept sound , and repaired the constitution , which the career of the former part of my life had deplorably  shaken .
For several years I applied myself to the maxims of gain , and , in the end , obtained by such industry a considerable fortune . ''


`` About this period my sentiments underwent another total alteration : from the domestic friend and man of business , I shifted to the man of magnificence and parade  and just as I had , by dint of infinite drudgery , obtained a good fortune , I took it into my head to spend it like a fool .
As you are in love , young Sir , you know something about human inconsistency , and therefore will not wonder at this apparent lunacy .
Well , Sir , I took it into my ridiculous head , as I was saying , to purchase  a piece of ground on the side of a hill , in the county of Somerset : upon this hill , I had the nonsensical ambition to build a spacious house , and in this house , to my shame be it spoken , I placed pictures and paintings , which , as the learned in those matters told me , were extremely fine and valuable .
I now no longer listen'd to the chatter upon change , the jargon of Garraway 's , nor the stupidity of the stocks .
I bustled no more in business , took my cash out of trade , set up a chaise , and commenced the eminent merchant retired from ways , to live upon his means .
I turned a bleak , bare hill behind my villa , into a shrubbery of sirs , and the steep descent from before my front door , I converted into  a garden , in which I placed statues of all the great folks  and , that the matter might be compleat , I ordered a pond to be cut in the centre , that I might have at once wood , water , and fish into the bargain .
My wife , however , soon complained that the walls were damp , my children were constantly afflicted with colds : my gardener discovered , that nothing either useful or beautiful would grow , upon account of barren ground  and the neighbouring gentry , after paying a compliment to my taste in building , pitied me on being unfortunate in the situation .
I made no more ado , Sir , but upon this , I pull'd ( like a true baby tired of my plaything ) the whole edifice down , even to the cornerstone   and , in the rage of my heart , hurried with my family again to London , where I took lodgings , and , in mere despair and shame , shut myself up for several days . ''


`` My fortune , acquired by the diligence of many years , was too substantial to be much hurt by a single folly .
I had indeed thrown away upwards of two thousand pounds , and I had got a pretty deal of experience .
Now mark the reverse : from that day to this , I do not believe I have misemployed or misplaced a single penny .
You see me now in the last stage of my journey .
My wife is in heaven , and my children are in good circumstances : one of my boys has  made a very good piece of arable out of that very ground which was reprobated by the indolent gardener : I have rebuilt the house , so as to make it fine , and warm enough for a farmer  and my third son has persuaded me to buy a pretty parcel of land contiguous to it .
As to myself , after all the frolics and vagaries of youth , I have something to line the easy chair of old age : I have an old woman to rub my ancles when the gout hath wrapt them up in flannels  my bed is the softer for being my own buying , and though I do not bid every puppy put his hand into my purse , yet , if he can prove to me that he is not a rogue , and is guilty only of raggedness , I shall never be churl enough to refuse  him a cast coat that hangs idly collecting dust upon a peg , nor will I send him away in the winter , without warming himself against the weather , by a warm seat in the chimney-corner .
Thus young , Sir , you see how fatal it is to indulge imagination : I was the sport of it for a long time , and happy was it for me , that I condescended , in the season of the grey hair , to lead the life of reason . ''


Here , my dear Charles , the old gentleman ended his story , which , though not absolutely in point , was truly entertaining , and enriched by very pertinent and salutary observations .
In all events it will answer a very good purpose , if the recital of it  in any degree alleviates the misery of my friend - a friend , whose joys and woes are always reverberated upon the heart of his


HAMLET TEMPLETON .


I HAVE health , or at least strength enough returned to vindicate myself to you  for I feel , that I must ever remain additionally uneasy till I stand fair and unsuspected in your thoughts and opinions .


 True it is , that I wandered into a house of ill reputation , and did it with a view of burying the image which haunted my repose .
The utmost , indeed , that could possibly be expected from such an effort , was not pleasure , but alleviation of pain .
Heaven knows I did not hope for happiness from the embraces of venal beauty , but merely to deaden for a moment , the sense of intolerable anguish  and even this was attempted in the absence or lethargy of every cool and rational faculty .
Shall I confess to you , that I sent a creature of convenience for a wretched female , who depended on her daily violations for subsistence ?
the messenger delayed , and my spirits sinking in the interim , I swallowed a  bumper of champaign , and drank to the health of Charlotte , even in my debauch .
As I was pouring down the third glass , now almost daylight , I heard the rustle of silks upon the stairs .
What a sensation did this trifle produce !
but , ah !
how unlike that I had been us'd to feel , when the step of Charlotte animated my expectation .
A female came  shewy , laboriously adorned , and , as she soon told me , just out of bed .
I began immediately to make comparisons : they were indeed odious .
I look'd in the eyes , for Charlotte 's love-born languishment , and I found in their stead artful ogles , misusing the lustre of what might once have been innocently bright .
I surveyed  the face for tender sensibility  the form for engaging deportment , and the dress , for the union of elegance and judgment  instead of which , I beheld confident aukwardness , and a flaunting variety , betraying at once the taste and the trade .
The lady , however , to whom long habit had rendered every thing indifferent but finery , called up a look which signified an entire compliance .
I must own to my dear friend , that time , place , and opportunity , all favoured .
Ah !
madam , there was but one thing wanting to compleat the scene .
There was only wanting - inclination .
In a word Charlotte , confess yourself deceived in me  confess that I am less infamously unfaithful  than you supposed .
I was shocked , disgusted , and burst into tears both of remorse and disappointment .
As soon as I recovered , I threw five pieces on the table , hung on my sword with a trembling hand , and bade the unfortunate , farewell .
Upon this transaction I dare not make a comment , nor have I the courage to expect more than your pity for the yet ardent passion of


CHARLES .


 'T IS impossible I should speak upon the subject of your last .
I rejoice however truly , in the recovery of your health , of which I desire you to be extremely careful , and take the liberty of a tender friend to advise you never will again put yourself unnecessarily in the way of destroying it .


You make me very uneasy about my sister , whom you do not mention  in any of your letters - what can be the reason of it ?
nor do you answer my request in relation to Cleora .


Adieu I am yours CHARLOTTE .


 I HAVE this minute received a little money .
If you think an apology necessary for my telling you of this , or of dividing it with you , as usual , you must greatly have altered your opinion of


CHARLES .


 SEND me as much of the money you have received as is convenient  but do not forget that there is a third person in the world less amply accommodated than might be wished by


CHARLOTTE .


 MADAM .


CHARLES has sent me what , under my present circumstances , I have no right to detain , and which , for fear of wounding his delicacy , I had not the courage to forbid his transmitting .
I do not doubt but he has sent a proper message to you  at the same time I judge it a point of honour , and shall esteem it a very great favour , if you will not be offended at my inclosure , which is undoubtedly the property of Cleora .


CHARLOTTE .


 MADAM .


YOU are not to be acquainted that I have lost my happiness .
But that is not to be the subject of this address : you complain of your circumstances , and I shall , to the utmost of my very slender abilities , be ever ready to alleviate them .
You will please to accept the inclosed trifle , as an evidence of my future intentions .


 I believe you have no idea that it is possible for you and I to be re-united .
Without entering painfully into a repetition of the points that at first divided us , I shall only observe to you , that our reconciliation ( I mean so far as relates to our living together ) is impracticable .


I find that our child is at boarding-school at a great distance from you : as your money is locked up at present , the support of this must be inconvenient .
I have been long anxious to see , and have my share of the pleasure arising from the society of the child  and I will now venture to request that I may be allowed to take  upon me the care of its education under my own eye .
It shall receive from me all the tenderness and delicate assiduities of a father .
I will lead it up in the paths of honour  not a sentiment shall be inculcated but those that will inspire her heart with virtue , or accomplish her head with understanding .
Surely madam , though it is necessary we should remain separate , it is by no means so that we should , in any degree , altercate , or entertain against each other a single sentiment of antipathy .
I beseech you therefore to allow me the common pleasure of a parent : as the child is apart from you at present , it may as well remain under my protection as that of a stranger .
 I have thoughts of placing it near me at an excellent seminary , of which I will , at the proper time , give you the direction , that you may favour the object of our mutual delight with your visits , and maternal attention : only trust it to my care , and I shall be satisfied .


I do not insult you with a sentence in relation to a late connection .
Whatever were the disagreements betwixt you and me , may they never be communicated to the curiosity of the public : and as to my intercourses elsewhere , may they never come within your knowledge to distress you .
Farewel .


I am , your obedient servant , CHARLES .


 DEAR MADAM ,


IT is not without great uneasiness , I find it necessary to be the amanuensis of your old correspondent Charles , who is in a condition that renders it impossible for him to take up the pen at present .
In a word , madam , he is wounded , and I seriously fear at the point of death .
The cause of this you will better learn  from the inclosed , than from any thing I can possibly say upon the subject .
He wishes exceedingly to hear from you , although he does not know that I am addressing you  and therefore I must beg you will not take any step to acquaint him by what means the news of his illness arrived .


I am , with the best wishes for the health and happiness of both ,


Dear Madam ,


your most obedient , humble servant , HAMLET TEMPLETON .


 I WRITE to you with my left arm in a sling , and a ball in the bottom of my breast , as yet vainly endeavoured to be extracted : the anguish of my mind exceeds that of my body , and I have no relief but from writing to you  and that is a relief although it is not without a great deal of pain I hold the pen : my surgeon , however , has left me for an  hour , and I am resolved to employ the interval of his perfections , in relating to you the principal circumstances of a quarrel that ended in blood on both sides .


I was on Tuesday last at a public dinner in the city , whither I went ( in the hand of an acquaintance ) on purpose to dissipate a little , and to expel thought , by looking about me .
The glass was briskly circulated , and after we had run rapidly the round of general healths , such as the king , church , royal family , c. c. we came home to the private toasts of the heart , and drank each to the prosperity of his passion , and the happiness of his mistress .
In the sincerity  of my heart , I verged a little upon common ceremonies , and gave the divine Charlotte .
I was pleased to see many politely ready to fill his glass of good wishes  but a person at the other end of the table repeated her name two or three times sarcastically , and at last , in a kind of half whisper , told his companion that she was to be had at - , but that her price was confoundedly high .
I desired an explanation of this - smoke the favourite , said the gentleman , simpering to his companion .
- The companion called to order , and I sat down : we drank freely , and though my heart lay burning within my bosom , I did not revive the subject , 'till the toast came  round to the person who had insulted me .
He proposed a lady : I drank her health , and then apologizing to the master of the treat for being unable to stay longer , withdrew .


I retired hastily into a room belonging to the same tavern , and soon found from my landlord , the name and quality of the person which at present employed my thoughts : he was an half pay officer of - 's regiment .
Pen and ink being brought , I wrote as follows :


 To Lieutenant A - .


SIR ,


YOUR profession leaves your courage unsuspected .
Without commenting , therefore , on wanting the manners of a British soldier , I have only to hint , that you have insulted a gentleman , who is waiting for you where the bearer will privately conduct you .
I am stepping out to prepare properly for your reception , as I presume neither of us are prepared in that way  but I shall return immediately .


After I had folded up , and sent the waiter with this billet , I went to a  gunsmith 's in the neighbourhood , and soon provided a brace of pistols , with which I returned .
The officer sent a verbal message by the servant , that he should not attend to such kind of engagements 'till the company broke up , and perhaps after that he might be in a humour to correct a stripling , who was hot enough to fight for his w - .
Stung beyond measure at this , I ran abruptly into the dining-room , and placed myself opposite to the insulter .
He was that minute entering into what he was pleased to suppose the history of our former separation , having heard , as it appeared , some absurd story on that subject .
He broke off upon my entrance , and filled his glass : just as he  was lifting it to his lip , I rose , and in a whisper told him my contemptible opinion of a scoundrel , especially when he happened to disgrace a cockade .
The colour of rage immediately rose over our hero 's countenance , and he threw the contents of his glass into my face .
All measures being now taken between us , I withdrew a second time , and the lieutenant was held by his companions .


My pains , Templeton , are so acute , I must rest a little .


 I WENT to a coffee-house , that luckily faced the door of the tavern , so that when the lieutenant came away it would be impossible for him to escape unseen .
In about an hour he came out by himself without his hat , as if he had stolen from the company , upon some necessary pretence , and was desirous to find me .
I shewed myself .
- The lieutenant beckoned to me , and I followed him .
With the first opportunity  he called a hackney coach , into which we both got , and rode in it sullenly till we came to the apartment of the Lieutenant .
Both of us threw down a shilling for the fare , because either disdained the obligation , in such a ease , of being treated .
He conducted me into a large well furnished dining-room , where , after having turned the key , he begg'd pardon for not attending me at the first summons , and proposed an immediate accommodation of differences .
- We fought - he conquered - I fell .
-


I must pause Templeton , a second time : the surgeon knocks at the door .
My anguish is severer than ever .


 I AM much more mangled without being more relieved : after near an hour 's misery , the ball remains in my body , and I am not able to finish my account of the duel .
The surgeon begins to look awful : his eye seems to menace actions still more bloody .
He has almost cut into my heart .
The next experiment will probably discover it to the spectator : ah , that Charlotte was then present - ah , that she could see it  throbbing for her - after that I could wish its motion to cease for ever .


But no matter .
You are my friend - I shall never acquaint Charlotte with the transaction , its motives , or its consequences - you are my friend : if therefore you wish to see me alive , hasten to


CHARLES .


 SIR ,


A Correspondence would be inconsistent .
I shall most certainly endeavour to keep you and Charlotte asunder .
That I have been instrumental in so good a measure is my chief glory , even though I have not the most distant idea of being with you myself : nay , even though you now want the power to please


CLEORA .


P. S. I shall not trust the child from its mother 's protection .


 CHARLOTTE intreats Mr. Templeton to be in the bird-cage walk of St. James 's park , within fifty paces of Buckingham gate , this evening at seven o'clock , where a relation of Charlotte 's , who has the greatest desire to see Charles , will be extremely obliged to Mr. T. if he will conduct him ( as he is a stranger ) to Charles 's lodgings .


 Beseeches Mr. T. will not fail to come  and that in the mean time the matter may not be mentioned to Charles , for whose illness Charlotte is truly concerned .


MR. T. will certainly observe Charlotte 's appointment , and conduct her kinsman to the unhappy Charles , from whose body the ball is this minute dislodged , at the price of such incisions and torments as  surely no other man has the fortitude to bear .
In the height of the torture , as the blood was flowing from the flesh , he press'd Mr. T. 's hand , and told him in a whisper , even with a smile on his face , that he was suffering in the cause of the vindicated Charlotte .


The injunctions mark'd in the note , will be religiously attended to by Mr. Templeton .


 I DARE not advise at present , either a discovery , or a second experiment .
The spirits of poor Charles are in too great a hurry , and as his fever intermits , it might be more dangerous than if it was , as before , perfectly delirious .
Depend upon it I will never leave him , and tell you , from time to time , very faithfully , how he goes on .


 The Lieutenant who wounded him sends a polite enquiry every day .
His cure , and your felicity , would give the sincerest satisfaction to


H. T .


IT is not romance  it is not a flight of fancy  I must see him again - I must see him instantly - Fear not any discovery  I will thicken my disguise - I will discolour  my cheeks - I will stain my complexion - I will do any thing so as you will yourself keep my secret , and let me see him this night .
Write directly , and say that you will call upon me by seven o'clock : I will wait even till eight with patience  but if you cruelly exceed that hour - ah !
Mr. Templeton - I must - indeed I must see him .


CHARLOTTE .


 PARDON my impatience - pardon such perpetual messages and letters .
I write now , only to tell you of an expedient - tell me the name , and give me the address of Charles 's surgeon .
I 'll acquaint you of my reasons for this , speedily .
I hope no turn for the worse has happened since my last .
What an unfortunate creature am I to occasion such complicated mischief to so amiable a man !


The bearer waits for an answer .


CHARLOTTE .


 DEAR MADAM .


THE surgeon who has the care of Charles , is named Melbank , and his residence is in St. James 's - street .
I am very sorry again to acquaint you that our wretched friend is in the delirium of a fever , in its worst state , and calls ravingly , several times in an hour , on his Charlotte .
Mr. Melbank is to bring with him in the morning , or perhaps  this evening , another surgeon of eminence , and a physician , resolving to proceed no farther without assistance .


I am , Madam ,


your humble Servant , H. T .


I AM interested Sir , beyond expression , in the life of your patient Charles , and have been , in some measure , the occasion of his present disorder .
 There are the most delicate reasons why I would not , just at this crisis , pay him an open visit  but if vou will take me in your hand , under the disguise of a student in physic and surgery , I will provide myself with the dress , and wait upon you in the evening .
Oh Sir , - it is vain to attempt these transparent concealments .
I am the most miserable CHARLOTTE .
I am that unhappy girl for whom he fought , for whom he was wounded .
Mr. Templeton has , no doubt , made known to you the particulars of your story .
If he has - am I not to be pitied ?
am I not to be justified in taking a step apparently romantic , but truly affectionate , truly innocent , in order to see the man  whom I have plunged into blood ?
Notwithstanding this , I will not call upon you till permitted , and I beg you will on no account reveal this circumstance to any person , unless to Mr. Templeton .


CHARLOTTE .


AND so Sir , I find you have demanded satisfaction of a certain gentleman for only speaking slightly of Charlotte 's constancy , although  you could suffer several licentious young fellows to circulate the most infamous falshood to the dishonour of your wife 's character .
But this I suppose , in the fine gentleman 's calendar , is gallantry , and I must set it down to the account of genteel life .


CLEORA .


MADAM .


FAR be it from me to interpose a single sentiment betwixt two persons of the same family at variance   but just for the present I am desired by the surgeon to beg you would forbear any severity in your letters  and , indeed , if you knew Charles 's present situation , you would at least stay till he is able to defend himself , by holding the pen to answer you .


I am , Madam ,


your obedient servant , H. T .


 YES , Charles , I confess it .
It was Charlotte who took you by the hand : it was she who came into your sick chamber , under the disguise of a man 's habit , and smoothed your uneasy pillow !
nor do I repent , or blush at it .
As I perceive you are pleased at it , I rejoice in the stratagem , and defy the sneers of such as have the heart , in those circumstances , to withstand the best of its impulses .
I enjoin you , oh !
my dear  Charles , to compose yourself , and remember that in your life is involved the life of


CHARLOTTE .


I KNEW it was impossible to be mistaken .
I knew it by a thousand circumstances !
by the brow of alabaster delicately meander'd by the cerulian of the veins - by the silken eye-lash - by the soft pressure of the hand - by the rosy lip - ah , Charlotte !
 my very senses returned to welcome you  pain stood suspended , and pleasure advanced !
my wound was well for the moment - my heart acknowledged you .
Did I not lay your dear hand upon it !
did it not bound in gratitude !
-


What can I say , Charlotte .
I am easier - I am better - I shall soon be well .
And is your life indeed wrapt up in mine ?
be it so .
Your wishes will be granted .
Heaven will spare Charles for the sake of Charlotte .
What wonders have you worked in a moment - a single interview !
-


 Oh , Charlotte !
- I shall live and recover - I shall be happy .
The barbarous surgeon commands me to lay aside the pen .
He never felt the - He takes away my ink-stand .


Adieu .
CHARLES .


OH my dear father assist me : the oldest , and best , and most ingenious friend I have in the world , is now on the bed of sickness , and in want of a small supply of cash to  answer the exigences of so pathetic a situation .
He has been dangerously wounded in a duel , and is now slowly recovering .
The loss of a large estate in the court of chancery  a disagreement in his family  and a thousand other severe strokes of hard fortune , attend him .
I know your generosity , Sir , and beg leave to invite it on this most interesting occasion .
Ah !
my dear father , you know not how extensive a happiness I could make , were you to transmit me an order for the trifling sum of fifty pounds !
if I can not obtain it any other way , from your liberality , I entreat that it may be considered as so much in advance of my next year 's allowance .
I will live the more saving and oeconomical in order  to serve my friend .
But why do I say this ?
you will applaud my sentiments : you will encourage the noble feelings of social sympathy , and congratulate yourself and your son .
` Twere unnecessary to observe that my poor friend has been already reduced to part with several things of value , which I have , one by one , carried in the dusk of the evening , to those who lend money to the children of distress , upon depositing the very necessaries of life .


I am , honoured Sir ,


your most dutiful , H. T .


 NOW the murder 's out I find .
I shall forbear henceforward to wonder at your extravagance , or at the various shifts you are driven to , to support it .
Upon my word , young gentleman , you are a mighty pretty fellow  a very prince of generosity  a perfect Pilades !
and pray who is this heroic Orestes ?
but no matter !
and so you want to fleece the old fellow out of fifty pieces , do  you ?
very well pushed , I must confess  but it wo n't take .
I warrant you now , if I should be blockhead enough to send you a draft for this money , you and your friend would be both cured of your sickness and your sorrows , and hug yourselves happily at having humbug'd the old put of a father .


I am mightily tickled with the compliment you pay my generosity , at the expence of my prudence .
As much as if you had said to a lady , madam , I admire your eyes , if they were not in the way of your nose , and I am charmed with your teeth , only it is a pity they overhang your lips .
- Between you and I , Sir , it is not  quite clear to me whether your generosity , as you call it , will not one day or another exalt you above the heads of the people , and give you a preeminent exit at Tyburn .
Why , you no more mind fifty pounds than fifty flea-bites , or so many snaps of the finger .
Do you know Sir , that fifty pounds will buy me a pair of horses for my carriage - that it will equip me in cloaths for two years ?
- that it is more than you ought to have per annum , and find every thing  although I am fool enough to double it ?


If I will give you an order for this sum , you will live more oeconomically - so you can live more oeconomically ,  can you ?
why , you are a prodigal by your own confession , and I have a great mind to sink the half of your allowance from this day , till you are pinched into prudence !
I ca n't conceive where the plague you got that cursed talent for lavishing money !
none of my family , nor any of your mother 's , were ever spendthrifts .
We were all upon the saving order .
Zounds , sir !
I have had three sets of buttons upon one suit of cloaths : but you scorn to set any thing off savingly , and by the way of Cheapside , as I used to express myself .
I have absolutely heard you laugh at soling a pair of shoes  you never would suffer my taylor to turn cloth of eighteen shillings per yard   and I have seen you toss up your nose at a fine-drawn stroke in the elbow !
for all this , you can condescend to go skulking with a bundle under your arm , in the dusk of the evening , to a pawn-brokers !
Zounds , sir !
what a low-spirited dog you must be !
to run into such a horrid place , with a coat , a shirt , and an old pair of stockings !


To be plain , young man , I do not expect any good from you while you are so consumedly liberal , and ready to give away your money to every coxcomb or impostor that asks for it .
But 't is as I ever said , `` lightly come lightly go . ''
Be that as it may : I will not send you a single shilling to  spend in such romantic purposes : and I would rather relieve any wound than that occasioned by a duel .
Every fellow that dares to lift up his hand against the life of another , ought to smart for it  and I should be sorry , for any one to escape out of such an infamous encounter without the loss of a limb , or a scar at the least .
If the truth was known , I do n't doubt but your friend fought for a wench , or because he was drunk , or because he wanted better and wiser employment .
Let the fact , however , be what it will , I am very angry that you should be a very great fool yourself , and that you should endeavour to make me a much greater .


I am , your offended father , HENRY TEMPLETON .


 I Continue to mend , and yet the inhuman Melbank still denies me the use of pen and paper  but I have bribed my nurse to buy me some , and she keeps it under lock and key .
These physical folks are such pedants - Can any thing in nature so soon or so effectually contribute to my recovery as writing to , and hearing from , the amiable Charlotte ?
Her sense - her elegance - her delicacy - her gentleness - her love - I mean her friendship , are all so many cordials to me .
I lay them - I lay the  letters which contain the marks of them , upon my pillow , and they add softness to the down - I press them upon my bosom , even till they touch my wounds , and they act as the healing balm , or restoratives of life , health , and joy - I then carry them to my heart , and it pants to confess from whence they came .
How then can this cruel Melbank tell me that I must stifle such ideas - such actions - how can he say they will agitate me into a relapse ?
You , Charlotte , are acquainted - you have perhaps some interest with Cleora .
If so , intercede with her , I beseech you , for my child .
She never sees it herself , and yet she will not allow it the shelter of a father 's arms .
She is  every way unkind .
But I must not indulge melancholy reflections .
I already feel the effect of them .
My spirits are fluttered - my pulses are irregular .
Melbank is coming to dress my wound .
I wish to heaven I was well enough to discharge him !
I had rather die than be denied to correspond with Charlotte .
Melbank is at the door .
The nurse shall hurry away my writing instruments .


Adieu !
CHARLES .


 YOU delay the recovery of your friend 's health , madam .
Your letters disorder and affect him too much .
Every thing that alarms , every thing that excites a tumultuous passion , should be most cautiously avoided in his present state .
You can not conceive what an injury you are doing , and all the endeavours of nature and a surgeon will be ineffectual if you do not desist .
I will give you a call this afternoon , and explain the nature of this mischief  more explicitly .
In the mean time , I hope you will excuse the well-intended advice of


Your obedient servant , ERSKINE MELBANK .


MY friend , Mr. Templeton , is suddenly summoned from my chamber , to attend the funeral of a superannuated cousin , at Sir Henry , his father 's seat , in the country  and the close-handed old baronet , only sent him an order for five pounds to carry him almost an  hundred miles , though he is heir to near seven thousands a year .
As this great consolation is taken from me , let it inspire the benevolence of Charlotte , and then she will charitably employ her pen in forwarding the recovery of


CHARLES .


NOtwithstanding , dear madam , what I urged to you , in tenderness to your friend Charles , last night , in regard to the danger of  writing pathetic letters before the nervous system could bear such alarming concussions , I would not , on any account , have you take any notice of this friendly hint to my patient .
He might misconstrue it .
Young men of lively spirits , and animated tempers , are apt to mistake .
You , however , see my motive , and will take your measures accordingly .
I can not but use this opportunity to applaud the dignity of your resolutions in regard to the separation .
'T is an effort even superior to the virtue of the Spartan Ladies : 't is Roman - 't is Christian !
How much ought you to be celebrated for so illustrious an action !
and how infinitely ought Cleora to sound your praises !
 at the same time , my good lady , are you not a little too enterprizing to continue the correspondence ?
was it not a little too much in the novel strain to come in a boy 's habit , and display such various beauties to the eye of Charles , in such a situation - softened as he was by sickness , touched as he must be at the discovery ?
you recollect to what an embarrassment he was reduced : did not he faint ?
did not he fall lifeless on the pillow ?
and was it not with great difficulty you yourself could support the conflict ?
suffer me to say , such trials , if frequent , would stagger the firmest philosophy , and I doubt , it is at best rashness to put too much confidence in our own strength when we  oppose it to those passions which too often turn strength into weakness .
It is certainly your duty to avoid the temptation as much as possible , and this you can do , only by assiduously avoiding every thing that reminds you of the object .
Do n't you know , my dear Madam , that in epidemic distempers , we are only secure , while we escape the touch of the contagious person ?
and with respect to wounds of the mind , they are like those of the body  if we venture abroad too soon , or , thinking ourselves quite cured , if we run hastily into circumstances that hurt us before , we shall , in all human probability , have a return of our complaint  and a  relapse , in either case , is often worse than the first attack .


To drop , however , the language of my profession , and speak as a moralist , I must every way , and by every argument , recommend it to you to lay aside the corresponding pen : every line in every letter stirs the embers , which , if not meddled with would go out , till , in the end , the fatal passion which at first kindled the original flame , would be utterly extinguished .
But , I beg pardon .
I am too hastily assuming the soft authority of friendship .
I confess , madam , your merit has greatly interested me in your welfare  and this , with the duty I owe to my patient ,  and the sincere love I bear to virtue , will unite to plead my excuse for the great freedom I have taken .


My sensibility is exceedingly hurt at your offering to settle Charles 's account with me , for my attendance .
I am well informed , madam , of that young gentleman 's misfortunes , and my chief uneasiness upon that subject arises from not knowing how I can assure him the visits I have paid him were on the score of a friendship , which his merit hath powerfully excited in the breast of


E. MELBANK .


 TWO days run away , and not one letter ?
but you may be ill - you may be incapable of writing - Oh !
heaven forbid that !
I would rather find myself neglected , than have you furnished with an apology from real indisposition .
Yet , indeed , Charlotte , if you can , you should write , and write longer letters than ever .
There is more necessity for such an indulgence .
I am very weak  my wound heals tardily - my friend is absent , and a nurse 's officiousness ,  is by no means like the tender attentions of a lover or a friend .
Ah !
what a blessing would my Charlotte 's society now be !
how might she support me with her kind arm as I made gradual efforts to walk across my chamber : from her hand how acceptable would be the bitterest draught , and the most nauseous drugs that could be administered !
in the middle of the day , when the sun favoured the attempt , here might Charlotte lead me to the opened window till I revived : the balmy air would be additionally salubrious , the warm beams of noon would be doubly genial , if Charlotte was by my side .
But this is impossible - yet surely it is not impossible to give me  the only comfort I can now receive !
- the innocent comfort of a daily letter !
the most rigid enemy could not deny me that !
and will Charlotte then deny it ?
write , I charge you , and gild my solitary sickness with one ray of satisfaction !


CHARLES .


THE date of a card I have this instant received from a person in the city , puts me in mind of a circumstance that brings the  tears of tender congratulation into my eyes .
It is the 18th of August !
my watch , which hangs at the head of the bed , points betwixt the hours of eight and nine !
It is the anniversary morning of my Charlotte 's birth !
it is the returning day of the year , that gave to the world one of the best and loveliest of women !
the sun darts chearfully into my chamber : the sky is uncommonly azure !
I have opened the casement , and am saluted with a breeze more balmy and serene , than I ever felt in my life .
There is a grape-vine runing along the wall , till its tendrils ambitiously twist round my window , and come mantling into my bedroom .
The foliage on the outside is  uncommonly luxurious !
and since I have been confined , a red-breast has nested amongst the leaves .
He is this moment in the sweetest thrillings of his domestic song !
Even so near the bustle and buildings of the metropolis , I have all the advantages of rural life !
Every thing around me seems to compliment my Charlotte !
What then must I feel upon the subject ?
how must I be touched - with what an ardent sincerity must I wish this day , and every revolving one - every eighteenth of August - how - how , I say , must I pray - how supplicate the powers of happiness and health that


 This day may be always sacred  No mourning , no misfortune happen on it  That it be mark 't with triumphs and rejoicings  That happy lovers still may make it holy And ever choose it to endear remembrance !
From the bottom of my heart I hail the return of this delightful morning .
And yet , Charlotte , how cruelly busy is fancy in the breast and brain of a man under certain influences ?
what a train of objects now use before me ?
what a vision is Imagination drawing ?
how she swells upon the canvass ?
what a glow in  her colouring ?
what animation in her touches ?
there is character in every stroke of her pencil  her figures are from the life .
She has a hand that throws Raphael into despair .
Her exact similitudes captivate the eye , and her resemblances subdue the heart !
Methinks I now see how Charlotte employs the present day  she invites the numerous circles of those that wish her well : the feast is prepared : the lovely entertainer in the bloom of beauty and youth , sits at the head of the table as goddess of the banquet .
She delights more by her senses , her wit , and her politeness , than by the delicacies of her board .
 And yet can it ever Charlotte , ah !
can it ever be forgotten , in what Charles used to engage upon this day !
will not his attention to the very hour , the minute - the second of her birth , be long remembered ?
With what a more than bridal vigilance did he watch the returns of this auspicious aera !
how did he fondly busy himself in birth-day preparations - love constant , exalted love inspired , his conduct upon these occasions .
It was love that invited the sun to shine on that day with a conspicuous lustre : it was love that provided the ornament , and decorating novelties which were then , for the first time , to be worn : it was love that wept over the sparkling glass : love it was which  gave the congratulating kiss - and it was love which smiled as the day closed , and as the indulging night advanced , to give you , all accomplished , to my embraces .


Surely these recollections will , even in the midst of natal festivity , revive those sentiments in the sympathizing bosom of Charlotte , which will bestow one tender sigh to the memory of affection , and


CHARLES .


END OF VOL .
I .


VOL .
II .


` Heaven first taught Letters for some Wretches aid .
POPE 'S ELOISA . '
LONDON : Printed for WILLIAM LANE , Leadenhall-Street , M.DCC.LXXVII .


 CHARLES AND CHARLOTTE .


DR. Melbank acquaints me you have hurt your wrist , and that it gives you great pain : I feel a sincere affliction upon two accounts arising from this accident  first , because it occasions uneasiness to you , and , secondly , because it prevents your making use of the pen .
However ,  I charge you not to venture too soon to exert it .
Rather let me be two or three days without your agreeable favours , than with them at the cost of your inconvenience : I will endeavour to support the loss of your correspondence , in the hope that your health may be the sooner restored : and as I myself get better every hour , I will do my best to entertain you with a double portion of packets .


Am I not grown a great philosopher ?
do I not at last acquiesce in your own system ?
do I not obey your inhibitions with even a scrupulous ceremony ?
and am I not a mere correspondent ?
am I not the cold creature you wish me ?


 Yes Charlotte , I will yield to your punctilious principles .
I will not murmur , nor will attempt again to invade your repose by desiring a personal interview , till the way to it is smoothed by providence .
That this will be the case , I am certain .
In the mean time I will endeavour to be contented with this remote , yet endearing intercourse , though Melbank has been labouring to persuade me it would be more for the health of my mind and body that I dropt the pleasures of the pen .
Of this he can never convince me  though I have received from him the tenderest treatment , and find him to be an able surgeon , and an amiable man .


 I this morning had a penny post letter from him , which , that I may do him justice , and give your gentle heart satisfaction , I inclose .


Adieu , Charles .


WHAT a pity it is that many of those articles of conduct , which are merely points of equity , should , in the opinion of the greater  part of the world , be considered as obligations : happy , however , it is for the tranquility of delicate minds , when the balance of favours between man and man is even , because then no irksome sensation of superiority remains to distress either  and the interchange is honourable , exact , and mutual .
This , Sir , is the state of the case between you and I. I am almost ready to confess myself indebted to the accident that brought us together .
The wounds , in which I have been an happy instrument of cure , have been , the means of making known to me a man of eminent abilities , and excellent qualities .
In the midst of torture and cross circumstances , how have I been entertained  by his remarks !
above all other parts of his character , I admire the liberality of his sentiments : at least they are to be admired in the theory .
How shall I rejoice to find them equal in the practice !
to slide again into the first person , and speak plainly  have you , my dear Sir , generosity enough to receive the inclosed , and to use it till I may have occasion to re-demand it ?
and will you do me the justice to believe I have had so much move pleasure than trouble in visiting you , that , unless you are so good as to set down my attention to the score of friendship , I shall be compelled to think myself too heavily indebted , and so despair of your intimacy  though I propose seeing you in the course of the day ,  yet this is a subject I hate to talk of , and therefore I have sent yon a post letter , that the foolish blush of confusion may be spared to both of us  and therefore I beg we may not mention this trifling point when we meet .
Your attention to this request will very particularly oblige


E. MELBANK .


MR. Templeton has transmitted to me a little rural poem , written by a literary friend of his : there is a novelty in the story , and  a simplicity in the sentiment , that particularly recommends it to persons of feeling .
For this reason I am going to transcribe it for your perusal .


I am always happier while I am employed either in thinking of you , or in any degree contributing to your entertainment .
Were it not for bending my mind assiduously to these little epistolary engagements , and by these means soothing my hopes , and lulling my cares , I should not , I fear , be able to keep my promise , or withstand the impulses of my heart , which would carry me perforce into the apartment of Charlotte .
I hope by to-morrow you will be able to take up the pen , and give me your  opinion of the poem .
A single line from your own hand , will agreeably convince me that you have again recovered the perfect use of it .
Mr. Melbank is still anxious to have me suspend our correspondence : if he persists in this advice , I shall hate him in spite of his generosity .
He is a great admirer of yours .


CHARLES .


 SILVANA , The HIGHLAND SHEPHERDESS .
'T WAS in December 's drear , and darksome days When the cold north sends forth his cutting blast : 'T was when portentous clouds denoting storm , Their sable horrors roll'd around the heavens : 'T was when , by force of hurricanoes vast The towering fir ev'n to his root was riven , Till all of feather , or of fleece , forsook The Highland hill , to shelter in the vale : Then 't was that poor Silvana to her grief A prey , and reckless of the raving sky , Sat on the perilous ridge of the rude rock , That frowns upon the dizzy precipice .
Lonely she sat , and ne'er did sorrow seize A form more delicate , a soul more kind .
Care , from her tender cheek , now woeful wan The rose had torn , and in its stead the tear Like dew-drops on the lily , settled there .
Five fleecy friends were to Silvana dear , And more than five moons wasted had they fed On the scant reliques of Silvana 's store .
 The prickly furze , the weed-entangled grass , The thistly blade , the heavy hemlock 's [ ... ] eaf , The bitter mallow , and the flowery fern , Her sheep ne'er cropt , but herbs of sweeter taste , The vernal pasturage of voluptuous meads , The richest grazings of the daintiest dell , The velvet verdure of the violet vale  The honied clover , and the fragrant blade .
Her daily journey to the fertile farms Was for the purchase of the day 's repast .
But now her eye was fix'd , her bosom bare , Irregularly throbbing with its woe  Wild to the pitiless winds her scatter'd locks Luxurious floated  half her shoulder spread , And half in deep disorder stream'd in air : Uplift to heaven her snowy arms were rais'd In passion , or in prayer  at last a sigh Heav'd from her hapless heart , and thus she sung .
I. ` Twill soon be o'er - No more despair , Silvana 's eyes shall soon be dry , Man , feeble man , was born to bear  `` To look about him , and to die . ''
 II .
Then soft awhile , and gentle death , Silvana 's passing-bell shall toll , Her sheep shall catch her wand ` ring breath , And heaven shall watch the flying soul .
III .
This fluttering spirit shall be free : My sheep , mean-time , demand my care  They browze , and bound round yonder tree , But ah !
- their shepherd is not there .
IV .
Yet cease awhile - I 'll not despair .
I see my shepherd in the sky , Tho ' man 's frail race were born to bear The wedded soul shall never die .
 I FEEL myself to blame .
I have interdicted a correspondence , that gives both you and Charles pleasure , and I am much afraid the health of my patient was not the only motive that led me to this .
The real motive I dare not discover .
Be it some atonement , that I acquaint you Charles 's health is not likely to be hurt , or his cure retarded , by the letters of Charlotte .
I am in a very aukward situation , and beg to be excused for dropping the subject .


E. MELBANK .


 WHAT must I do , Mr. Templeton ?
I am under an embarrassment , from the pains of which I can by no means disengage myself ?
Will you , who are in some degree a party concerned , give me your advice .
To cut short the idle formalities of ceremonious introduction , I must open to you the nature of my dilemma at once .
Would you believe it , Mr. Templeton  while I have been attempting to cure Charles ,  I have been myself wounded by Charlotte : yes , Sir , widower as I am , again am I caught in the nets of beauty and merit , and am vainly trying every possible effort to forget the form that undid my repose . ''
I have already been led into meanesses by this clandestine passion : it has urged me to desire Charlotte to forbear writing , under pretence of its interfering with my endeavours to restore Charles 's health .
I have visited this lovely woman several times , and have had the mortification to hear her heave a thousand sighs , and to see her shed a thousand tears  although she still remains sixt in her resolution of never again uniting herself to him , I have not had the courage to hint at my partiality   and to tell you the truth , Sir , I am witheld from such declarations from various motives .
I have conceived a tender esteem for Charles , and I am unwilling to give him pain .
I consider myself as standing in a very delicate light , and I know not how I can reconcile the different characters of a surgeon , a friend , and a lover .
I fairly confess to you , I never saw any woman so formed to please , as Charlotte : as to her having been connected with another , were not that other Charles , I should make that no objection to offer her at once my heart , hand , and fortune .
My profession is merely an object of my choice , not of necessity , and I have an income that could  support the woman of my affections affluently .
Were it not for the appearance of duplicity , which I can not bear , I should certainly make such overtures to Charlotte , as might put both my love and my principles out of dispute .
Such a woman , Sir , would grace the arms , and bless the heart , of a monarch  and I should rejoice to lead her by the hand into the embraces of all my family , and all my friends .


At the same time , what can I do ?
would not such advances , coming thus suddenly from me , look like taking advantages of sickness , and separation ?
Charles 's tenderness is too palpable !
Charlotte 's love is by  no means worn off .
I see them both every day , and I every day find in both fresh excellencies which it would be inhuman to injure .
Who knows what may happen !
Cleora may die  many events , may , under the direction of an indulgent god , auspiciously concur to bring Charles and Charlotte once more into the arms of each other .
I may be looked upon as an usurper , as a supplanter of affection : and what makes the matter still worse , is , that I have very lately done myself the pleasure of accommodating Charles with what the world considers an important favour .
I have lent him money  it is therefore the worst time in the world to make proposals .
The poor lad 's nerves too , are at present all  on the tremble  his strength is but just returning  his heart is greatly agitated  he can not get out of his chamber - what , can be done Mr. Templeton ?
as a friend to all parties , tell me - I am truly wretched myself , and yet I should be ashamed , if I wanted fortitude to prevent the wretchedness of others  particularly those , whom I have had the honour to oblige .


I am , your obedient servant , E. MELBANK .


 YOUR letter brought one of the greatest surprises I ever felt since I came into the world : nor can I possibly give my sentiments upon a point so particularly delicate .
For aught I see , you are all to be pitied  and you all deserve , and have my unavailing sympathy .
Heaven direct you all into such measures as may ultimately be for the general felicity !
at present , I can only remain anxious and wretched , till I hear that the  wishes of each are granted  and this , believe me , Sir , will be the first prayer of my heart .


H. T .


NOT a word yet ?
if you were better , I should have had a written testimony of it  and therefore I have the painful certainty to know you are worse - perhaps , Charlotte , you have deceived me : a sprain'd wrist may be a pretence to conceal an accident infinitely more  alarming  you may , for aught I know , be at this moment on the bed of sickness - you may be in the agonies of a sore distemper - you may have broken a limb .
I have questioned Dr. Melbank , who it seems attends you , pretty closely on this subject  and I do not half like his answers .
He stammers  he offers me a feeble excuse  he equivocates  and he abruptly goes away blushing , because he can not disguise the truth , in the veil of a better apology .
My imagination represents you in a condition , at which my heart achs  perhaps you are fainting , and I am not by to catch you in my arms : you are perhaps sick , and I am not present to administer the cordials of recovery -  you are weeping , and I am too distant to kiss away the tear - the point is plain  and this is the truth of the whole matter  if you do not , with your own hand , answer this hasty letter , which I dispatch by a porter , I shall draw the natural conclusions - I shall judge the horrors of your situation , and , weak as I am , venture abroad to offer my assistance .


CHARLES .


 IT is with a sincere pleasure I find myself again able to address my valuable correspondent  and I use this first moment of resuming the pen to thank him for his letters , and the poem : all which , I read with great satisfaction .
It is very true that I have been some time in your debt , but you wall now receive a receipt in full  for this epistle will certainly compensate for all that is due , and make the balances even .
Since the correspondence on my side  has been necessarily suspended , Dr. Melbank has favoured me with a friendly call or two , and , in his last visit finding me much dispirited , he entertained me by reciting the principal passages in his own life .
I was saying how hard it was to lose a friend , at the time one is most thoroughly sensible of his merit : upon this he sighed - pressed his hand upon his heart , and wiping a tear from his eyes , said , it was indeed hard  `` I have experienced it most severely , Madam , said he , and , notwithstanding my present flow of fortune , and fulness of practice , I dare say I have undergone more than you would wish an enemy to suffer .
As you seem to think your own situation  deplorable , although your friend is still alive , if you have half an hour to spare , I will run over some scenes that may serve to make you contented with your own state , by comparing it with that of others .


But on looking a second time at your letter , I perceive your messenger is waiting an answer , upon which account I must reserve the sketch of our friend 's history till my next letter .


I send this , merely to shew you the desired hand writing of


CHARLOTTE .


 `` IF I were now to die , ` twere now to be most happy . ''
The written evidence of your recovery , and the manifest marks of health I can trace in your letter , are all such circumstances of sincere joy to me , that I could suffer without complaining , and would , at any time pay for your felicity , the price of my own .
Poor Melbank !
he has been these two or three days unusually pensive , and I suppose it proceeds from having related past scenes of anxiety .
I  know enough of him to admire his character : I have had several fine assurances of his being in possession of a noble heart .
He shook me by the hand this morning , and , as he went out of the door , he turned his face , and discovered a tear .
If he has had any tender disappointments , heaven knows I pity him .
You have made me sigh for his story .


Adieu , CHARLES .


 `` MY adventures , Madam , '' said Dr. Melbank , `` shall be related as briefly as the intricacy and variety of them will admit - I was born under all the smiles of fortune , having a man of sense and property for my father , a woman of beauty and honour for my mother , and no other relations whatever alive , that were likely to dispute with me , the right of succession .
But alas !
Madam , from my first birth-day to the seventh year of my age , it seemed to be the  contrivance of fortune to enrich me : for m father engaged in a business that ruined his constitution and estate in the same instant .
He extended his trade till he became involved in a thousand hopeless calamities - He carried his ambitious schemes of merchandise , till he rashly run into all the extravagance of giving credit : he trusted to an agent , who , as is common enough , turned out a rascal , and being at last obliged to attend vigilantly to his own affairs , he embarked for the east , where he had considerable dealings , to gather in desperate debts to a great amount - there he caught a fever in the passage - lingered for some days - wrote a letter to my mother during his  sickness , and absolutely died at last , a martyr to that ambition , which induces a man to give up , according to the common phrase - a certainty for an uncertainty .
True it is , that I was his only heir  but had there been fifty competitors , not one would have long felt the spirit of litigation rising within them : for , when matters came to be examined , the poor man 's ambition for becoming the man of business , had buried his real estate in the ruins of an imaginary property : and all that he left behind him descended into the hands of a merciless crew of creditors , who verified at least , one passage of scripture , by taking care , in all such cases ,  that the sins of the father shall be visited on the children . ''


`` My mother , Madam , loved her husband so much better than her own life , that in the phrenzy of affection , she was frequently prevented from making a sacrifice to his ashes , of that beautiful form on which he had doated : time , however , brought her usual lenitive , and the widow began at length to think it her duty to share the poverty and misfortunes that was by this event , entailed upon her child .
Her constitution was always delicate , and this sore stroke gave additional force to a disorder which was hereditary to the female side of our family .
She had the  asthma in all its violence , and , in a few months , it reduced her to a shadow .
As this excellent woman had been too affectionate to secure to herself an original marriage-settlement , and the claimants were therefore generous enough to allow a few suits of half-worn apparel , which properly belonged to her own person  and after this , it was not easy to find a poorer pair than now exhibited themselves in Mrs. Melbank , and her fatherless son . ''


`` Maternal love , nevertheless , increased , in proportion to the necessity there was to exert it .
For some little time she tried the feelings of those who had been the companions  of her prosperity , but that soon failing , she applied to a resource , which may generally be depended on  i. e. provided the application be earnest : in a word , Madam , she withdrew from the smiling apologies , and civil evasions of friendship , to her own industry .
Being educated in all the accomplishments of her sex , and particularly skilful at her needle , she chearfully undertook to assist ladies in those very decorations which she was a short time before entitled to wear herself - Nay - such .
was her humility , she condescended to manage the work of those very women , whom in the life-time of her late husband , she visited upon terms of equality and intimacy  but fortune ,  you know , Madam , elevates and degrades , sometimes in the same hour . ''


`` From these efforts , I mean out of her work , she not only accommodated me with food , but instruction , paying regularly for my schooling , and providing for me every comfort of mind and body . ''


`` In this manner , with very few helps , were , we subsisted for several years , till at length her disorder grew , so bad , that she was totally unable to proceed in the business - a business , Madam , which want had urged her to undertake .
As I was deficient neither in gratitude , nor filial feelings , and was by this time arrived  at the age of distinguishing , judge the state of my mind , at perceiving the dear person to whom I had been so long indebted , declining away in silent and wasting agony , under my eye : her physician recommended change of air  and I therefore removed her a few miles distant , to a little village contiguous to the Thames .
Still , Madam , the cruel distemper gained upon all our endeavours , and neither sunshine , verdure , nor rural breezes , could restore her .
Sixteen days did she lay panting in the extremity , at the end of which time , we had exhausted all the little savings that the exactest oeconomy had hoarded up against a rainy day , after the necessary expences  of our subsistance were answered . ''


`` For my own part , bred as I was to no employment , and but just raw from school , I knew neither the value of talents , nor the means of getting money , by art , or by diligence  but our affairs were now come to the crisis .
My poor mother lay speechless : the woman with whom we lodged , pitied her extremely , and , as an instance of it , began to tell us how inconvenient it was for folks like she and her husband , who had a small house , to let lodgings .
The husband spoke first obliquely , and then directly , of a cousin , that was upon the road , to stay with them  during the fair time  and , in the progress of their observations , they made very pertinent comments on those excellent places of resource for poor wretches - the public hospitals - Assylums , said they , where those who want diet and doctors , and yet have no method to procure either , may get both for nothing - In this exigence , Madam , upon the edge of every thing dreadful , famine on the one hand , and despair on the other , I sallied out of the house , resolved not to come back with an empty pocket - Accordingly , in the distraction of my mind , and in the simplicity of my head , I opened my case to the very first person I saw .
The first person I saw , happened to  be such a one , as , I fear , `` take him for all in all , I shall not look upon his like again . ''
He was on horseback , not resident in the town , but merely passing through it .
Without scarce knowing what I was about , I told him the incoherent story , but told it to the heart - and never - no , Madam - by my soul , never shall I forget the anxious air , and melting tone with which he said - Talk no more , poor youth , talk no more , but quickly lead me to your mother .
What a tear did he shed on my hand as he dismounted from his horse - O God !
Madam , my only surviving parent was breathing her last as we entered .
She had not strength to speak - she could resist  the attacks of her fate , but faintly - it was just allowed her to say , faulteringly - kiss me , my son  and even as I was stooping to obey her , the lip quivered in death - in the next moment she was an angel . ''


`` This worthy stranger buried my mother with all the attention , and sacred decency , due to a parent of his own  and , for a long time afterwards , he supplied me with every thing that cou'd sooth the mind , or comfort the body .
But , alas !
this refuge was soon taken from me  the gentleman died suddenly , and I was once more left upon the wide world , an orphan , without a friend .
I was now reduced to seek for subsistence  in the capacity of a servant , and had the good fortune to be taken in by a nneighbouring apothecary for the menial purpose of carrying out his drugs .
It was at his house , Madam , that I first saw the exact resemblance of yourself - similar in sense - similar in beauty .
I shall not , however , trouble you with the annals of my courtship : the apothecary took a particular liking to me , and after I had been his servant two years , exalted me to the dignity of being his son , destitute as I was , and gave me his only daughter , intending , that I should continue with him , and learn his business .
He died , however , in less than six weeks , and continued his partiality , by bequeathing to me and his beloved Maria  - so was my wife called - his whole fortune , amounting to near three hundred pounds a year in landed property , besides a good house : as an honest man , I must tell you , Madam , that the apothecary had a nephew , which , having disobliged him , he never had seen for many years , and though he was once to have been the chief heir , was not so much as mentioned in his last sentiments . ''


`` Of this , indeed , I did not hear , till I had spent the whole fortune  for Maria had never seen the young man , and his uncle never spoke of him to her .
Since I have known the fact , I have vainly endeavoured to find the youth , that I might make  him amends  but my researches have not been yet rewarded , and the apothecary 's old friends tell me they believe he is dead . ''


`` A foolish ambition is , I believe , hereditary to my family .
I had no sooner got a competence , than I left the country - sold my house there  and , thinking that my observation had qualified me for the apothecary business , I opened , in an absurd hurry , a shop of my own .
I laid out a large sum , to the worst advantage , with a druggist , and finding myself without connections , I advertised for custom .
During this period I was surely possessed , for , contrary to the intreaties of my wife , whom I  adored , even while I contradicted , I resolved to go on : nay , not to have any reserve with you , I was so plung'd in this medical madness , that I purchased all the pompous paraphernalia of the doctor , and , in the shop of an apothecary , had all the tremendous apparatus of a surgeon .
I give you leave to laugh at me , when I tell you , that I cropt close to my ears , a fine flowing head of hair , to surround my lunatic pate by a set of enormous curls , rising , in formidable exactness , tier above tier , in all the majesty of a physician .
I became perfect in the pat on the snuff-box , the management of the graver muscles , and the swing of the cane : I knew the several uses of the watch .
I affected  to abridge my Latin , and to sign the initials of my name as unintelligibly and obliquely as possible  and , to sum up the whole , I should certainly have ventured upon an equipage - that most necessary of all pompous appendages - had not my poor girl , with streaming eyes told me , ( what really was but too probable ) that all those accomplishments would be of no sort of service , and that she verily feared , neither chariots , nor chirurgical instruments , nor drugs , nor gallipots , would be of any consequence , till I could prove to the faculty , and to my friends , that I understood something of the profession , beyond its pomps and vanities .
I began to think there was some truth  in my wife 's remark , for I could neither get any mortal to tell me he was sick  nor any man that wished me well , who did not tell me that he was sorry .
One day , however , fortune was determined to throw a job in my way .
It happened that a man was thrown from a ladder as he was repairing a house , and , in his fall , broke his leg , at the threshold of my door - God forgive me , Madam , but judging it to be a simple fracture , I blessed heaven for the accident .
I first scribbled a prescription , in the capacity of a physician , then made it as an apothecary , and lastly , I began to feel the part , as a surgeon .
I began at last to bandage the leg , and to bleed the arm : but the agitation I was in ,  put me into such a trembling , that , ( as I held the lancet unsteadily ) I rambled from the vein , and fairly cut a slice from the brawny part of the arm : the patient , who was a stout fellow , started up enraged , and , swearing that I knew no more how to bleed a man than his trowel , hopp'd out of the shop in search of an abler operator - notwithstanding these ignominious testimonies of my ignorance , I was obstinate enough to persist , till partly by pomp , and partly by vanity , I exhausted poor Maria 's whole fortune : from this time I involved my dear contented girl in the effects of my folly , and we were both , for a long time , the dupes of caprice , and the slaves of apology .
Reflection ,  and the remorse attending it , threw me upon the bed of sickness , and then it was that Maria hired a nurse to wait upon me , while she made application , and wrote circular appeals to the most opulent of her acquaintance .
She undertook this most irksome of all human engagements unknown to me  and it was not till after I got much better in my health , that she informed me of her miscarriage .
Though I should have thought it impossible to turn the deaf ear to such a creature 's request , yet she succeeded , as people of both sexes generally do upon the like occasions .
Curious , although common , were the evasions made use of : one , had unluckily just parted from all his money  - a second , had taken an oath that he never would lend a farthing more to his own brother  and the reason was , he had already suffered by his good-nature - a third , was excessively-grieved for me - a fourth , was excessively grieved for Maria - a fifth , was excessively glad to see folly , extravagance , and vanity , rewarded in this world - a sixth , told my wife that he made it a maxim never to give money , but that , as one good turn deserved another , he was ready to be even-handed with her , and give favour for favour - a seventh , said he had a sum to make up - and , in short , Madam , every one had an excuse  so that poor Maria returned convinced , that indigence professed ,  is the only state that must find desertion and deafness attend its petitions . ''


`` By this time I felt my folly in all the bitterness of consciousness  and in the midst of all these calamities my wife was far advanced in her pregnancy , when she fell down stairs , hurried on a premature labour , and died in my arms in the evening of the ninth day - I was many times tempted to deeds of impiety and despair  and , having my affairs in the utmost disorder , I went on board a tender , and , with very little money in my pocket more than would pay my passage ( and even that obtained by the sale of my drugs - for alas !
 my estate was long since gone ) - I landed in Jamaica . ''


`` As if fortune was once more resolved to befriend me , I was in the very ship with , a man of the first eminence as a surgeon , and of very considerable property , who had been to England to take possession of that property .
His humanity was equal to his ingenuity : my history endeared me to him : he offered me his pity  and before we had arrived at the island , an accident happened that changed that pity into the tenderest friendship . ''


`` He was one evening walking by moon-light upon the quarter deck ,  when , by a sudden swell of the sea , ( it being then a calm ) he was thrown from his center , and fell overboard .
As our ship was rolling , on he was soon at the stern , and I , who was the only person that saw his misfortune , ran to the boatswain , alarmed the company , and ordered out a boat with all dispatch : mean-time I threw a large rope from the poop , and he had the good luck to swim near enough to reach it - By some means or other the boat was entangled , and could not be easily extricated - I drew the gentleman by the rope to the ship 's side - the calm was now quick dead , and little or no swell .
I brought him within half a yard of the gunnel , and then ,  stooping till I was even with the water , I dipt in my arms , while another man had girt a rope round my middle , and by clasping the poor exhausted surgeon in my arms with all my violence , the man above , fastened the rope to a pully , and , at the risque of almost cutting me in two , for I was resolved not to let go my hold , drew us both up together .
- From henceforward this gentleman and I were as brothers : for near five years , and a half he in every respect treated me as such : I studied with the utmost diligence under his tuition in the art of anatomy - I attended him over all the islands in every case , and to every patient , and in the end I became a tolerable proficient .
 In the mean time an opportunity of marrying to the utmost advantage , offered itself .
- The idea of Maria prevented all such connections .
Never was application more intense , nor perhaps better rewarded - and I owed every thing to my friend whose name was Williamson .
Had Maria lived to see this reverse of fortune , what could have been added unto me - At length , however , Dr. Williamson ( who had not a relation alive that was known to him ) died of a fever , then epidemical , in Jamaica - He made his will in my favour , and left me every thing he could call his own upon earth , except the portrait of a lady that hung round his neck , and which ,  in the same condition , was buried with him .
The doctor 's fortune was large , and it hath given me affluence , but not joy , for I had much rather my friend , and my wife had lived to share them .
- ''


`` Here , Charles , the doctor ended , and giving a heavy sigh , took me kindly by the hand , and wished me a good night .
What a multitude of revolutions , croud into the petty span of human existence ! ''


Adieu .
CHARLOTTE .


 I HAVE a strange piece of news to communicate to my dear Charles : an old friend of mine has just written to me on a curious subject .
He has , it seems , lately seen Charlotte , and is over head and ears in love with her : he has a large fortune , and is smitten so smartly , that he writes me word he intends to make serious proposals of marriage  and only wants me to assure him the connection betwixt you and her is actually dissolved .
I really believe  he is in earnest , and he is a man of good sense , great connections , and splendid circumstances , besides being in one of the genteelest professions .
What the deuce am I to say to him on this point ?
He presses for an answer , and I am utterly unprepared for it .
For your part , I suppose you would not give your consent to her being the wife of an emperor  and yet , if this spark should make honourable advances , and offer such terms as are extremely flattering and advantageous , how would you act in that case ?
would you oppose , or would you promote , or would you stand neuter upon the occasion ?
shall I not do right , if I tell my friend the subject is too nice to be  spoken to - or shall I - but you must direct me .
I will not send a slip of paper till you give me full instructions : and so , pray write to me immediately .


H. T .


I HAVE resolved to venture into the country for the benefit of the air , and , therefore , you must not expect to hear from me again for some days .
For a short time therefore , adieu to


CHARLES .


 HAVE you seen Charles ?
he has left his lodgings , and yet has taken nothing with him .
His landlady informs me he went out with two-well-dress'd men in a coach , although it was evidently very difficult for him to get in the carriage .
If you have not heard from , or seen him , I shall be exceedingly uneasy .
I had written the inclosed letter to you ever since yesterday morning , and kept it in my pocket , nor do I now send it without being doubtful  whether it ought not to be suppressed .
At all events , I beseech you not to break it open , or pay it the least attention till you are perfectly satisfied of the safety of Charles .


E. MELBANK .


TO CHARLOTTE .
( Being the letter inclosed . )


I FEEL myself in the greatest confusion , as I take up the pen to address you : my design , however , is laudable , and my wishes innocent .
There is a person of my acquaintance who is lately become tenderly sensible  of your merit , and he is extremely anxious for me to endeavour to interest your sentiments on the subjects .
At present , however , he will only dare to trouble you with a single question - Could any thing incline you to enter into the marriage state with any other person than Charles - in other words - could the utmost assiduity , attention , and ample fortunes , all at your disposal , prevail with you to accept the hand , and suffer any other object to cultivate your esteem , and lead you to the foot of the altar ?
I will take care that your reply to this shall be decisive  it shall inspire encouragement , or extinguish it for ever - not  the passion - at least the declaration of it .


I am , your obedient servant , E. MELBANK .


I HAD a billet from my friend Charles , a few minutes before I received your favour , and though I am afraid , he ventures out too soon , yet I am acquainted with the design  of his excursion , which is only to get a little fresh air  and I suppose he has taken a couple of friends with him to look out a pleasant and wholesome spot .
After he is fixt , we shall certainly hear from him .


In relation , sir , to your inclosure , I should esteem myself unworthy the compliment intended me , if I did not instantly reply to a point of such consequence .
Sensible as I am , sir , of the honour - greatly as I venerate the sacred rites to which you allude , it is clearly my duty to tell you , that I can never conceive myself justified in giving my hand to any person , while Charles is living .
There are certain circustances between us which  make this resolution , a matter of conscience  and though it is highly probable , I shall never be more than that gentleman 's correspondent , yet , during his life , I am solemnly determined never to admit , or even think of the addresses of any other man upon earth .
In my unlucky situation , this may sound affectedly , but indeed , sir , it is pure principle  and you can not give me so elegant an instance of your friendship , as your interceding instantly with your acquaintance to forbear the revival of a matter , that must be unsuccessful .


I am , your obedient servant , CHARLOTTE .


 I WRITE this letter to you in a place of confinement , to which I was carried , just as I was preparing to walk abroad for the first time since my illness .
The shock has returned upon me a violent fever  by some means or other I fainted away in the coach , from surprize and weakness  and , I now find the dressing has left my wound , and I am in a great deal of misery .
This is the more unfortunate , as I am resolved not to let either Melbank or  Charlotte know a syllable about my situation : I have been already too much obliged by the one , and I can not bear to be for ever racking the generosity of the other .
How any of my creditors could possibly detect my retreat , sequester'd as it was , and apart from all my former connections , I can not guess : evident enough it is , I am in prison , and for a debt of all others the least recollected , because I do not now suffer for myself , but for having made myself foolishly answerable for the extravagance of another : yet the creditor is a very humane man , and some cruel tamperings must have been used with him , before he could be brought to this measure .
To enquire ,  however , into these points is absurd .
I am a most unfortunate man , and the hand of adversity is eternally upon me .


Since I came hither , I read your letter upon the subject of Charlotte 's marriage .
Ah !
Mr. Templeton , how does self-love stand arm'd against the welfare of social ?
But sickness , and acute distress , hath , perhaps , mended both my heart and my ideas .
I can now cooly consider myself as I really am  a man mark'd out from community to be eminently miserable : a young creature , whose own family have long confederated against him , even till the wishes , which could only be satisfied with his destruction , are  compleated .
Yes , dear Templeton , I now behold myself with an impartial eye - as a triumph to my enemies , as an anguish to my friends - as a distress to those who have ever connected themselves with me .
I blush to examine this picture of the truth , and the only atonement I can make , is to make a decent retreat from conscious error at once .
In the first place , Templeton , let me endeavour , though very late , to do justice to Charlotte .
A friend of yours , with all the advantages of birth , fortune , virtues , and a genteel profession , will marry her - will lead her by the hand , you say , and offer her terms of tenderness and honour .
It is enough Templeton .
I see  plainly my duty , and I am inspired by the prospect of it .
Fully convinced as you are of the gentleman 's merit and circumstances , I shall rely upon your judgment , and enquire no more - Pray present my compliments to him , and after you have read , and put a wafer under the inclosed letter , deliver it to him from


CHARLES .


 To - ( Being the inclosure . )


SIR ,


YOUR friend , Mr. Templeton , has written to me upon a very delicate occasion , and made known to me the wishes of your heart .
Ah !
sir , should those wishes be gratified , what a happiness will you enjoy ?
I need not , I presume , point out to you the merits of the object whose affections you design to solicit , although it is impossible you should , at present , be so intimately acquainted with them as I am : notwithstanding  this , sir , I have now so full a sense of what ought , and what , therefore , shall be done on my part , that you may rest satisfied of meeting no interruption from the writer of this letter : he advises you on the contrary , to make advances to the heart and hand of the loveliest of women : he is convinced how much it is for your felicity , and her reputation : his own selfish wishes he sacrifices to such considerations , and he declares solemnly , that the husband of Charlotte shall have the veneration of


CHARLES .


 FINDING myself perfectly stout , and my wound free from any pain , I have been bold enough to make an excursion into the country , just within reach of the penny-post , through whose medium I send this , and shall send my future letters to you , and to Charlotte .
I hope , by this time , your good sense and good nature have recommended you to that lady 's attention : I even wish your sentiments may have weight with her , because , in that  case , you may be of service in a matter wherein her fortunes are nearly concerned .
To speak plain , Dr. Melbank , an opportunity invites , which should not be neglected : a gentleman of great property , and many amiable qualities , is struck , I find ( as indeed he well might be ) with the beautiful form of Charlotte .
His views are noble : he is well acquainted with her late connection , and yet his ambition is to make her his lawful wife .
Judge how thoroughly I must be convinced of the importance of her inclining to this offer , when I can bring myself to desire you will deliver a letter to her upon the subject  a letter , Mr. Melbank , urging her by all the  arguments that arise out of the case , fully contemplated , to accept the hand of another admirer : nay , more  I enjoin you , sir , as you value the the character of this charming , but injured woman , to second my eloquence by yours , and to suggest every thing that may incline her to a measure so auspicious to her , in every respect .
I send my letter under cover to you , and sealed , that you may first run your eye over it , and see the motives of the now resigned ,


CHARLES .


 TO CHARLOTTE .
( Inclosed . )


THE lessons of Charlotte , have at length brought Charles to a real sense of right and wrong : he has deliberated upon his duty several solitary hours , and the result of the whole is a plain conviction , that his continuing to correspond with her , is highly culpable .
His weakness is constantly urging him to mix with his sentiments , the expressions of love , all which serve to fan a fire , that might otherwise be consumed .
Charles is at last certain , that he is doing his fair friend an injury by this  conduct .
He is persuading her to cherish a hopless passion , and must consequently make her very unhappy .
Were she left to the drift of her own prudence and wisdom , they would soon conquer a fatal flame , which is perhaps acquiring fresh force from being thus indirectly cherished .
She is by these means also , kept out of those elegant circles which are so innocent , so advantageous , and so agreeable to female youth .
Perhaps , if she were to go more into the world , she might meet the man whom she might yet like - whom she might honour with the name and privileges of a husband .
The curse that attends Charles , may not attend another , and the advantages  of marriage , though , in real fact , they may not , in particular cases , contribute much to purity of heart , contribute infinitely to worldly reputation .
Charles is become sensible of what Charlotte ought to do , should she receive advances of this honourable nature .
As it is impossible she should act unkindly to any man , so , if any man of fortune , good temper , and good sense , should address her , it is the most serious advice of Charles , that she could indulge him with encouragement .
Blinded no longer by the mists of passion , he can now see the train of desireable consequences attendant upon such a step .
He sees the amiable Charlotte  caressed by those who before had the insolence to sneer .


He observes the beautiful martyr embraced by those who lately kept aloof : the very virtue and excellence , over which affected state and haughty chastity before triumphed , is now congratulated , complimented , and applauded .


She will , therefore , weigh these important articles , and whenever they present themselves to her acceptance , it is the hope of Charles , that she will not refuse them .
That she may be tortured with no more improper sentiments , but lay such as  these to her heart - is the last intruding prayer of


CHARLES .


THERE is a friend of yours in great distress at the - prison .
He is ill , and your assistance , as a surgeon , would perhaps be desireable .


I am , your humble servant .


 READ the inclosed , and pity


CHARLES .


CLEORA to CHARLES .
( Inclosed . )


YOU are not to attribute your present confinement to the malice of the creditor , at whose suit you were arrested .
It was at the instance of Mrs. P. your mother , who  takes that method of bringing you to a sense of religion , and your duty .
She considers a jail as the school of virtue , and apprehends you will now have something more important to employ yourself than in scribbling love-letters .
Be assured , however , Sir , I had no hand in bringing upon you this trouble , and have but just heard it from the mouth of your creditor .
Charlotte has , no doubt , by this time been to comfort you , and with her , I suppose , you think all situations equal .


CLEORA .


P. S. Your reversionary annuity is likely to be swallowed up in the expences of the law suit .


 Madam .


SINCE the most fortunate circumstance that ever befel you , next to the marriage with my father , ( ` twere necessary to say that I mean his death ) I have been sitting down many times , to write to you  sometimes in the ardour of an honest resentment , and sometimes , as a pleading , neglected child : but I have remained silent , even yet , an left you uncontrouled to the luxury of your  good success , and of my anxieties .
But your conscience now seems quite brought over to your side , and I can no longer suffer you to triumph , either in the benefit of my inheritance , or in the warm and wicked comforts of a wealthy widowhood - ( oh !
what a robe of mourning has yours been madam ) without trying upon you , the force of truth , and remonstrance : - without exerting one desperate experiment upon a heart , which habit and nature seem impregnantly to have fortified ( as if it were the citadel of cruelty ) against all the artillery of the parent , and of the woman !


 The artifice and complottings , by which my destruction has been effected , are not unknown to me - How is it , Mrs. P. that you are able to reconcile to yourself , at the foreboding age of sixty-three , actions , of a colour so atrocious , that the penitence of your youth upwards were scarce sufficient to wipe away ?
by what casuistry have you pacified every private monition  and how skilful must have been that sophistry , by the magic of which , you are capable of sitting composed , at the head of a table , which you have stolen from your child ?
but why do I interrogate ?
't is a maxim in morality , that a bad woman has no limit to her crimes .
You are gone  too far to recede  and I have no hope that you will mend in the progression , but expect that you must gather guilt , as you go onward to the grave , till it shall be the pleasure of providence ( in mercy to me and mankind ) to confine you there .


You accuse me to your acquaintance , of wildness , and profusion !
'T is the wretched , pitiful , pretence of guilt , of private guilt , labouring for a public apology !
To lay some error to my charge , was necessary to save you from the assaults of your sex  to palliate a conduct like your 's , it was indespensible , to alledge something against me  since , to have tormented a child in such a manner ,  without some shadow of occasion , would have argued a temper too monstrous to have been ranked among women  and the very boys would , in mere vengeance , have stoned the inhuman mother .
But depend upon it , the sick pillow , will be to you a pillow of plagues : your bed , a bed of torture  and every feather there , will prove a thorn to torment you !
Is this the language of lunacy ?
is it the violence of phrenzy ?
No , madam : faithful to the injuries of its master , this vindictive hand has hitherto confined itself to sentiments of the most frigid moderation .
From this moment , I cut you away from the insulted sensibilities of affection : when nature discards  you , what claim can you have upon the heart of a son ?
and yet , do not think , I mean to forget you so far as to leave you to yourself .
Believe me , madam , the day of such voluptuousness is past  and although you have robbed me of every right which should at least have divided with you the comforts of the world , I will henceforward take care , that you shall no more enjoy them , without the heaviest tax of indignant reprobation .


Your argument with my poor father was always in the same style : `` I should spend his fortune . ''
With what parental piety have you provided against this !
but even granting  it had been so : had I not on my side the claims of nature and of blood ?
and what were your claims , madam ?
The claims of a gay , needy woman , who after having been long setting in vain , the matrimonial trap , caught in it , at last , a gentleman of property : and , by these ingenious measures , rose from the indigence of your widowhood , to the dignity of a wife , and , by surviving the second husband - enjoyed widowhood again with all its most favourable perquisites .
Consider your shattered fortunes , at the time of your matriculation into my father 's family .
Did you bring six-pence into that family , which you have thus iniquitously plundered ?
are you not scorned by the very people ,  whom the maxims of sordid courtesy oblige to receive the hated guest into company ?
nay , have not many of these openly discovered their indignation ?
has not your brother , the good Mr. S - , often spoke warmly and disdainfully against the cruelties , which , at once mark and stain the character of sister and of christian ?
has not your usage to the unhappy writer of this letter , even in the soft moment of unoffending infancy , been the remonstrance of the rich , and the proverb of the poor ?
did not your inhumanity `` grow with my growth , and strengthen with my strength , '' till I was three times compelled to find resource from the unkindness of a mother ,  in the wanderings of the world , and in getting a meal in whatever part of that world I could obtain it ?
is there a pang , a sorrow , a disaster , or an agony , which , either your artifice , or open malignancy , has not inflicted upon me ?
have you not been the topic and the ridicule of the very man - Mr. W - , whom you ordered to exert the tyranny of the rod over me , at an age , when the birch ought to have been retorted on his own posteriors ?
did not this very man , I say , point at you from the public pulpit in the the presence of the Deity  and did not your conscience take alarm , till it extorted from you a paltry half crown , almost the largest liberality , I  ever had from you ?
have I not stated facts ?
have I stated more ?
I appeal to an indignant county  I appeal to a large , attesting , congregation  was it not also amongst your schemes , to ship me away for the torrid terrors of Senegal ?
and was not the very captain - a sea captain , madam , who had passed his life on the rugged bosom of the ocean - too tender , to acquiesce in a stratagem , at which ( though a woman projected it ) the pity of a panther , and the bowels of a bear , might have revolted ?


You often say in your conversation , that `` I have lost my character : '' oh !
hard of heart !
I have so : thanks  to my own mother .
I have not only lost that , but my health , happiness , and patrimony !
The latter of which you now riot in .
What a pity , that you are in the wane !
what a pity , that there should be one , who must soon plunder the plunderer !
what a pity , that death must in a very few years , defraud the defrauder ?
these , however , I know , are thoughts , you pretend to indulge  you are among those magnanimous characters , that , with Roman fortitude , can bear pain , combat inconvenience , and smile at dissolution : this kind of stoicism I have heard you boast  and it must be confessed , you are , when in perfect health , a notable heroine .
How well you can support poverty with a full  purse !
how much more independant and stationary you are , than your wicked Son : with a well furnish'd house , and affluent income at command ?
my house , madam  my fortune !
but pray enjoy them : by the laws of Rapine , they are yours .
I can earn the bread of fatigue , while yours is already provided ( by your own impiety provided ) and much good may such provision do you !


You are , I find , as you ever was , seconded by that infamous attorney , Mr. J. - , and I dare say you have made your story good , among such of your friends , as live at a distance from the great scene of your stratagems : with them , you are , alas !
 the best , but most unfortunate of parents  a desolate widow-woman , forsooth , who equally mourns , the loss of her lord , and the wanderings of her child !
Oh !
force of feminine fraud !
execrable , execrable delusion !
where , where , madam , must I look for a parallel to you ?
not in man , surely  not in any one of your own sex , I hope , to heaven !
for the Countess of Macclesfield herself , whose infamy , you know , is published , was merciful and maternal to you .
I fear we must quit the bounds of this world , in search of the simile , and , descending into another , find your resemblance , in the father of finesse .
It is recorded , you know , madam , of him , and of him only ,  that he could for his purposes , assume all shapes and characters  `` make the worse , appear the better cause , '' and sometimes rose even a minister of light to determine precisely , whether he was in reality , an angel , or a fiend .
There is , however , a uniformity in your character , not unworthy of you : to be complete in crime , is at least , more ingenious , than a half-witted , bungling villainy .
You are above being content with your mere victory , in the Court of Chancery  and as the magistrate did not take care to compel you to preserve , my poor pittance in reversion , after you are gone to account , you seem resolved to delay the sale of the  estate  and had rather , I perceive , pay away all the hopes I have in the world , in the interest of creditor 's demands , than deposit the annuity in the funds  lest , it might be possible for your persecution to die with yourself .
But you are determined , I find , to be consistent  and are , therefore , taking the only measures , which will enable your barbarity to survive the grave .


My exhausted paper warns me to quit you for the present  and I shall leave you , madam , to sup `` with what appetite you may , '' though I am confident your relish to it would be keener , were you to  know that I have no supper to enjoy .
In this important particular , however , I must disappoint you .
My senses are still sufficient to the purposes of common life , even though liberty is taken from me .
I have frequently heard you wish , that I could neither read nor write .
Preresolved as you were , to drive me to a dependance on the efforts of writing and reading , I see nothing preposterous in the wish .
I suppose then , it would give the total finish to your exultation , if it should please the omnipotent to touch the brain .
The loss of my senses would , indeed , be joy to you  and I know not whether your heart would not open wide enough to purchase for  me the bells , the whip , and strait waistcoat , could you at the same time purchase the delirium , which would make such dreadful furniture necessary .
But , perhaps , this may never be crouded into the catologue of my calamities : he , who feedeth the ravens , rewards , at least with bread , the efforts of an injured child .
Providence will protect those , whom the parent has neglected : when the thoughtless ostrich leaves her egg under the sand , it is rescued from the violence of the wave , and is called into being , by the sun beam .
The allusion is striking , madam .
May God give you ( though late in life ) a soul to feel it .
Farewell  I will write again soon .
Your .


CHARLES .


 P. S. I find , I am to enroll among the catalogue of your maternal indulgencies , my present confinement in the place from which this letter is dated .
Had not this last stroke of barbarity been added to the rest , I had not even now taken up the retaliating pen : but I have been too long passive - you triumph in the severity with which I meet the attacks of calamity , and you have at length extorted from me a reply .


 YOU have written a very long letter , to a very short purpose , since it only induces me to exhaust a very few sentences upon you , in order to shew , with what a sincerity I despise you .
Let them laugh , who win : let those who lose , rave : I have got the estate , and see no reason why I should interrupt the composure and luxury it produces , by putting myself in a passion .


I am , the victorious , E. P .


 I THANK you , madam , for this last blow at my sensibility .
May it be as effectual as you could possibly wish it !
and may the hand that hath smitten , have no future opportunity to be uplifted , against the bleeding heart of


CHARLES .


 OH !
God of heaven , Mr. Templeton , what am I to do now ?
All that I felt before , was lenity to the misery in which I am at this minute involved .
Poor Charles is in a prison , without money , without health , without a friend !
He has sent a letter to Mr. Melbank , and another to me , disguising his situation , and advising me to accept the hand of some other man , whom he [ ... ] s given to understand has addressed me .
It was from Cleora , that I  learned his calamity , and that it is occasioned by the malice , and unnatural schemes of the restless Mrs. P. his mother .
I have not seen Dr. Melbank since I received this killing intelligence  and when I do see him , there is a certain circumstance which makes it highly improper , that I should apply to him , of all the men in the world , for relief .
How , Mr. Templeton , how dreadfully is this excellent youth reduced ?
what a soul must he possess to write such generous letters at a crisis so deplorable ?
Perhaps he has had a return of his fever - perhaps - indeed , sir , I am almost distracted .
I dare not go to him , nor can I stay away from him .
Oh !
these cruel debts ,  that are pulling perpetually at his heart-strings !
Oh , sir , what step can I possibly take !
Almighty God direct me !


CHARLOTTE .


TO what accumulated indignities , does the want of a fortune expose me ?
Soon after I had sealed my last letter to you , I hurried on my things , and walked out into the Park , to meditate on the steps I should take in this dilemma .
I had not gone more than half the length  of the place , before a gentleman accosted me by my name , and enquired into the cause of that uneasiness , which was but too apparent .
In the disorder of my heart , I told him the whole story : I soon recollected in this gentleman , one of the many who caressed Charles for his brilliant sense  and , as he had lately come to ample fortunes , I began to hope I had met the person who would assist in the necessary business .
The debt , said I , is but an hundred guineas : what say you ?
will you condecend to serve a good man , whom you admire ?
will you exalt yourself by entering a place of confinement ?
if so , go to him : conceal from him by what means you heard of his misfortune ,  and may the power that sees the generosity , reward it .


He pencil'd down my address , in order , as he said , to acquaint me what he had done , took me kindly by the hand , and bidding me be more chearful , left me .
How happy was I , to see him walk briskly down the park !
and , when out of sight , I was ready to drop upon my knee in gratitude to the God , who raised up to my poor Charles , so able and so amiable a protector .


I chearfully went home  where I had not arrived half an hour , before a servant , in a livery I recollected , brought me the following card .
Oh !
 Mr. Templeton , why should I be thus insulted ?
yet , never tell Charles of it , if you have the least regard to the most uphappy


CHARLOTTE .


To CHARLOTTE .


YOU want an hundred guineas to serve your friend .
I inclose you an hundred and fifty pounds .
As it may not always be convenient for a lady to pay one way , she has , luckily for her , the choice of paying it another .
Let Charles remain where he is at present - compliment me with the use of his pillow for  this evening , and let the inclosed , pay for my lodging , with which , you may take him out to-morrow .
I trust to your honour .


To - From CHARLOTTE .


WITHOUT pretending to any virtue , I may be allowed at least , pride enough to tell you , that you are too contemptible a being to be made an object of Charles 's resentment  and , therefore , you have the satisfaction of playing the poltroon with impunity .
Your bribe I re-inclose , safely sealed up .
May  Charles 's misfortunes never sink him so low , as to receive redress from the hand of infamy : he is a nobler object in his prison , than it is ever possible such a wretch as you should be in a palace .


CHARLOTTE .


I HAVE not yet either heard from , or seen Dr. Melbank  and the inflexible Charles ceases to correspond .
Though personally divided from this worthy man , I must even  consider myself as his nearest and dearest friend .
What then must I suffer , to see myself unable to do the least service for him , in the greatest exigence .
I have been to five of those men , who advertise to lend money on annuities : my poor pittance is so strangely bequeath'd , that I can not possibly dispose of it .
I fully know your circumscribed situation  I have sent every thing of value I could possibly collect to be pledged , and the utmost I can raise is fifty-two pounds .
Cleora refuses to tell me the name and address of the creditor , or else , I might , perhaps , compromise the debt - oh !
heavens , Mr. Templeton , I am this moment struck with a thought which  may prove propitious .
I will put it instantly in practice .


Adieu .
CHARLOTTE .


MADAM ,


MONEY , which Charles lent , is very unexpectedly paid into my hands by the borrower , and I inclose a note to the amount of it .
Charles 's present situation may perhaps be greatly alleviated by so  trifling a sum as fifty pounds  at least he will be glad to find , one of the many people he has obliged , turns out grateful : but , I am persuaded , he would receive this supply with double pleasure at the hand of Cleora .
There are certain disguises which are really virtuous , upon account of their motives : ah !
that I could prevail upon Cleora to pay Charles an immediate visit , and offer him the fifty pounds , as so much raised upon her by the security of her marriage settlement : in such a delusion there could be no criminality  for he does not yet look for the payment : at the same time , it might have such an affect upon Charles 's heart , that a perfect reconciliation might be the  consequence .
Let this be as it will , I seal up the sum , and leave the method of conveyance to your direction .


I am , MADAM , Your obedient servant , CHARLOTTE .


CRUEL as you are with your concealments , I have heard of your misfortune .
In prosperity ,  Charles , I could forgive you for deserting me , but to drop my correspendence in your distress - how could you be so inhuman ?
- Though I flatter myself you are still a lover of justice , and , if so , you will not scruple to receive what accompanies this letter , which is at present of no service to me , and may be of some to you .
You will recollect , Charles , that I did not refuse your address , on a similar subject , and I have , therefore , a right to expect you will not refuse mine .
- Ah !
Charles , do not at such a time reject my friendship : - do not despise and cast off my attentions , when they ought to be ten times doubled .
Remember what I say to you , and farewell ,


CHARLOTTE .


 OH !
my dear , dear friend , I am oppressed - I labour - I am bowed to the very earth with with the weight of various obligations - I am almost ready to execrate the destiny that makes it necessary for for me to receive them - had my hard-hearted mother permitted my father to follow the feelings , which nature generally annexes to the paternal character , I had then been able to confer benefits , instead of receiving them .
I might then have sought out merit , diffidence , and undistinguished  virtue , from the barren vale of obscurity .
Instead of which , I am condemned to be myself the object of benevolence : - how , madam , - how is a soul like mine to support the burden of perpetual favours ?
that they are delicately bestowed , is an aggravation .
I feel them , Charlotte - I am conscious of them , and they enter into my soul .


This is the preamble to a transaction , of which I ought , perhaps , to blush .
I am at liberty - I am free - my debt is wholly discharged - your letter was delivered to me on the outside of the prison door - I was just stepping into the coach that carried me to my old apartemnts   - my protector was leaning upon my arm .


Ah !
Charlotte - such a friend - Whom do you think capable of such things ?
to whom is Charles indebted for his liberty ?
it is not to be conjectured - Know then that he who so lately saved my life by his skill , hath now saved my freedom by his generosity - Let the name of Melbank be carried upon the rosy wing of gratitude , to the heaven of heavens .
I fold up his letter upon the subject : give it your tears , Charlotte - give the author of it your adoration - but pity , I charge you to pity , the insignificance of


CHARLES .


 A FRIEND of mine , of the tribe of Israel , has offered to lend you a sum of five hundred pounds upon the reversion .
He has been with me this morning , and upon terms , ( moderate enough for a Jew ) agrees to furnish the money .
As this kind of brokerage business is generally kept a secret , I think you had better not mention it to any unconcerned person : by which means the matter may be privately managed , and nobody the wiser .


Adieu .
E. MELBANK .


 THE matter of raising money on my reversion is all finesse .
It is all a trick of the unparalelled Melbank 's , who wanted to deceive me into a notion , that I was making use of my own property .
I wish to heaven we could all meet over a dish of tea , and that you would both give me an opportunity to prostrate myself in the presence of each other .
Let me deliver your bank-bill with my own hand -


Adieu , CHARLES .


 MELBANK , is too great for the compliment of common language .
He dines with me to-morrow - are you disengaged - ?
dare you trust your heart - ?
Dr. Melbank says there is no fear - The dinner will be ready at three o'clock .


CHARLOTTE .


I AM to be trusted - Love yields the laurel to gratitude .


CHARLES .


 I HAVE written the invitation you desired , with a trembling hand .
- He will come !


'T is within a few hours of the appointment .
- The clock is now striking twelve : every stroke vibrates on my heart - every stroke is more than a second nearer to the time .
Gracious God !
Cleora is this minute passing by my window - she kisses her hand in compliment - I have  not the courage to call her up .
- She goes on .
- She is out of sight .


I will this instant forbid him .
- He shall not , Dr. Melbank - he must not come .
- I am feelingly persuaded of the consequences , and I - must - prevent them .


Adieu .


32.1 .
To the same , in continuation .


I CAN NOT turn the apology to my mind .
- I have written , and blotted , and rejected , three different cards - I shall be too abrupt - I wish you were with me ,  that my excuses might be delicate .
- Heavens , Sir , it is past one .
- I will forbid him at once .
- And yet - Dr. Melbank - as he is so very calm - as he can view me with the moderation of friendship - as we shall talk upon ordinary subjects - methinks - perhaps - I should suppose - oh , what shall I do - let me dispatch this letter to you , and let your immediate answer direct


CHARLOTTE .


 I AM not very well , and yet I will be with you in ten minutes .
You have nothing to apprehend : all will be as it should be .


E. MELBANK .


 SOMETHING has happened , that prevents me the pleasure of dining with you  I am , therefore , obliged to send that in a letter , which I at first designed to deliver personally .
I expect the favor of a visit from Dr. Melbank in the evening .


Adieu .
CHARLES .


 AFTER having congratulated you on the recovery of your liberty , and on the acquisition of Dr. M - 's friendship , I must inform you , that you are more obliged to that gentleman , than you can at present imagine .
It is a duty I owe both to him and to you , to inform you of what I know concerning the matter .
Dr. Melbank , Charles ,  is the very man , who applied to me on the subject of Charlotte 's marriage - Dr. Melbank it is , who would lay himself , and his fortunes at her feet , before the altar : he it is , who can stifle his own passion , in pity to yours : he it is , who can serve the man that stands in the way of his tenderest wishes .


Now , Charles - now is your time .
- Are you equal to an exalted action ?
- have you an ambition that scorns to be vanquished ?
- can you really practise the precepts , and the sentiments , expressed in the letter you desired me to deliver to the gentleman who courted Charlotte upon terms of honour ?
if you can do all these  great things , this is the critical moment : this is the golden opportunity .
- You know what would exalt your character - you know what will sink the scale of obligations , disagreeable to the dignity of Charles 's ambition .
Conscious of your virtue , I will never speak or write another line on the affair , but will leave the noble heart to its natural operations .


H. T .


 DEAR CHARLES .


IN compliance with your whim , we have dined without you  but our tea will want its social flavour , and be totally insipid , if not inspirited by your company .
The kettle is boiling with expectation .


E. MELBANK .


 WHY , why did you suffer me to see you - why , after I had sent an apology , did you throw the temptation a second time in my way ?
- I saw you at the tea-table - you trembled as I came into the room !
- what a vermilion covered your face !
- by what a death-like paleness was it succeeded - how unlucky was Melbank 's departure !
- how fatal the illness that occasioned it !
- Why were we left alone ?
- why , after such an absence , were  we permitted to be in the same chamber together ?
You were cruel enough not to draw away your hand as I took it - your resistance , was a more than half invitation - I carried it to the bosom , against which the heart was violently beating , and you did but faintly frown - the arm that I clasped round your neck , brought me within reach of your lips , and instead of throwing me away from the pressure , you permitted me to kiss them twice .
Had not I at that moment brought Templeton 's letter out of my pocket - what might have been the consequence ?
I bow reverently to the guardian Deity that saved us both .


 Charlotte , we must meet no more - I give you to the only man in the world that deserves you .
You say , he can not speak upon the subject .
- No matter for that - His delicacy should emulate ours .
Every principle that ought to actuate man and woman , demands that we should make the sacrifice to his happiness , mutually .
He loves you unboundedly .
- His honour only , can exceed his passion .
- He has thrown our generosity beyond all distance .
There is but one way upon earth to get again within sight of him .
Severe , I perceive , will be the martyrdom on both sides .
- Ah , Charlotte , we have deceived ourselves .
- Our affection is  more tenderly animated than it ever was - it was in yesterday 's interview more palpable , than at any former period ?
- it glowed in our cheeks - it shone in our eyes - it streamed in our tears - it panted in our hearts - what of that ?
- the duty is proportioned to the danger : were we ten times dearer - if alas !
that were possible , I am perfectly satisfied , we ought to submit .
Who saved the life of Charles , but Melbank ?
who brought him by the hand out of a prison , but Melbank ?
what does he require in exchange for all this ?
he requires nothing : but , if circumstances favoured , he would make Charlotte the wife of his heart , his hand , and his fortune - what benefits  would result from that connection ?
all that we ought to desire : the felicity of the noblest character of God - an honest man  with riches , splendor , fashion , elegance in the train .
You can not love him - admit it : he can not expect it at present .
But still , you esteem , you venerate , you admire .
His passion preys upon his health - I see it in his sudden paleness - I see it in his counterfeited spirits - I am so abundantly obliged , Charlotte , that I shall die - I shall die with confusion , if I am not by some means able to make a return .
One great opportunity courts me .
I can yield to him the object of my adoration - I can yield her in the bloom of beauty - in the warmest  ardours of my affection .
Yes , Charlotte , I can , in this case resign you , though I were to expire in the effort .
God knows how my heart will bear it , but Charlotte - I will bear it , and have even still intrepidity enough to bid you imitate


CHARLES .


WERE I not fully resolved to do justice to the advice of of your letter , I should want the courage to answer it .
But , cost what it will , you may depend upon the gratitude of


CHARLES .


 I AM a very wretched woman , Charles , and know not to what fate I am reserved !
never sure , was any one in so intricate an embarrassment .
Upon one condition , however , I will make the sacrifice you desire , even though the loss of my senses should ensue .
Ah !
my friend , what an [ ... ] gonizing trial do you put me to !
still I repeat it to you , if Charles will make one great offering to generosity , another shall immediately be made by


CHARLOTTE .


 SENSIBLY touched as I now am , there can be no condition with which I shall not acquiesce , to to promote the honour of Charlotte , and the happiness of Mr. Melbank , who manifestly avoids me , lest his tenderness for you , and friendship for me , should betray him into an explanation .
Make your own terms : they shall be adopted by


CHARLES .


 GIVE your hand to her , who has lawfully a right to it , and I will present mine to Mr. Melbank when he solicits it .


CHARLOTTE .


CAN nothing less than such a circumstance satisfy you ?
however , to shew you how far I can go to perform what is dictated by conscience , I comply .


CHARLES .


 SUPPOSING all past actions obliviated , have you any partiality for


CHARLES .


I THANK you , sir , more for the hundred pounds you desired Dr. Melbank to pay me , than for the offer of your hand , which for many delicate reasons , is not acceptable to


CLEORA .


 YES , Mr. Templeton , I will go through what I have begun , or perish in the attempt .
- I am not , however , boaster enough , to pretend that my heart is serene .
Oh , Sir , it is torn almost to pieces .
I feel my affection for Charlotte , and my admiration for Charles , increase upon me every hour .
I have seen them both together , in the same room , and the struggles they had , to conceal their agitation from a third person , broke  through all disguises .
- Never did I behold such a scene - I could not support it , but withdrew , and left the lovers to themselves .
Wretched as I am , I deplore the misfortune that keeps them asunder , and , though it may sound like romance , I would do much to promote their happiness .
Nay , I will do every thing within my power .
'T is , in my opinion , a base action to divide them - should Charlotte even yield to my proposals , upon a re-application of them , what would be the consequence ?
I should possess a woman 's hand without all her heart .
I should greatly add to the miseries of a man , already too much opressed .
- I can not bear the thought - I shudder at it , Mr. Templeton .
No , Sir , - let me not  take an undue advantage of the calamity that called me into the family .
- It can not be - I foresee the horrors it will heap upon two pre-possessed hearts .
- They labour at indifference , and they discover attachment .
- I will avoid both .
- Some would smile at a man , on the wrong side of thirty , being thus conquered , by a tenderness , they would pardon only in eighteen .
But frigid tempers , are no proper judges of more soft and pathetic constitutions .
- That I do love Charlotte , is , alas , too fatally true !
but my affection shall not seduce me into a meanness , unworthy of


E. MELBANK .


 VERY long , and very anxiously , have I waited for you : I want to consult you upon a point , not to be trusted to paper , or the post - but , what will , I know , weigh more with you than all the rest .
I want to lay myself under another obligation to you .


CHARLES .


I AM sorry to inform you , dear Dr. Melbank , the wound in my breast is broke out again , and demands your immediate assistance .


CHARLES .


 TOO generous , too amiable , Charles , how could you invent a stratagem , that you knew I could not suspect , or resist yielding to , in order to betray me into the interview , I had , with so cautious an officiousness , avoided .
'T was a virtue that verged upon barbarity .
Every one of your arguments , however , convince me , that I ought not to proceed - Charlotte , you say , will make me happy - she will conciliate the general joy , by submitting  to my wishes .
How , Charles , can that be called a general joy , which would produce general infelicity ?
- she would submit - it may be so - the more angel she - But who could , under such circumstances , be base enough to suffer the submission ?
it can never be .
I see my duty , and can not suffer even the most eloquent passion - not the persuasive , all-subduing voice of love - to lead me from it .


I will give my young man proper instructions as to your wound ,


and am , your 's , E. MELBANK .


 HOW much am I restored to my serenity , by the receipt of a letter , which I inclose , from the noble-minded Dr. Melbank .
With regard to Cleora 's refusal of your hand , I have only to observe , that I have done my duty , and you have done yours : let that , my dear friend , be a great satisfaction to us both .
The worst is past  Dr. Melbank is satisfied - Cleora is supplied with money - Charles is at liberty , and Charlotte will soon acquire sufficient serenity to write to him - but you shall no longer be detained from the letter which has put me in spirits -


CHARLOTTE .


 IF you can forgive me for having tried , by a splendid proposal , to wean you from the affection you bear , and ever ought to bear to Charles , I may still expect your friendship , though I tell you that I would not now marry you for the uniting Indies  you have given my heart some pangs , and I have richly deserved them  for I should have held sacred the friendship betwixt you and Charles .
- In my  more serious opinion , formed as it now is , on deliberation , I think you should not go to the altar with a monarch .
The scenes , which I find you have both been engaged in , must have established a tenderness not to be conquered .
If fortune ever favours , you will sanctify your mutual passion , by a public testimony : if it should not , I can scarce think either of you at liberty , conscientiously speaking , to enter into other engagements .
I am leaving London for some weeks , but at my return I shall certainly enquire after the amiable correspondents .
Mean time ,


I am your most obedient servant , E. MELBANK .


 MELBANK , is like one of those glorious phoenomena which awes us weaker , and more imperfect mortals , into silence .
He reaches the resolution of Charlotte , and throws out of sight the fortitude and dignity of Charles .
As the poet therefore says of the deity , I say of Dr. Melbank .


I lose Myself , in him !
Come then , expressive silence !
muse his praise .
 He is too great to talk about  let us content ourselves with thinking of him .


I find Charlotte , we must not indulge ourselves in any more interviews - they are treacherous - they betray us .
Let us endeavour to be contented with our usual pleasures of corresponding : let us follow strictly the advice of our friend .
I am weak enough to confess to you , that I am more rejoiced at Dr. M - 's noble conquest over himself , than at any thing I ever felt since my existence .
Had he married you - had he doubled my obstacles - had he taken you for ever from me - or had the cruel certainty  of your being wife to another attended me - God knows , how I should have supported it .


All his generosity - even though he had thrown his whole fortune into my lap - would have shrunk before me  and such is the inconsistence of a tender heart - although I was myself the proposer and promoter of the union , had it been carried into execution , I believe I should have hated him , and hang'd myself .
But as it is , I could build churches , and erect monuments to his memory : he has saved me from desperation : he has made me able to bear Charlotte 's absence .
While I know that she is not connected with another , I can bear to  live without her society .
I am happy to hear constantly that she is well , that she attends to her intellectual improvements - that she will often read my letters , and employ herself in the innocent task of writing answers .
All these things were , I own , very lately , considered as too little - but adversity brings us to a proper sense of rational blessings  and the prospect of everlastingly losing the tenderness of Charlotte , has made me satisfied with that , which at present ought to satisfy me .
My situation indeed , appears , upon reflection , to be much more supportable , than I at first imagined !
how much severer might it have been rendered , by either your marriage or your death !
let me endeavour to  procure comfort from comparison .
We are both happier than thousands - I have at this minute an instance in my eye to justify this , and , as I am sure it will serve to make us both more reconciled , I will , in my next letter , communicate it to you ,


Adieu , CHARLES .


WHILE I was at the house of the sheriffs officer , Charlotte , an adventure struck me so forcibly that it would be barbarous to refuse  ( to so tender a heart as your 's ) the recital of it  especially as it will shew you , that there are agonies in life , compared to which , ours are transient and trifling .
In mourning our own calamities and disappointments , let us not too selfishly forget the calamity of others  but where ( as in the following case ) we see wretchedness exceeding our own , let us remember , that , not to be the most miserable , is at least one source of contentment  and instead of murmuring , we ought to sympathize .


Soon after I was arrested by Mr. Trap , and conveyed to his house , I beheld a young man sitting in a very pensive posture , resting his cheek upon  one hand , and holding a pen in the other .
He was not at all disconcerted at my being brought in , but smothered the sighs as well as he was able , and began to write .
`` There 's more stuff in the office , master , said a fellow that now entered the room - there 's two or three more of the roe and doe family come to visit you - it is a sad thing to be sure , but , howsomdever , you shall not go over the water to-night  you are every inch a Gemmun , I will say that , and you spend your money like a prince .
No , no , God forbid I should carry any Gemmun out of my house while he behaves as such  so sit still , for you sha n't go to jail till to-morrow . ''


 Upon this Charlotte , the poor young man looked up , discovered his eyes swimming in tears , drew a handkerchief out of his pocket , and put it over his face .


Having a little recovered himself , he took up the pen again , and just as he was applying it to the paper , his features assumed something of consolation : but this again , was presently dashed by the appearance of the bailiff 's wife , although , to do her justice , she was a very obliging woman .


There are some messages , you know , so displeasing in their own nature , or at least rendered  so by the peculiar circumstances which introduce them , that they would seem disgusting , though they were to be delivered by the lips of the graces .


Mrs. Trap therefore , was as gracious as it is possible for any one to be , who presents a bill that requires to be discharged on the spot .
Her harangue was to the following effect .


She was very sorry to trouble him , but it was a rule .
It made all things , on all sides easy : - scores , were scores  short reckonings made long friendships - gentlemen were here to-day , and gone to-morrow  and therefore  she hoped he would not be offended at the customs of the house .


Here , Charlotte , the prisoner took his hand from his pocket , from whence flew one solitary guinea , and he protested to God , that if the fiftieth part of that sum more , would purchase him a passport to paradise , he could not raise it .


I was , soon after this declaration , left alone with my fellow prisoner , who , still preserving an air of dejection , addressed me , as you will find it recited in my next letter .


Adieu , CHARLES .


 WHY should you despair , sir , said I ?
because , replied Mr. Reynolds , my condition is on all sides desperate : besides that I have no money , I have no friends to procure it , nor any means or health to acquire it by : you , sir , are , no doubt , brought here by some misfortune , but God forbid you should match in misery the most unhappy man that is now speaking .


 Poor as I was Charlotte , and destitute both of fortune and happiness , I put my hand into my purse , which being perceived by Reynolds , he waved his hand in token of disapprobation , and , with swimming eyes , exclaimed , pray take your hand from your purse , sir - I beseech you to take it away - I am resign'd - I bow me to the burden of my fortunes - money can not , you know , Sir , medicine to a mind diseased - not the fortune of the East collected , could restore me to my tranquility .


I beg , Mr. Reynolds , said I , that we may pass the remainder of our  evening together without interruption : as we are united by a similar misfortune let us make it a social one .
My fate , like yours , is not to be alleviated by money , yet let us , for this one night , live in the hope that the morning may bring comfort on her wings .


You are very polite , and propose what would be extremely agreeable , Sir , said Mr. Reynolds - but really - really - I - I - I - .


Here Charlotte , he began to reexamine , and shake his pockets .


Oh fie , fie Sir , said I .


 I went out , and ordered ( agreeble to the slender state of my finances , and with a prudent recollection of the charges of the house ) a comfortable supper .
At my return , poor Mr. Reynolds was weeping over a letter , that , by the evidence of several places much worn , and a variety of foldings , appeared to have been the frequent subject of dear and solitary meditation .
After he had read it , he pressed it to his heart , and kissed it  he looked steadily at me , and , thinking the sentiments would speak best for themselves , put it into my hand , without uttering a syllable .


As I know , my lovely correspondent Charlotte , does not possess a heart  like that invulnerable piece of rock which lies putrifying in the bosom of Mr. Timothy Trap  as I know , on the contrary , she can pity the sorrows that even surpass her own , I will oblige her with a transcript of of the contents of the letter , which the prisoner trusted to my perusal .


( The inclosed Letter . )
Written on a Death-bed .


Most dear JAMES ,


I Want the spirit to write , what I have not the strength to speak .
As I have persuaded you to leave my bed-side for a short time , I will employ  that interval , as well as I am able , in imparting to you some sentiments that you ought to know .


Your late miseries , oh my dear James , went too near my heart , and the day that your furniture and even our bed was last seized , I had the rashness to take poison - a poison my husband , which , though very slow , is certain in its operations .
My doctor has discovered the occasion of my illness long ago , but in compliance with my intreaties , has hitherto concealed it from you .


How , James , can I sustain the sense of my guilt ?
instead of dying , I should have lived , on purpose to  make your life supportable !
in what a condition do I leave you .
Oh my soul whither art thou going !
Oh James - James - pity me save me - protect me from - fro - farewell - farewell I can no more .


LUCIA REYNOLDS .


I shed , my Charlotte , over this epistle , the tears of sensibility : it was written in a faint hand , the words scarce legible , and every syllable spoke the disorder of the unfortunate writer .
When I returned it to Mr. Reynolds he kissed it as before , folded it up as a miser would have folded a bank bill of a thousand pounds , surveyed it on all sides with the greatest  tenderness , and then deposited it in a little box of ebony .


So heaven befriend me Sir , said he , as he put up the box , I would not part with this to be restored to all the fortune I had a right to inherit .
No barbarous mother !
no , inhuman parent , this you can not take from me : of this inestimable relique you can not rob me : this is a treasure your child can call his own , in defiance of all your artifices .
I thank the great and good God , for the blessing - oh that I could find an honest man who would lay it upon my bosom when I enter the grave , for which I have long most pathetically petitioned .


 Mr. Reynolds , said I , you see that friend now before , you , should I survive , and if not , I would recommend that office to a dear and faithful woman who would not neglect it .


I had scarce finished this promise , before Reynolds was upon his knees , and gave me , as he rose , with his hands clasping mine , such a look of acknowledgment , that I felt enter into my heart .


And is there then , said I , is there another Mrs. P. - and was there ever another Charlotte ?
did Mr. Reynolds call the one his wife , and and the other his mother ?
if so - you have still reason to be contented  Mr. Reynolds : the blessed society of such a wife , is more than a balance for the curses , keen as they are , of such a mother .


Blessed society , returned Mr. Reynolds , yes , Sir , her 's was a blessed society : horrible as was the death she died , the life she lived might atone even for the crime of self destruction .
She was eleven years Sir by my side , during which time we were never in prosperity , and yet - such was the charm that mutually bound us - we threw adversity into despair - she was my wife upon earth - she is an angel in heaven .
If you Sir have got the counterpart of her , do not talk of pains , or prisons , or penalties - if  there is not something wrong in your heart - it must be happy .


Upon this , Charlotte , I ran over the heads of my history , at which even with the softness of a Desdemona , he wept particularly at such parts as related to my mother 's barbarity , and my Charlotte 's kindness - ( I did not mention Cleora by name ) and , after I ` He gave me for my pains a world of sighs ' had ended , he promised to reward me with a scene or two from his own disasterous volume .


 But the recital of this must be reserved to a future opportunity .
I am this instant summoned upon indispensible business .
Pity Reynolds , and pray for


CHARLES .


TEN days have I taken to compose an agitated , and , I had almost said , infatuated mind .
I have engaged myself with unusual assiduity in the business of my profession - I have read - I have written - I have idled , I have toiled .
-  Alas , Mr. Templeton , I am ashamed at my progress , or rather at my having made no progress at all .


I am still a slave to my passions - this charming woman , pre-engaged as she is , still crouds on my imagination - I have banished myself from her sight , and yet I see her : I have pretended an absence from town on purpose to avoid all formal communication , - yet , notwithstanding all this , I blush to tell you , I am a very miserable man .
My friends perceive the effect in my looks , without knowing the cause - the cause I dare not mention , lest I deservedly become the object of ridicule .
You have , dear Mr. Templeton , a gentle heart ,  and it is some pleasure to correspond with you : Charlotte passed the other morning by my door , as it is usual with her , in her way to the park , and she called to know of my servant ( supposing me to be out of town ) whether I was well , when she last heard from me , and when I was expected to return .
Happy was it for me that I had pre-instructed my servant in case of enquiry .
An interview at such a crisis , would have certainly , destroyed all my better resolutions : and yet as she went from the door , as I was in the street parlour , I could not avoid going to the window : the blinds favour'd me .
I saw her depart - she was dress'd by the hand of Hebe , and , in my opinion ,  more beautiful than ever .
I heard her sweet and tuneful voice leave her best compliments for Dr. Melbank : the sound thrilled my soul .
I was strongly inclined to open the door that led to the entry where she stood .
I got up - took hold of the door handle - drew it - set it on the jar - every word she uttered was more distinct - `` She cordially hoped I was quite well - should be exceedingly glad to see me upon my return to town - and desired her most affectionate compliments might be transmitted . ''


Oh Mr. Templeton , had she staid another minute , I should have discovered  myself and my infirmity .


Adieu : Pray for the returning reason of your


E. MELBANK .


CHARLES , I find , is out of prison , chiefly through the means of Charlotte , who has contrived to raise him up a friend in the extravagance of one Dr. Melbank .
No doubt the woman buys this man 's friendship , at a pretty dear rate : however , Charles is mean enough to  accept of a favour by whatever means it is procured  and as you have nothing to expect from his generosity , I would advise you to threaten him with putting some other of his creditors in pursuit of him  thus , perhaps , you may extort through fears , what yout can not obtain through a sense of duty .


Your Mother , E. P .


 I Can never adopt the measures you advise , to oppress Charles , it would only put it more out of his power to befriend me in point of money matters .
He gives me from time to time as much as his circumstances admit , though I am not sure , if the presents be not chiefly made at the instance of Charlotte .
I perceive it is a vain endeavour to disunite them .
They still love , and still correspond .


Your obedient servant , CLEORA .


 LONG as it is , I make no apology , Charlotte , but expect many thanks for giving you , as related by himself ,


57.1 .
The continuation of Mr. Reynolds 's History .


I Will tell you only such other of my adventures Sir , as more immediately led me to my present situation , and that I may not unnecessarily increase your melancholy , I will relate the story with as much life and  humour - for I have been engaged in whimsical scenes - as my poor exhausted spirits will permit .


Mr. Reynold 's sat down , and began .
The continuation of his narrative ran thus .


I shall begin this part of my history at the day I obtained , after various delightful difficulties , the hand of my beloved Lucia , who , being only a farmer 's daughter , was considered by my mother ( who can match your 's for cruelty ) as an intruder in the family , and therefore took every opportunity to insult her .
This contemptuous treatment made us resolve to leave her house , and rather  earn our bread by daily labour , than be indebted for it to one who was constantly upbraiding us for the bounty .
As I was not bred to any business , I was obliged to seek for such an employment , as depended rather on the application and versatility of genius , than any thing else .
Having a well grounded classical education , and a sprightly vein for undetached compositions , I was advised , by a young friend who knew the town , to apply to the booksellers , and endeavour to get a livelihood from the pursuits of the press  while my poor Lucia was to throw in her mite , by attending to the needle .
With these views , and only three guineas and a half in our pockets , we  left this cruel mother 's house one evening pretty late , ( taking advantage of her absence from home ) and set out to a neighbouring town , from whence we embarked in a waggon for London .
Upon our arrival there , we called on our young metropolitan friend , who agreed the next morning to attend me to a printer of his acquaintance : we soon , through his assistance , produced a lodging , and , for the sake of literary convenience , it was in a small court , that led into Paternoster-row .


Upon going into the printer 's shop the master surveyed me critically , and without any previous , or delicate ceremony , asked ( as soon as he understood  my business - ) what I could do ?
whether I had any specimens about me ?
whether I was a verse-man , or a prose-man ?
whether I had ever dabbled , in those doings , or was only going to throw my ink about the world ?


My friend answered for me , that , I was a young man of genius who could turn my hand to any thing , that I would enter into immediate employ  and that my diligence might be depended on .


As authorship was thus early the necessary means of eating and drinking , it was not to be supposed I had much time to bestow upon the elegancies of composition  upon polishing  my periods , arranging my arguments , or decorating my sentiments : good , or good for nothing , so many pages were to produce so many pence , and therefore the main point was , to have the pen almost always in my hand , and scribble away , for the supplies of the day .
Generally speaking , however , my task-masters , the booksellers , cut out my business , and told me what , and how much would be wanting that night .


If , as it is asserted , there be universal charms in variety  never ought man to be more contented , or think himself more entertained than myself  for I have often wrote round the whole circle of the sciences in twenty  four hours .
- I purchased my breakfast by a page of politics - my dinner by a sheet of biography - my tea by history - my supper by a poem on the pleasures of the spring , and my lodging ( which I shifted nearly as often as my subjects , and much oftner than my linen ) by divinity .
The next day came into play for the morning , a slice of mathematics - for noon , a plate of translation , and for the evening , a dish of indexes .
My employers , sir , notwithstanding this labour of Hercules , made woeful complaints that my works did not sell , that they did not pay for paper and print - that I was not known : that unless I could get a popular writer to lend me his  name , they must decrease the copy-money .


About this time poor Lucia 's wardrobe began to decline , though her lovely face was ever dressed in smiles of congratulation , or in tears of sympathy - my own apparel began to be truly literary , and I recollected to have often seen one of my booksellers , whose name was Meadowes , slide about his shop in the mornings , till after hair dressing time , in a green frock .
We were both of a size , and I made formal proposals - this very frock Sir cost me a whole octavo volume of sermons , which were printed the following month ?
under the taking title of sermons , by a late right  reverend prelate , warranted originals , and to be seen by the curious in his lordship 's own hand writing .
While I was labouring for the coat , I had no other wages till I had earned that , than what I could get by working after stated hours : and yet it was absolutely necessary for me and my wife to subsist in the interim : accordingly I sat up for two nights together , and wrote a large poem of the 1s .
6d .
size , on conjugal tenderness , entitled the faithful pair .
I hurried away with this the next morning to a new purchaser , who said if I would leave it ten days or a fortnight , he would give me his answer .
This proposal , not suiting the situation of affairs at home , I went to a second dealer in  these wares , who having looked at the title said , he had made an oath never to burn his fingers against the blaze of poetry any more  a third observed , that he would sell me a parcel of poems by the pound - and a fourth hinted , that if I would take the opposite side of the subject , and write in support of conjugal infidelity , he would treat with me .


Chagrined , wounded , desolate , and disgusted , I went into a pawnbroker 's shop , and pledged a pocket-piece of silver , upon which - the value being four shillings - they lent me two and twenty pence  with this modicum I bought a few necessaries , and ran to offer them to the half-starved , but  still uncomplaining Lucia .
In her dear company I forgot every indignity , and every care , and we passed the whole evening over a mutton chop , and a pot of porter , with joy , content , and tenderness inexpressible .


The next morning , an hour before the time of going to work , I thought something agreeable might happen from trying the heart of Mr. Meadows  and setting myself seriously down to the task , while Lucia was asleep , I thus addressed the feelings of a Bookseller .


 SIR ,


MY wants are extreme : the opportunities of supplying them , are few .
The greatest part of those wants have been brought about by misfortune : I have this day a bill coming due for house rent  or I should rather have said room-rent .
Will you this once advance a single guinea , to prevent , the unhappy consequences .


I am your most grateful servant , I. R .


 Mr. Meadows returned by the bearer , this short and laconic reply .


To Mr. REYNOLDS .


SIR ,


WERE your principles equal to your understanding , there might be some encouragement  but while I admire you for the one , common honesty requires that I should despise you for the other .


J. MEADOWS .


Upon the receipt of this audacious letter , I thought my reason would have left me .
I threatened vengeance  on the barbarous writer .
Oh Sir , hear the circumstances that attended it .
I had many misfortunes , and many debts upon me .
I dared not venture abroad till the shades of the night befriended me .
I sold the labours of my pen to this fellow , on his own terms , and I had entrusted him with the knowledge of my abode that I might correct what are called the proof sheets , as they come from the press : the wretch knew at what an advantage he took me , and that he might say almost any thing with impunity .
But , oh Sir , what villany could exceed his insult at such a time - by a fellow too with whom I had scrupulously fulfilled every engagement , and who knew not a syllable  of me or of my affairs , but from the vague breath of partial or vulgar report .


I did not however , answer his impudent letter , but crushed it in my hand , and to prevent its being seen by the too cruel and sympathizing Lucia , threw it into the fire .


Disdaining to work any more in the service of Meadows , I sought out a new talk-master  I left the management of the remainder of the two and twenty pence to Lucia , and began my search .
I at length made myself known to one , little celebrated , but very busy , and was directly to begin a new family bible , by a certain Dean  and a society of clergymen - my new master had just dined , and as the cloth was removing , I suppose he saw me look somewhat wishingly .
He was very much addicted to wit , and thus facetiously began to interrogate .


`` What , I warrant me now , you eat as well as I - that is , begging your pardon , you would if you could !
ten to one but you drink too - eh ?
what a pity it is you scribere-cum-dasho gentry should be pestered with those plaguy passions , and hankerings after meat , drink and cloathing .
Zounds !
if I was an author - I would live like the * camel on my own idearers .
Oh d - m - e you  you a 'n' t half an author yet - well , come , since thee hast such curses upon thee , thee canst not help 'em - so , here , Susan , Susan , ( he went to the door of the kitchen stairs ) bring up the beef bones , here 's one of my authors a hungry , as usual - bring up also Susan , the suety pudding that was too little boiled a sunday , and the broth that your mistress said tasted of the copper , and all the bits of broken bread that you can find , and make haste .
Damme master author , I am better than a father to you , even before you have written a single syllable .


Better than a mother Sir , said I , you assuredly are  and then the tears  sprang into my foolish eyes , as I compared the delicate dinner that I supposed she then might be eating , to the bare bones , stale pudding , coppery broth , and broken bread , that Susan was now going to place before me .
However , as I was never quite so hungry since I was born , and as I knew my ever dear Lucia had sufficient for a frugal meal , I never eat a more hearty meal , or blessed heaven with more sincerity , that a meal ( though coarse ) was bestowed at all .


When Mr. Reynolds had finished the last sentence , Charlotte , the bailiff 's servant brought in the supper , and his history was suspended .
You  must therefore suspend your curiosity , till I can recollect the remainder of this most interesting narrative .


Mean while I am your 's CHARLES .


WHEN supper was over , and I had persuaded Mr. Reynolds to drink a glass of wine , he proceeded in this manner .


 In the midst of this literary labour and indigence , a relation of Lucia 's died , and bequeathed her the sum of two hundred pounds .
This was a delicious windfall , and I received it in bank bills a month after the persons decease : violent , and immediate transitions however , are undesirable and dangerous : the leap , from poverty to plenty is truly alarming , and many a man 's head turns giddy in making it .
Such was the present case .
I had no sooner got this precious treasure in my hands , than I gave a loose to imagination .
As it was Lucia 's money , I could not bear the idea of using it for my purposes .
I considered the poor hut in which that excellent creature resided , as unworthy  such an inhabitant , and therefore , immediately , and unknown to her , I took two little neat apartments , and furnished them to - what I knew to be her taste - I reflected upon the forlorn state of her wardrobe , and I repaired it by silks , laces , linens , c. to the amount of almost one of the hundred pounds - with these purchases , which I made from time to time in the course of the first week , I , at a proper period , made Lucia acquainted , and the dear creature Sir was almost ready to faint at the tidings .
She saw the conjugal delicacy and disinterestedness of my intentions , but she saw also the imprudence of laying out all our little property , in finery , that was wholly inconsistent  with our embarrassed state , and our future expectation .
Luckily , however , my furniture was second hand , and I had eighteen guineas still in my possession : we therefore agreed to manage this with the utmost frugality , till I could supply myself by writing some work , that , by taking time and pains with it , might be likely to establish my reputation as an author  after which , according to the trite expression , a man may lie a bed .
In pursuance of these oeconomical resolutions , I had fixed upon my subject , sketched out the plan of my design , entered upon the introductory parts , and began to kindle in the progress  when , lo !
I had not , with all my foresight , provided against  certain demands which various trades-people had on their books against me , for former necessaries .


One evening , after I had laid aside the pen , in order to enjoy the sweets of a conversation never tedious , and always tender  just as Lucia began to entertain me with a favourite song , a man came into our apartment and presented a bill for thirty-seven pounds , which had been owing him , and collecting to that size , for upwards of two years .
Startled as I was , I hardly knew , how to stammer forth an apology , and the creditor perceiving my confusion took it as a token of my distress , and was therefore resolved to have his money on the spot .
I equivocated .
 He left me abruptly , and , with the authority of a creditor , slapt to my dining-room door with a shew of indignation .
Our song , and all our harmony , you may be sure , was now broken , and we were left to many sorrowful reflections .


Our affection , however Sir , was of so delicate a nature , that all the ardours of romance were realized in my conduct , and even pastoral sentiments scarce did justice , to the tenderness of my passion .


Nature had formed her for eminence , and such was her mind , that she bore with me the burden of anxiety , and doubled the sense of better  fortune , at the time that she shared it .
But the great charm which endeared and distinguished her , was , that fervid fortitude , that gave her strength ( even after the bed was torn from under her ) to go through the most piercing inconvenience , and the hardest trials .
The insults I sustained however , were too much for her , and she grew quite melancholy , and would sometimes pass whole days without being able to utter a word - at last the hour approached when all the miseries of my existence were to be collected to a point - when fortune , piqued at my former defiance of her , by one decisive blow - the moment at last came - which - which - you know the rest , Sir - spare -  spare - oh spare me the repetition - Lucia is in her grave - excuse - excuse me -


Mr. Reynolds , my dear Charlotte , broke off abruptly - so must Charles .


P. S. My tears will give me leave , in pity to you , to inform you , that I this very day am to have Mr. Reynolds 's company at dinner , which may serve to shew that he is no longer in a house of confinement .
Adieu .


HOW truly do I pity the unforfortunate Reynolds !
- how  much am I obliged to Charles for the narrative - but how infinitely do I honour him for the sentiment and intelligence of the postscript - and so you have restored the prisoner , to freedom - what a fate was his Lucia 's - ah Charles , how many tears did I sacrifice to her death-bed letter - merciless creditors - what a woman - what a wife did ye destroy !
how will Templeton rejoice - how will the good Melbank , who is arrived , congratulate Charles on the service he has rendered such a character as Mr. Reynolds !
- in a jail , only for twenty-five pounds !
- a man of his brilliance - good God !
- but he is now at large , and through my Charles 's means - oh my friend , bring us all together  - what have I said ?
- no Charles - no - adieu to visits - fatal indulgencies !
- and yet - surely - when we think of Reynolds - when his harder , much harder fortunes are considered - we may be well satisfied - can not we cherish the most tender and innocent friendship , without once cherishing a guilty thought !
how unreasonable !
oh Charles , let us be above it - we will assuredly all have one happy meeting - I will put confidence in you , because I know I can now safely trust myself .
Farewell .
You shall soon hear again from


CHARLOTTE


 CHARLOTTE , hears of her good doctor 's return to town with great pleasure , particularly , as she wants both his advice and company on Wednesday , to meet Charles , and an agreeable stranger .


IT is impossible to resist your invitation .
I shall attend it - and  yet , is there not a little tincture of - of - of - pshaw , nonsense , into what idle stuff am I rambling !
you may depend upon me .


E. MELBANK .


MR. Reynolds will not be the only visitor you may expect on Wednesday : you will see another of your friends on that day , besides Dr. Melbank , the incomparable , and the unchangeable


CHARLES .


 I Find that the base-minded Mrs. P. refuses any longer to provide for the child , and that she who has pillaged all the father 's effects , and the son 's property , has the impudence to plead , poverty - what pangs Cleora are in store for that woman !
what a sickness is she preparing for her soul !
as to the child , since no intreaties can prevail with you to trust it into my arms , pray send for it directly into your 's  and as my affairs are now likely  to mend a little , I shall be able to accommodate both you and your little companion .


CHARLES .


NOW Sir , indeed , my misery is compleated - I have had another interview with Charlotte , in the presence of Charles - a stranger was there - oh , Mr. Templeton , such a stranger : upon his coming into the  room , I was greatly struck with the resemblance of features which I shall never forget .
At dinner , Charles drank to his health , under the name of Mr. Reynolds - I no sooner heard the sound , than my heart ceased to beat - I felt a mixture of inexpressible misery , and fell back in my chair .
They officiously recovered me to greater misery - whom do you think sat opposite to me , Sir ?
- the only man in the world that I had injured - the nephew of that very Mr. Reynolds , who was the father of my Maria , and who , but for some petty offence - some partial misrepresentations , was to have heired the fortunes that were given to me .
Reynolds , Sir , said I - are those features ,  the exact image of Mr. Stokes , the property of Mr. Reynolds - of the very person who is now before me ?
Mr. Stokes , Sir , replied he , was my uncle , the brother of my mother - but I was , when very young , most falsely painted to him , and never saw him afterwards : he had a daughter then at a boarding school .


He had so , Sir , said I , almost sobbing , and that daughter 's name was -


Maria Stokes , said he -


And that Maria Stokes , rejoined I , was my wife - and she is -


Where said Mr. Reynolds ?


 With the God that made her - but is it possible , resumed I , that you should be this very Mr. Reynolds , - where have you been : by what means have you eluded my most industrious enquiries - I have been buried , Sir , he returned , amongst the booksellers - I have been condemned under fifty names , to conceal from the gripe of the creditor a wretched body not worth the fatigue of a single search - I have never shewn my face - or applied by letters to those who basely deserted me - I have hid myself in the thickness of a thousand disguises - and , in short Sir , my kind benefactor who sits next to me will explain the rest .


 Upon this Mr. Templeton , Charles withdrew a moment with Charlotte , and on their return , put a packet of letters into my hand , containing - what do you think Sir ?
- nothing less than the history of Mr. Reynold 's .
- I have borrowed these letters , Sir , and now send them in franks for your reading - look into them Sir with an eye of compassion .
-


When I had finished this perusal of them , I made use of the little strength I had left , to fall upon my knee - I took Mr. Reynolds 's hand  and so Sir , said I - I have at last found out the unhappy gentleman , whose natural expectations I have despoiled - why did you not leave  some clue to your residence , before the death of your uncle , - I was only a servant in his family - I did not even know , at that time , that he had a nephew in being - I - I - in a word Sir , as this lady has furnished me with your narrative - she will be so kind to give you a sketch of mine - in the mean while let me retire into another room - I can not support it any longer without relief .


I went Mr. Templeton , into a small book closet - flung myself on a sopha which was there , and burst into tears .


I must make a pause -


 CHARLES and Charlotte , after an hour 's absence , ( in which I will not attempt to describe what I felt ) came to me : each of them took a hand , and led me into the apartment again - Mr. Reynolds advanced and began to address me .


`` We have both had our misfortunes , Sir , said he - but I can see no trace of guilt in your conduct .
As to my uncle , I had long buried my  expectations of receiving any benefit from him , nor did I ever see him but five times in my life : my mother turned his heart and his passions against me  and I am now rejoiced to hear she has not been the better or the richer upon that account .
My indulging friend Charles has , since you were out of the room , trusted to me a paper ( sent him by this lady ) which relates all I could desire to know - nay more than I could desire - for I find my cousin is dead - you have lost your wife - Alas !
alas !
Sir and I - I have lost mine . ''


He wept , Mr. Templeton , and I had but too many reasons to sympathize .


 The delicacy of Charles and Charlotte during this surprizing interview is not to be imagined , their passion seemed to be now quite extinguished , and they attended only to us .


I had a thousand things to say , and yet I was obliged to go away , with a full heart , without saying any thing to the purpose .


I am , Your unhappy E. MELBANK .


 WHAT a scene - what a party was yesterday 's !
I have not heard from either Dr. Melbank , or Mr. Reynolds .
Consider my impatience , and all that you know , communicate to


CHARLOTTE .


P. S. Your care of my sister was noble , I receive her at your hands with many tender thanks .


 PRAY , my dear Charles , forward the inclosed to Mr. Reynolds , and let illness excuse my making this letter to you so abrupt .


E. MELBANK .


 ( The Inclosed . )
To Mr. REYNOLDS .


I Dreamed last night that I was the murderer of your wife - I saw her in my visions - the figure of your cousin too , arose close by the side of her , to reproach me .
- I have certainly been the unknown instrument of mischief to many - pray come to me that I may quiet my conscience - to have been even the innocenct cause of anguish , is too much for a delicate heart - how intricate are the mazes of providence - I charge you to come .


E. MELBANK .


 I Have only time to fold up Dr. Melbank 's note , and to scribble a hasty copy of his letter to Mr. Reynolds - that gentleman and I are this moment going to the house of that noble character .


Adieu , CHARLES .


 MADAM ,


I Have at length brought myself to be really sorry , you and Charles , can not be properly re-united .
As I now see that the circumstances which happened prior to , and since our separation , would render a re-union intolerably imperfect  and as you are evidently the woman of his choice , I am willing to enter into articles of mutual release , and try how far it is possible for your return to Charles to  be put upon a moral footing - I thank you madam , for the papers that have past between you , giving an account of your whole intercourse .
I am at least glad to see that Charles does not dwell on the vile report that was promulgated against my reputation .


In regard to any difference in our tempers , and disagreement in other respects , we have both smarted for them sufficiently , without dragging into the account the most barbarous report that ever was invented to destroy the fame of a woman .
I confess to you the impossibility , ( as things have fallen out ) of my ever being happy with Charles - whatever he may think - I should now scorn  as much the advances to so unprofitable a reconciliation as himself - we were never comfortable - at least we were never fond after the first month - I was dupe enough to listen to a love-tale made by a man upon the bachelor 's ramble , under a fictitious name - every step we both took was romantic  and had I not been as much besotted with a wild , mad-headed scheme as himself , I might have seen prudence , without going to * Scotland for repentance .
But the deed is done , and I wish with all my heart it were undone .
How can you madam , believe Charles a constant man ?
- can it be possible he should  have such a principle in his nature ?
ingenuity - wit - address - elegance I am ready to grant him - but fidelity to any one favourite , whether wife or not , is surely out of the list of things practicable .
You say , he will , after he has come to some terms with his creditors , contribute to my genteeler support .
He writes me word he will also assist me in a proper provision for the child .
-


If he fulfills these promises , heaven knows , I never desire a closer intercourse with him , and I have resolved in my mind to mark this as the last letter he shall ever see , or Charlotte ever receive on the subject : for , to tell you the truth I do not  see that I have divided you from him , to any good purpose .
I do not pray for his death , or my own , but never did a matrimonial prisoner pray oftner , or more earnestly for liberty , and an honourable escape from bondage .


I am Madam ,


In conclusion of our correspondence , your humble servant , CLEORA .


P. S. I hear that Charles 's , mother frets and laughs , alternately , at the receipt of his retaliating letter .
She says she will , persecute him for it without mercy .
I should hope she  would not put her threats in execution , but I have friendship enough for his safety , to beg you will put him upon his guard .


ALAS Charlotte , I have been witness to another scene more tender , even than the first : Reynolds and Melbank were an hour together , without the intrusions of a third person  and when I joined  them , they were tenderly locked in embraces : the poor doctor is exceedingly ill , and we both sat by his bed-side all night .
About twelve o'clock this morning he fell into a short slumber , and Reynolds went to bed .
I begin , indeed , now Charlotte , to consider our pangs of separation as trifling , in opposition to what I have lately heard , and lately seen .
Dr. M - mentioned you several times in the course of the night with the greatest marks of respect - kissed the picture of the deceased Maria - wept again over the fate of Lucia - pitied Charles - and bathed the hands of Mr. Reynolds in tears .
- I shall return to him again , as soon as I have put a wafer under  this , for the satisfaction of the sympathizing Charlotte .


CHARLES .


I Am held up in my bed - and I have past the night in a fever - do not think me superstitious if I say - if I prophecy - that this will be the last time you will receive a letter from me .
Poor Reynolds 's situation teras me one way , and my affection  for Charlotte another - I love her yet Sir - yes Mr. Templeton , guilty as I know myself - God knows I love her yet - I have the killing circumstances too , of having Charles constantly before me , and exerting himself more indefatigably than my nurse - his hand is often in mine - he smoothes my bed-cloaths - he offers me medicines - he keeps a death-like silence in the room - he most tenderly avoids speaking of Charlotte - I am afraid he still suspects my lurking passion .
What can possibly have made me thus weak !
I am a child - I am a child Mr. Templeton - may God bless you .


E. MELBANK .


 THE doctor is quite delirious , Charlotte - he cries out by fits - and enquires for Mr. Reynolds - Mr. Reynolds appears , and he bids him avoid his presence .
Before his fever had reduced him to this state , he sat up in his night gown , and ordered the lawyer to come to his bed-side - he waved us out of the room smilingly - the servants were called as witnesses - a will was made - we  re-entered , and he placed us both on different sides of his bed .
`` I am afraid , dear friends , said he , I have suffered from visiting lately a poor woman in the Fleet prison - I have reason to think the fever she has since idied of is of the contagious kind - [ ... ] ll as I was , I visited her on the very evening after I had found the long lost Mr. Reynolds - my spirits were then very bad .
- ''


`` I desire you will take the bare possibility of it for granted - I must not suffer you to enter my chamber again my friends , till I am better - when I am certain as to the nature of my disorder , you shall be again with joy admitted : till then - farewell - farewell . ''


 The doctor pressed our hands very softly - desired us to wash the fingers in hungary water - and then threw the sheet over his face .
Touched at the solemnly affecting manner , in which he spoke , Reynolds and I withdrew , and have not dared to enter against his express inhibitions since .


CHARLES .


SIR ,


MY poor dear master orders me to tell you that his physician has pronounced his disorder to be  catching , and requests you will on no account come near the house , and that you will not suffer Mr. Reynolds to leave London .


Your humble servant , J. SPEDMAN .


AFFECTION has I fear hurried me into danger - I past the best part of the last night in the bed-chamber of Dr. Melbank - no fear of his discovering me - he knows no one .


 His situation can not possibly be described - still does he lie , Charlotte , in the struggles of death - his lips silent his eye closed - and the sigh breaking laboriously from his bosom - I kissed his hand - I could not help it Charlotte - it was the hand that saved me from destruction .
- He loves Charlotte too - some veneration is due to him for that .
-


A loose paper lay on his pillow - I have pillaged it - and the theft has been repaid by an almost brokn heart .


Read it Charlotte - what a character is this to the last .
Pray assiduously for his recovery .
-


CHARLES .


 The Paper .
To CHARLES - CHARLOTTE , and Mr. REYNOLDS .


LET those to whom this loose sheet , written at different snatches , is addressed , religiously observe the sentiments it contains .


Be the friendship of Charles and Charlotte ever inviolate - when they die , it is desired they will order themselves to be placed in my family vault at - let Mr. Reynolds write a line of forgiveness , on my tomb-stone : it will soothe me -  - Mr. Templeton is requested to attend my funeral - Charlotte is pathetically invited to put on mourning .
-


Alas , alas - where am I wandering ?
- foolish - foolish Melbank - I have quite lost myself - let me then , while sense is returning , use the precious interval to desire my will may be opened , and the articles performed the day after my death .
-


E. MELBANK .


 DEEPLY as I am affected for the amiable Dr. Melbank , I can not excuse your rashness in going to him , after interdiction - and running the hazard of losing another valuable life .
Take some advice upon the matter , I conjure you , and let me know by constant messages , how the good doctor , and my best friend go on .
Surely - surely such esteemed characters , will be yet restored , in pity to their admirers , and for the service of mankind .


CHARLOTTE .


 OUR best friend is no more .
I have power only to write the sentence , and wrap up into a cover the letter that brought the news .
How will the tears stream from your dear eyes at the tidings .


CHARLES .


 ( The Inclosed . )
JAMES SPEDMAN to CHARLES .


SIR ,


MY excellent master is amongst the angels : he departed this life in the forest miseries of a putrid fever , this morning a little after day break .
He was sensible to every thing , and knew every body about him , about two hours before he left the world .
The names of Charles , Mr. Reynolds , and one or two more , were several times repeated : he clasped his hands together , and employed his last breath in blessing you  all .
After this he turned upon his pillow , and ( though he exhibited the greatest signs of pain ) remained speechless till he expired .


I was with him all the time - I am not afraid of catching any bad sickness in performing my duty to the best man , and the best master that ever lived - God Almighty knows best , in such cases what to do : but I am sure he could not be pleased if I like the rest of the servants , had neglected so worthy a gentleman in such a situation  and I shall ever honour you Sir , for the courage your friendship gave you to come and look at the good doctor , when other people run away from him .
I have  been nineteen years his servant , Sir , on and off , and he has many times saved my life - I certainly shall not now leave him , while he is upon the earth  and yet the physician says he must be put into the ground directly .


I am Sir , your most humble servant , JAMES SPEDMAN .


 THE large packet of letters that I send you , will at once apologize and account for my long silence .
Neither , Charlotte , Mr. Reynolds , or your friend , have of late been able to take up the pen .
It was this day month , that the body of our most worthy benefactor was committed to the earth - I do most truly assure you , that the affluence in which his unequalled generosity has left me , by no means compensate  the pleasure I had in his society , and the satisfaction I received from his life .


He has divided the bulk of his fortunes amongst three persons , my Templeton , who certainly could form no possible expectation of his bounty .
Here follows a faithful extract from his will .


- `` Item , To my beloved friend Charles , I bequeath my dwelling-house in St. James 's - street , with all its furniture , plate , c. c. ''


`` Item , I bequeath to Charlotte , in testimony of my esteem for her virtue , and reverence for her misfortunes ,  the sum of two thousand five hundred pounds , to be paid immediately on my decease , or as soon afterwards as the said sum can be conveniently drawn from the funds , where lie certain monies mentioned in other parts of this my last testiment . ''


`` Item , I give and bequeath , to my servant James Spedman one hundred pounds sterling . ''


`` Item , To Charles , Esq I bequeath one thousand pounds , for the use of Cleora , to be paid out of my cash , now lying , and being in the funds . ''


 `` Item , I bequeath to the said Charles , Esq my Sussex estate , subjected to the yearly rent of two hun-pounds , to be paid into the hands of J. Reynolds , Esq which is a debt due to the said J. Reynolds , Esq for many years . ''


`` Item , To the aforesaid J. Reynolds , Esq in consideration of interest on the said debt , my houses , lands , and properties , whatsoever , and wheresoever , lying and being in the island of Jamaica . ''


`` Item , I bequeath to Charlotte all my pictures in my library , with all my books , paintings , and the miniature of my dear wife Maria ,  hanging over the library chimney piece . ''


`` Item , I charge the said Sussex estate , given to Charles , Esq with the annual deduction of one hundred pounds , to be paid to Charlotte during her natural life , on every eighteenth day of August , being the anniversary of that lady 's birth . ''


`` Item , I give and bequeath to H. Templeton , Esq one hundred guineas for a mourning ring , and any other testimonies of friendship that he may choose to employ it in . ''


`` Item , I give and bequeath , to Charlotte , the watch , and some  trinkets lying in a little gold box in my front parlour drawers , also my old and favourite dog Pompey , with an annuity of five pounds during his natural life , to be paid out of the Sussex estate , over and above the annuity of one hundred pounds . ''


Can any words , oh my dear Templeton , be adequate to such circumstances - and yet there is not a single person concerned who would not rather enjoy the dear company of the testator , than the splendid evidences of his tenderness and attention .


And then to die , as he did , in the meridian of life - in a situation so pathetic , at a time so delicately critical !
 Blessed , for ever blessed be his memory upon earth - Rich and abundant be his rewards in Heaven .
Never did I see such genuine , unaffected grief and gratitude that mix themselves in the sympathy of Charlotte and Mr. Reynolds .
-


Cleora 's letter also upon the subject , does her honour .
-


Reynolds and I , live at present in the good doctor 's house  and we are so often reminded of his image , and his goodness , in every thing about us , that it is not in the power of gold to charm our grief -


 That I have still a sigh for Charlotte , is but too certain , and I would most willingly reject all that I am now worth , and , after all deductions , that will , I find , be a considerable fortune - Yes , Templeton , I would yield up every shilling - be again involved - again a prisoner - again liable to all the insults of an unfortunate man - and depend for the remainder of my days upon the precarious efforts of my own hands - had I this minute the privilege of of leading her by the hand to the foot of the altar -


I conjure you to come to town , and let us , in the first place do justice to  our benefactor , by erecting to his memory a suitable monument  and let us inscribe on it such sentiments , as express our grief and our gratitude in the most lively manner .


CHARLES .


FINIS .
Notes * .
Meaning , very likely the Cameleon .
* .
Charles and Cleora were married in that Kingdom

