
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .


` Ficta , voluptatis caus , , sint proxima veris . '
By the EDITOR of CHRYSAL .


IN TWO VOLUMES .
VOLUME I .


LONDON : Printed for T. BECKET , Corner of the Adelphi , in the Strand .
MDCCLXXIV .


TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD CAMBDEN .


 My LORD ,


I Must not make any Apology for claiming your Lordship 's Patronage for the following Work .
It is a Claim of Right .
The Spirit of it is your own .
I caught it by long and close Attention to your Lordship  and now that it is let loose into the World ,  it naturally flies back to its Parent for Protection .
If I have been so happy as to make the Body worthy of such a Spirit , that is all the Merit I pretend to .


I am , with Attachment and Respect , My LORD , Your Lordship 's most humble and most obedient Servant , CHARLES JOHNSTON .


- May 17 , 1774 .
PREFACE .


 IN this enlightened age , when men judge intuitively of all things , it may not be improper to say a few words concerning the following work , if only to save critical sagacity from the misfortune of being led astray by the title .


In the History of the Prince of Betlis , there is not one soft scene of love , one sentiment of loose desire .
Outrageous Virtue is never gratified with anecdotes of private Scandal  nor Licentiousness flattered with the sacred name of Liberty .


 It must not , though , be concluded from hence , that Arsaces is a meer moralist , or held up as a pattern of perfection , a monster which Nature never formed .
He is drawn as he was , with all his faults upon his head , subject to the power , but not the slave of Passion  and speaks with freedom the sentiments suggested by the occasion , whether gay or grave , of reprehension or applause .


To wipe off the false colourings of Prejudice , and shew Truth in her native purity , is the writer 's aim .
How he has succeeded , is not for him to say .
There is , at least , some merit in the attempt , and upon that he humbly rests his fate .


 Amid the variety of incidents , with which our hero 's life was filled , the learned reader may probably not be displeased to find some curious points of history brought to light , which have too long lain in undeserved obscurity : Nor will he be offended at the writer 's not having paid more minute attention to the manners of the times and countries , in which the various scenes of his work are laid .
He has endeavoured to draw the universal manners of Nature , which suit all climes and ages .
Greater particularity would have been only pedantry .


1.1 .
SECTION I .


AS Temugin was riding through his army , on the morning after his victory over Mohammed had added the mighty empire of Khouaresm to his boundless conquests , he observed among the captives of the war , a youth just sinking under a double weight of chains , while the dignity of conscious virtue shone through his distress , and shewed a soul superior to misfortune .


 Temugin was struck with the sight  and calling to the leader of the band , which guarded the captives , enquired who that youth was , and how he had merited such severity .


` Lord of the Earth , ' answered the soldier , ` this slave deserveth every cruelty which can be inflicted on him .
He it was , who yester evening slew the valiant Togrul  and by his obstinate resistance , for some time delayed the victory , which crowned your arms . '


` Say rather , ' returned the captive , with a look and accent of indignant contempt , ` that I supported faithfully the cause in which I fought  and disdaining life , without its greatest blessing , liberty , strove , though alas !
in vain , to lose both honourably together . '


The manner in which the captive spoke these words , heightened the favourable impression which his appearance had before  made upon the heart of Temugin .
` Take off his chains , ' said he , ` and lead him to my tent : I will examine him more particularly , when I shall be at better leisure . '


The soldier instantly obeyed  and the captive , prostrating himself before the emperor , expressed his gratitude for a favour , which darted a ray of hope through the gloom of his present situation .


Other cares prevented Temugin from thinking more of this adventure for the remainder of that day  but when he retired in the evening to rest , the idea of the captive recurred to his mind , and took such strong possession of it , as to forbid every approach of sleep .
Calling therefore one of the eunuchs , who watched at the entrance of his tent , he commanded him to order his attendance .


As soon as the captive entered , ' I have sent for thee , ' said the emperor , ` to  learn the story of thy life .
What is thy country , thy lineage , and thy name ?
And by what actions hast thou supported the sentiments , which I have heard thee utter with such energy ?
Arise !
speak the words of truth , and expect a candid hearing . '


` Conqueror of the World , ' answered the captive , as he arose from the emperor 's feet , ` the incidents of a life of misfortune will afford but little entertainment , to one who is raised above the reach of such himself  as they can not interest a sympathetic regard . '


` No state , ' interrupted the emperor , ` is exempt from the common lot of humanity : nor is he capable of enjoying happiness himself , who is insensible to the sufferings of another . '


The captive replied not  but seating himself on the ground , at the foot of the emperor 's couch , began in these words .


1.2 .
SECTION II .


 MY name is Selim .
I come from the Valley of Amoim , in Arabia the Happy  where the wisdom and virtues of Abudah , my father , procured him , in a private station , a respect more sincere , than that which is usually paid to wealth and power .
Much had he read , and thought still more .
He had also travelled through many nations  and by a comparison of their manners , dispelled the prejudices which too often spread a cloud over a contracted sphere .


But he was stopped in his pursuit of knowledge , by the nearer duties of domestic life .
The cultivation of his mind had refined , not extinguished the passions of nature .
He viewed in a light of just contempt , the mistaken , imperfect happiness of celibacy  and in obedience to the first purpose of his Creation , took a wife into his bosom .


 Heaven seemed at first to smile upon his marriage-bed  but the blossoms of his hope were soon blasted  the hour which gave him a son , depriving him of a wife .


Severely as he felt this loss , he sunk not under it .
Reason succeeded the first emotions of nature  and his piety trembled at the apprehension of offending heaven , by repining at its irresistible decrees .
- Pardon , gracious lord , this mention of a father , to whom life is my least obligation .
It is a necessary introduction to the story of my misfortunes .
It is a tribute to his memory , which Nature will obtrude through all restraint .


` Disgrace not reason , ' answered Temugin , ` by making an excuse for virtue .
Duty to a father , as it is the foundation , so also is it the best assurance of loyalty to a sovereign .
A good son can not be a bad subject .
- Proceed . '


 ` The love , ' resumed the captive , wiping away the pious tear which trickled down his cheek , ` which Abudah had felt for his wife , was transferred to her wretched orphan , and doubled the force of paternal affection .
As soon as he had paid the last debt of humanity to her beloved remains , he laid me in his bosom , and turned his steps home to his native land , where his tenderness well supplied the loss I had sustained . '


His first care was to lay a foundation for that health , which is necessary for the enjoyment of life , and the performance of all its duties .
He taught me to feel no wants but those of nature , whose inevitable imbecilities were not aggravated by injudicious fondness .
Hunger sweetened the most simple fare  and exercise made me find refreshment in sleep , which was never allured by luxury , nor indulged to enervating excess  while my body , gradually inured to the vicissitudes of the seasons , required not  the voluptuous incumbrance of cloathing to screen it from the severest inclemencies of weather .
My food was vegetables .
I drank of the brook : and I wore no cloaths but barely what the laws of decency demanded .


Yet intent as he was on establishing my health , his care was not confined to that alone .
As soon as the first dawn of reason began to enlighten my mind , he directed my thoughts to such objects , as necessarily led to wisdom and virtue .
He imprinted upon my soul a just sense of the obedience which I owed to the Author of my being , by explaining to me my dependance on him .
He taught me to read the sacred proofs of his wisdom , his goodness , and his power , in the tremendous volume of his works .
The stars of heaven shewed me the glory of their Maker .
The sun by day , and the moon by night bore witness to his power .
My soul was humbled before the Lord of the Universe , and adored  the goodness which incessantly supports the creatures of his hand .


` As the life of man is designed for action , ' he would say , ` all knowledge which leadeth not to the practice of virtue , is but vanity . '
- While my mind therefore was expanded by these sublime speculations , he explained to me the principles and reason of every duty of social and civil life  proving that obedience , which ariseth not from conviction of the justice and necessary obligation of a law , has no more real merit , than the habitual servility of a brute animal .


He then unfolded to me the complicated relations in which man stands to man , both as an individual , and as a member of a community  and from them deduced all the various duties of either state .
` The highest degree of perfection , ' would he frequently say , ` to which the human nature can arise ,  consisteth in the imitation of the divine , which is possible only in benevolence  and constitutes the essence of all the moral , social , and civil virtues , however varied in their appearances , in the various circumstances and connections of life , from the peasant in the field , to the prince upon his throne . '


The example of his actions enforced the precepts of his wisdom , and led me insensibly to practise the virtues he inculcated , as rising years afforded ability .
I suffered hunger , to feed the hungry  the feeble and aged found a support in the strength of my youth  and I rushed into danger to rescue the distressed .


Nor were his instructions limited to the narrow sphere of our private station .
As the powers of my mind became capable of more extended exertion , he raised my view to higher scenes .
He traced government to its origin in the general welfare and happiness of mankind ,  the source , from which ultimately and equally flow the different , but reciprocal duties of subjection and command  and reconciled their apparent oppositions , on the unerring principles of reason .


The avidity with which he saw my soul imbibe the instruction of his words , made him happy .
` Power , my son , ' he would say , the tear of paternal tenderness and pride glissening in his eye , ` was originally conferred as a reward of superior merit and virtue  and still the hand of heaven doth often most unexpectedly raise from the cottage to the throne , the man who is found worthy to govern .
It is a duty , therefore , to qualify ourselves to fill properly whatever station is appointed for us . '


In the pleasing illusion of these fond reflections , he unfolded to me the ordinances of peace , he taught me the arts , and inured me to the toils of war .
` That  general happiness , he said , which was the cause , and should be the invariable aim of sovereign power , can be enjoyed only in the shade of public tranquillity , the cultivation of which therefore , as it is the first duty , so is it the true glory of a prince .
But then , as the follies and vices of mankind make it impossible always to maintain that most desirable state , it is also indispensibly necessary for him to be able to repel injustice , and assert his rights by war  of which however , as these are the only just motives , so when they are accomplished , he should never let revenge , avarice , or a passion for false glory , inflamed by the deceitful smiles of success , urge him to pursue it farther .
He should never forget that his foes are his fellow-creatures  that his very victories are purchased with the inevitable miseries of his own subjects . '
- But whither do I fondly run ?
Why should I repeat the maxims of an humble minded recluse to the Conqueror of the world ?


 ` Proceed , ' answered the emperor , ' I am attentive to thy words .
The sentiments of thy father were suited to his station .
Had he been a sovereign he would have thought otherwise . '


1.3 .
SECTION III .


MY mind had followed the words of my father , continued the captive , without difficulty or doubt , while he explained the duties of life upon the principles of reason , and truth  but when he descended from them to the practice of mankind , when he came to speak of the causes , and consequences of war , the scene was changed .
I lost the awe of divine justice , which had led me hitherto  and wandered in the perplexing labyrinth of human life .
I saw nothing but contradictions in the ways of man .
All professed to seek happiness , but wilfully turned away from the paths , which led directly to it .
All professed virtue , but practised vice .


 False shame , ( should I not rather call it pride ! )
would not permit me to disclose the difficulties in which I was entangled , to my father .
I thought I could struggle through them , by the strength of my own mind , without betraying my weakness , by having recourse to his assistance .
A presumption , justly punished by all the miseries I have suffered since .


Destitute thus of the guide , who had always led my steps in safety , I attempted in vain to grope my way , through the darkness , with which I was enveloped on every side .
I attempted to trace consequences to their causes  but the attempt still left me in greater uncertainty .
I saw vice triumphant !
I saw virtue depressed !
I was utterly at a loss to know , whence this could proceed .
If from good , why was the contrary prescribed ?
If from evil , why was it permitted ?
My mind was perplexed with many doubts .
I attempted to  measure the ways of heaven with the line of human reason , but it was too short  and the more I thought of the subject , I was only perplexed the more  in so much , that I was at sometimes almost tempted to doubt , whether virtue and vice differ'd more than in name !
Whether heaven really interfered in the government of the world , or left it merely to chance .


As I sat one evening , on the bank of the rivulet , which runs through the vale of Amoim , wrapt in these speculations , my senses were suddenly overwhelmed with sleep , and I saw , as in a vision , a Being , such as the celestial spirits , who watch over the actions of mankind , are represented to be , standing beside me .


Regarding me for some time , with a look of reprehension softened by pity , ` Son of Abudah , ' methought he said , in a voice which thrilled my soul , ` thy unhappiness is beheld with compassion .
I  come to put a stop to researches , which if pursued too far , would over-turn reason .
Thy knowledge is only speculative .
Thou seest man , but as in a mirrour  and dost thou attempt to investigate all the mysteries of his nature !
Vain presumption !
First look into real life  nor pretend to judge of the substance from the shadow . '
- Saying this he vanished from my sight  and at that instant I awoke .


It was some moments before I recovered from the extatick awe , with which this vision struck me .
Starting up at length , and continuing the illusion of imagination , I looked eagerly around for my kind instructor  and could hardly believe that I had seen him only in a dream .


Nor did the discovery put an end to that illusion .
I considered the words of my father , ` that heaven often opens its will in the visions of sleep , when the  soul , freed from the clogs of sense , is more capable of entering into intercourse with the spiritual beings , which continually surround us , though imperceptible to corporeal sight . '
- And I looked upon the reverential awe , with which I had been over-powered , as an incontestible proof , that the being , I had seen , was my better angel , sent to me with a command from heaven , to which it was my duty to pay implicite , and instant obedience .


But this obedience was attended with difficulties of the weightiest nature .
Against the will of my father , I was sensible that it would be impious to begin , in vain to expect success in any undertaking : And the anxiety he always shewed , if the ardour of the chace , or any other accident detained me out of his sight , only a few minutes longer than he expected , left me no room for hope , that he would consent to my plunging thus alone , into  the difficulties and dangers of the world .


In a cooler moment , this reflection would have been sufficient to deter me from any attempt : but my soul was now on fire  and inclination , co-operating with the power of imagination , proved too strong for reason .
I thought I only preferred the superior duty , expressly commanded by heaven , when I resolved to leave my father 's house , that very night  and launch into the boundless ocean of life , without giving him any notice of my design  an expedient , by which I flattered myself , that by avoiding an express inhibition , I evaded the crime of direct disobedience , never remembering the maxims invariably inculcated by him , ` that candour is of the essence of every virtue  ' and that ` no good , in the end proposed , can justify any evil in the means made use of to attain it . '


 Vain as this evasion was , it silenced all my scruples  and I attended the call of my father to our evening 's repast , with a serenity in my looks , which my heart was far from feeling .


But my soul soon shrunk back from such deceit , and I dared not to meet his eye , or return with equal warmth the kiss of love , with which he sealed his benediction , when he dismissed me , as he fondly hoped , to rest .
Inauspicious omen !
Alas , too strictly fulfilled by the unhappy event .
Oh !
where was then my guardian angel ?
Why had not my soul some presage , that this kiss would be the last , with which I should ever be blessed by him !
That thought would have opened my eyes  and brought me back to reason , and to virtue .
-


A flood of tears here choaked the utterance of Selim .
He hung down his head  and sobbing aloud gave vent to  the grief , with which the recital of this unhappy event had over-charged his heart  while Temugin kindly sympathizing with him , interrupted not the pious offering of filial duty and affection .


1.4 .
SECTION IV .


NATURE at length being relieved by this indulgence , the captive thus continued .
` Having but few wants , I required little preparation for my intended expedition .
As soon as my father retired into his own tent to rest , I girded on the sabre , and mounting the horse , which he had provided for me to learn the exercises of war , departed without having so much as considered whither I should direct my steps . '


` But my infatuation was too strong to permit my attending to any thing , beside compleating my escape .
I therefore travelled forward during the whole night , without bestowing one thought on the  folly and danger of such an undetermined state  or stopping even for a moment , till the appearance of day reminded me of the duties of religion , when alighting from my horse , and sprinkling my face with an handful of sand , for I had no water to perform the ablution , I offered up the prayers of the morning . '
- ` Break not your narrative thus , by enumerating the performance of religious duties , ' interrupted Temugin  ` We will suppose them always regularly performed . '
The captive bowed his head in obedience , and proceeded .


The sacred awe which always accompanies acts of devotion , stilled for some moments the tumult in my mind , and turned my thoughts in upon myself .
I started at the first glimpse of my situation , which now began to open upon me .
I dared not to look back  and before me , all was darkness and dismay .


 I paused to consider how I should proceed  but before I could determine upon any thing , the power of determining for myself was taken from me .
A troop of Bedouins rushed from the covert of some trees , near to which I had stopped , and seized me as I lay prostrate on the earth .


All the horrors of my situation instantly arose to my view .
The more than brutal ignorance and barbarity of those lawless ravagers , of which I had heard too many melancholy instances , left me but little hope of favour at their hands .
However , in the instinctive impulse of self-preservation , I threw myself at the feet of their leader , and embracing his knees , conjured him to take compassion on my youth , and suffer me to return to an aged father , whose grey hairs the loss of his only son would otherwise bring with sorrow to the grave .


 But I prayed to the winds .
Instead of being moved by my intreaties , the ruffian spurned me from him with his foot  and nodding to his followers , they instantly bound my arms , and putting me on my horse , led me away with them .


What I now felt , at the thought of being thus torn , probably forever , from the arms of my father , suggested to me the anguish of his soul , on missing me that morning .
I saw , tho ' too late , my crime in its proper colours  I owned the justice of heaven , in my own fate  and only grieved for the unhappiness with which I had overwhelmed him .


But I was not suffered to indulge such reflections .
The rapidity , with which the ravagers hurried me along , kept my spirits in involuntary motion  and the novelty of their manners excited a curiosity , which in some degree diverted my attention from my own distress .


 On a division of the captives of the expedition , I fell to the lot of the leader of the troop , by whom I was appointed to the lowest offices in his squalid oeconomy .
But I repined not .
I remembered the words of the prophet , that ` the days of man are numbered  and the events of his life written on the table , which standeth before the throne of God , from the beginning of the world . '
- I therefore humbled myself before heaven  and submitted without murmuring to its decrees .


Nor did this resignation , to the divine will , pass without reward .
It was taken by my master for a willing acquiescence under his authority  and in a short time gained me his good opinion so far , that he set me over the other slaves of his household .


1.5 .
SECTION V .


 THE first use which I made of my new authority , was to lighten the yoke of bondage upon my fellow-captives .
They received sufficient sustenance  their labours were suited to their strength and capacities  and their souls were not wounded by unmerited insult or reproach .


The consequence soon justified this conduct .
The work of our master was performed to his satisfaction  and he slept in safety among slaves , who had no cause to wish him evil .


But I was far from enjoying such happiness as they seemed to feel at this change of their condition .
My soul , impressed with the deepest sense of piety and virtue , was shocked at such an absence of both , as degraded man below the level of the brutes which perish  and I trembled with fear , that the force  of example might infect my heart , and sink me down to their degenerated state .
Moral virtue and religion , my father had often and most earnestly inculcated to me , are so essentially connected , that the one can not exist without the other .
Of the truth of this maxim I had abundant proof in my present situation .


As the revelations of the divine will , vouchsafed as guides to reason in matters above the investigation of its own powers , were either utterly unknown , or at least so corrupted as to bear no resemblance to the sacred originals  so were the very rules of conduct , and mutual intercourse invariably imprinted by the hand of Nature on the human heart , for the most part effaced among them .
Their knowledge of a Deity was uncertain , and debased with notions contradictory to those principles of his essence , which open themselves to reason in its first efforts .
For beneficence or gratitude they had not even a name   and justice was no farther known or regarded by them , than as it served the convenience of preserving their respective property , and having that recourse to force among themselves by which all their disagreements with others were decided .


Though the horrors inseparable from slavery , were aggravated an hundred fold under such masters , I never lost hope  nor slackened my assiduity in the execution of the trust committed to me . '
I will do my duty , ' said I , whenever despair began to steal upon me , ` and depend upon the justice of Heaven . '
A resolution , which by keeping my thoughts employed , prevented them from brooding over my own unhappiness , and thereby enabled me to support its weight .


The effects of my management soon became too evident to remain unnoticed  though my master , who held it  beneath him to look so low , was the last to perceive the change .
Awakened at length from his inattention , he gazed around him in stupid amazement  and enquiring the cause of what he saw , opened his eyes and mouth into a broad stare , while I explained the reasons , and instanced the advantages of my conduct  then awkwardly relaxing his features into the first smile of complacency they had ever felt , expressed something like approbation .


Nor did he stop here .
He represented me in so favourable a light to the tribe , that looking upon me now as one of themselves , they admitted me to accompany them in their excursions for prey  an honour never before conferred upon a captive .


1.6 .
SECTION VI .


 THOUGH such a course of life was equally contrary to the principles instilled into me by my father , and to the disposition of my own heart , the hope of one day regaining my liberty , and returning to him , which it seemed to open to me , outweighed every other consideration , and strengthened my hand on several occasions in such a manner as gained the approbation of my new companions .


I had not been long in this state , when in one of our expeditions , we happened to fall in with a caravan , so numerous and well provided for defence , that it appeared madness in us to attack them .


But the prospect of rich plunder , over-balanced every thought of danger   and we fell upon them with the fury of wild beasts enraged by hunger , rather than like human creatures .


The event was such as the rashness of the attempt deserved  and we were repulsed , with the loss of more than half our number .


As I was not blinded by the same passions with the rest of our troop , I had presence of mind to effect our retreat , after they had all given up every hope of it  the importance of which service raised me so high in their opinion , that their leader being among the slain , they conferred his post upon me .


This seeming honour , only added anxiety to additional fatigue  for as they pay implicit obedience to the orders of their leader , during their excursions , the care of conducting which is thrown entirely upon him   so every failure of success is imputed to him as a crime , and exposes him to worse than brutal outrage .


But the fascination of command , made me blind to every objection  and I entered upon my new office with all the eagerness of inexperience , encouraging myself with this reflection , that at any rate it was better to rule than to serve such savages : and that I should have it in my power to direct their motions to the way most favourable to my escaping from them .


As I saw that disappointment of the plunder sat heavier upon the survivors than the loss of their fellows , I considered whether it might not still be possible to compass by stratagem , what we had failed of by force  and revolving in my mind various schemes , I at length hit upon one , which proved successful .


 For some days after our defeat , we hovered about the caravan , unable to bear the thought of quitting it , and giving up our hopes , though we could see no prospect of obtaining them .


Having advanced thus a considerable way into the desart , a strong wind arose one morning , just after the caravan had begun to march .
This incident instantly suggested to me , what I had hitherto wearied my thoughts in fruitless search of .


Drawing our people out in a single line , at some interval from each other , I led them above the caravan , in the wind  and galloping rapidly along , we raised a cloud of sand , which the wind poured down upon them in a torrent horrible to imagination .


As soon as I had reached the end of the caravan , in this manner , I turned off with the foremost of my followers ,  and taking a sufficient compass , to avoid incommoding our own men , I was time enough back in the rear , to continue the line , as the last begun to move .


Having repeated this , as long as I thought it possible for human nature to support it , we attacked them in the midst of their distress , when sinking under what they had suffered , and concluding , from the manner in which I had kept up the line , that our numbers must be many times greater than they were , they lost all spirit , and made but feeble resistance .


It was impossible for me , in the first transports of victory , to prevent a carnage , to which the inequality of numbers unhappily gave the appearance of necessity  but as soon as their fury began to cool , I exerted myself to put a stop to that , and all the other outrages , too generally offered to captives .


 The booty gained on this occasion was so great , as for some time to satisfy desires which had never known bounds before  a circumstance most favourable to my farther designs .


When the captives were secured , the next thing was to take measures for our safe return home , which it was far from being easy to effect , as we were liable to be attacked by the other troops of Bedouins , who range these boundless desarts , and make no distinction of persons , where there is a prospect of prey .


As this care fell entirely upon me , I resolved to execute it in such a manner , as to procure the liberty of as many as I could of the captives , whose lives I had saved .
Accordingly , when all things were in readiness for our march , I selected those whose youth made them best able to bear the yoke of slavery  and then dismissed the rest  in peace , with provisions sufficient for their journey : an act of humanity unknown to the Bedouins , whose custom it was to slay all such captives as they thought useless to them .


The dispositions I made for our march , and the vigilance with which it was conducted , secured our retreat through the midst of many dangers , several troops of much superior force having met us on our way  but deceived by our appearance , they did not dare to attack us .


1.7 .
SECTION VII .


THOUGH the authority of the leaders of those tribes has relation only to the conduct of their excursions , and ceases at their return home , I flattered myself with a fond hope , that the great service I had done them would procure me an influence which might enable me to do them services still greater , by  enlightening the brutal ignorance of their minds , and humanizing their manners .


I was not insensible of the difficulties and dangers of attacking prejudices , grown sacred by long use  and that ignorance , always captious , seldom fails to revenge the imaginary affront of instruction  but the thought of success was so pleasing , that I was not to be discouraged from the attempt by any apprehension .


The first thing , necessary for accomplishing my design , was to select some person , on whom my instructions might be bestowed to best advantage , that he might assist me by communicating the information he should receive , and recommending it from his own experience .
Nor was I long at a loss , whom to chuse .
Khaled , the son of my late master , was the one in the whole tribe , with whom I had the greatest intimacy ,  whether from the circumstance of our having lived together , while I belonged to his father  or that my having once saved his life at the imminent hazard of my own , had attached him to me .
With him therefore I resolved to begin , not more encouraged by our intimacy , than because I thought I perceived in him something more like that rational curiosity , which is the first incitement to knowledge , than in any other of the tribe .


The only science of which the Bedouins had even the faintest conception , was that which regards the motions of the heavenly bodies .
But though the clearness of their hemisphere , and the circumstance of their being obliged by the heat of the sun , to perform the greatest part of their occupations in the night , gave them the most favourable opportunities for pursuing this study to advantage , they had made no farther progress in it , than barely what was  necessary to direct their steps through the pathless desart , where they could have no land-marks to guide them in their way .
On this science therefore , as that most likely to interest their attention , I proposed to found my attempt .


For this purpose , I took occasion to enter into conversation with Khaled , as if accidentally , on the various appearances of the heavens  and beginning with the first rudiments of the science , led him , as it were , step by step , up to the Creator of them , proving the necessity of his existence from the existence of his works  and his wisdom , his power , and his goodness , from the wonderful construction , and support of them .


Having thus established in his mind , the first principle of religion , in the belief of a Deity , I proceeded to deduce from thence the duties of piety ,  and moral virtue .
But my endeavours , in this latter instance , were far from being attended with equal success .


While my instructions had been confined to matters of meer speculation , he listened to me with willing attention  and not only assented to truths , which interfered not with the tenour of his life , but also exerted his utmost assiduity to communicate and inculcate them to others .


But when he saw , that an utter change in his whole conduct was to be the consequence , that passion was to be subjected to reason , and justice made the rule of action , no evidence , however clear and conclusive , was of force sufficient to combat habits , pleasing in practice  and as it were sanctified by long and general reception .
On the contrary , from that moment , he withdrew his confidence from me  and I  soon found that he counteracted , instead of assisting my endeavours .


Though I was well aware of the difficulties , which this defection of Khaled threw in the way of my designs , I was too sanguine in the pursuit to be deterred by it  and resolved to try , whether I could not effect by example , what I had failed of by the force of reason  taking care to commence with such things , as from their obvious advantage in a political , as well as rectitude in a moral light , I concluded must necessarily command instant assent .


1.8 .
SECTION VIII .


 THE loss , sustained in the late expedition , had reduced the numbers of the tribe so low , that they were obliged to remain at home , for fear of being over-powered by some of the other tribes , whom they might meet in their excursions .


As they were sensible of this disadvantage , the severest to them , of which [ ... ] had any sense , I judged that an [ ... ] to remedy it , must be embraced with the greatest readiness and joy .


Though the violation of the marriage bed , was guarded against among them , by every preventive care , every terror of punishment , the female sex , before that bond , was abandoned to the most shameless prostitution .


 Criminal as this custom was , the method taken to remedy what were looked upon to be the only bad effects of it , was still a greater crime .
The wretched fruits of this licentious commerce were exposed to perish in the desart , without regard to the duty of paternal tenderness , or the welfare of the community thus robbed of its support .


Against a practice , so contradictory to nature , as well as to reason , I urged every argument which either could suggest  and to give weight to my words , began the reformation of it among my own slaves , branding with a mark of infamy every female persisting in promiscuous prostitution  and obliging every male to rear , and maintain by extraordinary labour , every infant assigned to him .


Though , as I have before observed , the public advantage was as obvious , as  the private virtue of this regulation , a general outcry was instantly raised against it .
The unmarried of both sexes exclaimed that they were robbed of the liberties and rights of nature  and the whole tribe declared against the intolerable tyranny and crime of such an innovation , which , as they alledged , would compel people to rear children against their wills  and contrary to their convenience .


It is impossible to express what I felt at this utter disappointment of hopes , upon which I had so strongly set my heart .
I now , too late , remembered what I had often heard from my father , that ` though it is the duty of every person , and especially of those , whose station may give influence to their example , to live according to the dictates of reason and virtue , yet a general reformation of manners is not to be too sanguinely expected from the most eminent example , or best concerted scheme ,  if the circumstances of the times are not assisting  but when these co-operate , the most inconsiderable , and improbable means are found sufficient to accomplish the greatest ends . '
- But my thoughts were soon diverted from these reflections , to matters of nearer concern to me .


The charge of making innovations in their established customs , was looked upon to be so atrocious a crime , that they resolved instantly to put a stop to it , by the most exemplary punishment , in order to deter any future presumption of the kind  for which purpose , they suddenly surrounded my tent , and having seized me before I could attempt either defence or escape , were proceeding to drag me out of the camp , in order to stone me to death , when I owed my safety to a principle , from which I had never expected to receive so great a benefit .


Khaled , who had totally estranged himself from me , for some time , and  was now become one of my loudest accusers , no sooner perceived their intention , than he rushed out of the croud , and claimed me for his slave , as having been the property of his father .


I availed myself of the momentary check , which this claim gave to their fury , to speak in my own defence .
I demanded to know my crime , and my accusers .
I pleaded my services .
I called upon their gratitude .
I argued , upbraided , and besought  but all equally in vain .
My voice was drowned in the cry of innovation , which was roared from every mouth  and without deigning to make any other reply , they directly gave me up to Khaled , to return to a state of slavery , from which I was deemed unworthy to be freed , seizing upon my slaves , and every thing which belonged to me , as public property  or rather I should say , as proper objects of public rapine .


 As soon as the croud was dispersed , I turned to Khaled , and thinking he had devised this claim only to save my life , was advancing to embrace him , in testimony of my gratitude  but I was soon undeceived .
Without shewing the least concern for my misfortune , or even taking notice of ever having known me before , he ordered me to be thrown into a kind of dungeon , where they were wont to keep such slaves , as were found unserviceable to them , till a certain season of the year , when they disposed of them , and such other parts of their spoil , as they had no occasion for themselves , to merchants , whom they went to meet for that purpose , in exchange for matters of more immediate use .


These occurrences were far from clearing up the doubts , which had been the cause of my leaving the bosom of my father .
On entering the dungeon , my soul shrunk in upon itself in horrour .
` If this be real life , ' said I , ` better did  it appear in the mirrour of speculation .
More favourably was the shadow to be judged of , than the substance ! '
-


It was some happiness to me however , not to be left long to these reflections .
That very evening , a party of the Bedouins set out to meet the merchants , and took me with them , among the other useless lumber , which they wanted to dispose of  when Khaled shewed his proficiency in knowledge , and virtue , by the value he set upon his instructor , giving me in exchange for a wallet , made of the skin of an ass .


1.9 .
SECTION IX .


 THE merchant , whose property I thus became , thinking he saw something in my appearance , not unworthy of his favour , as soon as the Arabs had concluded their markets , and departed , asked me in a humane manner , ` for what fault I had been sold at so low a price ? '


As my tongue knew no language but that of truth , I not only informed him of what he enquired , but also of the first motive and manner of my leaving my father , and the end proposed by my travels : to all which he listened with attention  and then told me , when I had concluded , that ` these were matters , about which he had never concerned himself  that all his care was to buy and sell as well as he could  and that he was content to take the world as he found it , without enquiring  farther into the actions of men , than as they might affect his own interest . '


Contracted as these sentiments then appeared to me , I was soon sensible of the advantage in my change of situation .
My new master had much experience of the world , and its ways  and where a view to interest did not interfere , formed just conclusions from what he saw .


The conversation of such a man , which I enjoyed in the most unreserved intimacy , sweetened the bitter cup of slavery , affording me pleasure , and instruction , at the same time .
Without attempting to trace motives , or consequences , he related plain facts  and in them supplied a kind of artificial experience , unincumbered with those disquisitions , which for the greater part only obscure what they pretend to illustrate , and are more apt to mislead , than guide reason to the right way .


 One evening , as I was sitting by myself in his tent , indulging the fond hope , which my master 's favour seemed to open to me , of returning to my father , he entered , and seating himself near me , ` Selim , ' said he , ' I have observed your demeanor ever since you have been with me , and see that your wisdom much exceeds your age .
I have therefore resolved to consult you on an affair , which gives me much anxiety  and if your sentiments concur with mine , shall be glad of your assistance to carry them into execution . '


I have followed this painful profession of a merchant , with various success , for many years , without being ever able to acquire a sufficiency for the support of old age , in comfort and decency .
Often indeed , have I thought myself within sight of the end of my wishes , but some unforeseen misfortune hath as often disappointed my hopes .
A reverse ,  which I have too much reason to apprehend at this time .


In the course of my present journey , it has been my fortune to purchase a female slave , of such exquisite beauty , and rare accomplishments , that I may well expect to sell her to the Sultan of Cairo , whither I am now going , for so high a price , as shall make the rest of my days happy , if her own perverseness does not prevent me .


An invincible melancholy has preyed upon her heart , from the first day of her coming into my possession .
She keeps a gloomy silence , which neither threats , promises , nor intreaties can prevail upon her to break .
She turns away , with disgust , from every attempt made to entertain her  and the sustenance she takes is so little , that it shews she wishes to shorten the number of her days .


 Such a conduct alarms me with apprehensions , not only of missing my expected profit , but also of losing the great price I have given for her .
A loss , which I can not bear .
What I have to propose to you therefore , is that you will strive to insinuate yourself into her confidence  I am not insensible of the danger of such a trust  but I know your discretion , and depend upon your virtue .


I suspect that her heart fosters some secret grief !
If it could be discovered , means might possibly be found to administer alleviation to it , at least .
Will you then try to make this discovery ?
The human heart finds comfort in the communication of it 's woes  and if you can once engage her attention , I have no doubt , but she will open herself to you .
-


There was something so uncommon in the nature of this proposal , that it  raised a curiosity I had never felt before .
Totally engaged in the pursuit of knowledge , under the eye of my father , I had never had any particular intercourse with the female sex  nor formed any notion of that power , which nature has given them over the heart of man .


I had a desire therefore to see a woman , on whom were founded expectations , which appeared to me so extraordinary  and readily undertook a commission , with the dangers of which I was unacquainted  if I should not rather say , that the mention of those dangers was my first motive for undertaking it , as it seemed to promise an opportunity of raising myself still higher in the opinion of my master , by my surmounting them .


1.10 .
SECTION X .


 THE first time I saw her , she was sitting in her tent , with her eyes fixed upon the ground , and motionless , as if the action of every sense was suspended .


Struck with the sight , I gazed on her , and while my eyes eagerly devoured her beauties , thought I was only studying how to address her in the manner most likely to answer the hopes of my master .


I had stood thus for some moments , melting in sensations utterly new to me , when the fair slave , not having perceived my entrance , exclaimed with a sigh , which seemed to burst her heart , ` Unhappy Sappho !
To what new misery am I reserved ? '
-


The sound of her voice awoke me from the extasy , in which I had stood  entranced .
Throwing myself eagerly at her feet , ` Lovely Sappho ! '
said I , seizing her hand , and pressing it to my heart , ` unfold the cause , the nature of your unhappiness , and depend upon every effort , in the power of man to make , for your relief . '


Her surprize at so unexpected an address deprived her of utterance for some moments .
Recovering at length , ` Insidious man , ' said she , tearing away her hand with indignation , ` to intrude upon my solitude , in order to steal the secrets of my soul !
But your base arts shall not avail !
In my name , you know more , than I ever intended to discover !
But more than that shall you never know . '
- Saying which she wrapped herself in her veil  and resumed her silence , which my most passionate entreaties could not prevail upon her to break .


 This repulse threw a damp upon my spirits , which I knew not how to account for .
I was surprized at what I felt .
I questioned my heart , whence it could proceed  and at length resolved it into my anxiety to serve my master , heightened perhaps , as I thought , by compassion for so fair a creature .


This thought encouraged me to proceed , with double assiduity  in the execution of the task assigned me .
I walked beside her camel , as she travelled , beguiling the way , with tales of entertainment  and verses , which I hourly composed in praise of her beauty .
I lulled her to sleep with songs of love , and consolation .


Such a conduct could not fail to affect an heart naturally susceptible of the tenderest impressions .
She relaxed her reserve .
She received my services with complacency  and admitted me to a familiarity , which was soon improved  into that tender kind of friendship , which can subsist only between the different sexes .


As I was walking one evening , by the side of her camel , conversing with her on indifferent subjects , she dropped some expressions of surprize , at my never having shewn any curiosity to know who she was , or by what means she had been brought into her present unhappy state .


This was an opening , which I had anxiously watched for .
I replied , ` that far from being incurious about any thing which concerned her , my heart panted with the eagerest desire to know every incident of her life , in hope of making some discovery , which might suggest the means of removing her unhappiness  but that I had been kept silent by respect , and fear of awakening that grief , which I had the pleasure to see in some measure beginning to subside . '


 Thanking me for my delicacy , she said with a reprehensive smile , that her griefs were too deeply imprinted on her heart , ever to be forgotten  but though she could not flatter herself with the faintest hope , of its being possible for me to afford her relief , she owed too much to my humanity to refuse gratifying me , with the information I desired .


Saying this , she paused for a few minutes , to recover her spirits  then wiping away a tear , which accompanied the recollection of her misfortunes , she began in these words .


1.11 .
SECTION XI .


 ' MY name you already know .
I was born in the island of Mytilene , of a family which never knew disgrace , before I was unhappily added to it .


The fondness of my father viewing , in too favourable a light , the poor endowments bestowed upon me by nature , he spared no pains to improve them , by every accomplishment of education , flattering himself with the hope , that they might raise me to a more exalted rank in life , by alluring the affection of some of our young nobility , whose own riches could enable them to consult inclination only in the matrimonial choice , as he had not himself a fortune to give with me , equal to his wishes .


We often owe the disappointment of our designs to the very means , upon  which we build our most sanguine hopes of their success .


The power of pleasing , in which nature was thought to have been most liberal to me , was my voice .
Fond of music himself , my father omitted nothing , which could conduce to perfect me in an accomplishment so universally admired .
I was instructed in the use of every instrument .
I had masters of every country to modulate my voice , and form my judgment , and fame said that their endeavours were not unsuccessful .


Among these masters , the most celebrated was one , who had been educated in the seraglio of the Khalif of Bagdat .
The care taken in that jealous court , to prevent the ministers of pleasure from abusing the access , which their occupations necessarily give them to the female sex , prevented also my father 's having any apprehension of danger ,  from the familiarity of his access to me .
I practised with him every hour , alone , in every dress and every attitude he thought proper  to try , as he pretended , which suited best the powers of my voice .


Of all the pleasures of sense , that which captivates the soul most strongly is music .
By its command over the passions , it commands the heart , while it silences reason by its union with sentiment .


Nor is this command exerted only over the hearer .
The feelings of the performer advance with his execution , till he becomes insensibly the slave of his own art , as I soon unhappily experienced .


The praises , which I received for my proficiency , warmed my heart with gratitude to my teacher , to whose indefatigable assiduity I was sensible of my  being indebted for them  and doubled my attention to his instructions .


In vocal expression , the attitude of the body naturally accompanies the sentiment .
My teacher practised this to an extreme , which I at first thought ridiculous , and disgusting .
But that disgust soon wore off .
I saw him , if I may use the expression , only with my ears  and found such pleasure in his voice , that every thing he did pleased me .


Such a prepossession in his favour could not long escape his observation .
He perceived it too plainly  and took an advantage of it , equally base and absurd , to attempt improving my admiration of his voice into a passion for himself .


With this intent , whenever we practised alone together , he chose none but the most tender themes of love for his  lessons  and not content with my accompanying his voice , as before , taught me also to imitate his looks and gestures , in which he proceeded to every endearment of the passion he expressed , till Nature , catching fire , realized the imitation on my heart , and I felt the flames he only acted .


My soul had , till now , been so totally engrossed by my passion for music , that I had never before felt the impulse of any other .
Pleased therefore with sensations I did not understand , I took no pains to conceal them .


It is impossible to describe the rage of my father , at a discovery so destructive to his hopes , so fatal to his fondness for me .
He directly turned off my teacher in the most opprobrious manner  and loading me with every reproach of ingratitude , degeneracy ,  and folly , interdicted my ever seeing him , with the severest menaces .


Nothing shews the natural right of the human soul to liberty so strongly , as the reluctancy with which it bears every semblance of restraint .


Though my heart had been warmed by the caresses of my teacher , I was so far from having a confirmed passion for him , that I knew not even what that warmth meant  and would have rejected any direct offer of love from him with indignation .
But my pride was now piqued on the opposite side , by this treatment from my father  and I thought it no more than a just assertion of my liberty , to do that which he had unjustly attempted to prevent my doing .


My teacher , who had found means to have intelligence of every thing which passed upon the occasion , soon  availed himself of this spirit of liberty , ( should I not rather call it contradiction ? )
which my father had raised in me .
He requested a private interview , which in the present state of my mind I made no difficulty of granting  when pressing his suit with all the ardor of desire , and treating the charge of its absurdity with contempt , as a calumny devised only to deceive my inexperience , he worked up my passions , particularly my resentment , to such an height , that he obtained from me a promise of marriage under the sanction of the most solemn vows .


' 1.12 .
SECTION XII .


 ' A moment 's reflection shewed me all the misery into which I had plunged myself  but I was not long permitted merely to reflect upon it .


My promised husband could not conceal his triumph over the contempt and contumely with which he had been treated by my father .
The consequence of this indiscretion was equally severe upon us both .
He was thrown into the common prison , where he suffered all the indignities and wretchedness of poverty and guilt among the vilest malefactors , for having seduced a pupil , whom he had been entrusted to teach for hire  while my father , in virtue of his paternal authority , confined me to my chamber , in which I was guarded with the most rigid vigilance , and denied every thing like pleasure , or even comfort  in order to punish me for my  past disobedience , and bend me to his purpose of breaking the engagement into which I had entered .


But this severity disappointed itself , and only hardened my resolution into obstinacy .
Though I saw all the wretchedness I had to expect , with such a husband , in a life of vagrant poverty , dependance and disgrace , I dreaded still more the scoffs of my acquaintance , and the bad treatment of my family , of which I had already tasted so bitterly , should I remain among them .


I therefore determined to feign a passion which I did not feel , as the only excuse for my folly  and take my fate , however hard , among strangers , away from the slights and reproaches of my friends .


I say , a passion which I did not feel .
For upon examining my heart , I found in it none of that enthusiasm ,  that madness of love , which is described as delighting in dangers , and sweetening distress .
I found it had been the music I had loved , not the man  and that the connection between them had even lessened that love .
I had dreamed of happiness , but I awoke to misery .


My obstinacy at length so effectually weaned me from my father 's love , that he cast me off from his care , and abandoned me to my fate  when the first use I made of my liberty was to fly to my teacher , and perform my promise of marriage , amid all the horrors of his prison .


Formed by nature for love , the human heart sympathizes instinctively in the misfortunes too often occasioned by it .
This act of mine had such an appearance of the infatuation of that passion , that it moved the pity of all who were not immediately interested in the  honour of my family  and my husband found protectors , who soon restored him to liberty .


Our situation , however , seemed to be but little amended .
We were at liberty to go whither we listed  but we wanted the means  and to remaining where we were , could we even have subsisted there , I would have preferred perishing of famine in any other place .


At length the cold hand of charity , scantily enabled us to travel to the metropolis  where curiosity to hear a voice , which had had power to invert the laws of nature , for some little time drew such crowds to my husband 's performances , that we were relieved from the immediate pressure of poverty .


But most dearly did I purchase this relief .
The curiosity of the public was not confined to my husband .
They must also see the subject of his triumph   the fool , who had sacrificed sense to sound .
Every one , who patronized , assumed a right to visit him .
I was shewn from morning till night , to a succession of strangers , who broke in at all hours , without respect or ceremony  and gazed at me with as much indelicacy and insolence , as if I had been a monster exhibited to sight for hire .


Nor did I suffer from their gazing only .
They insulted me incessantly , with such ribbald questions , and such base proposals , as were an outrage upon the female character : and when I ventured to express disapprobation of their behaviour , though in the most humble terms , they treated my tears with ridicule  and threatened to punish me for such presumptuous affectation , as they gibingly called it , by withdrawing their favour from my husband .


 Much as I was humbled in my own eyes , my spirit was not yet sufficiently subdued to submit to such usage .
I complained to my husband , in bitterness of soul  and declared my resolution to shut myself up from the sight of the world , rather than suffer a repetition of it .


But I was far from receiving the approbation of my conduct , much less the protection I expected from him .
He answered me coldly , that my sensibilities were too lively , and took unnecessary offence  that what I complained of was merely a thing of course  that we must humour the caprices of those , by whose favour we lived  and that other women , instead of being offended by the proposals made to me , would have turned them to good advantage , as they were indeed one of the best resources in our way of life .


 It is impossible to express what I felt on his saying this .
I thought I had before seen all the horrors of my situation  but these words opened new , of which I had not had the remotest conception  and betrayed the infamous origin of all his base designs upon me .


As soon as the fullness of my heart permitted me to speak , I answered him with a look of the most poignant disdain , ` that what he meant by his way of life , I knew not , nor desired to know  but that mine , though a life of folly and misfortune , had ever been , and ever should be , a life of virtue and honour , nor would I add to the disgrace I had already brought upon my family , by departing from those principles , to save myself from perishing of famine , as I justly deserved . '
- Saying which , I retired to my chamber  nor could all his expostulations ,  menaces , or entreaties , ever prevail upon me to alter my resolution .


The curiosity which our strange adventure had raised , was no sooner gratified , than my husband 's voice lost its attraction  and we sunk back into our former distress  for such a slave was he to the appetites which he could indulge , that he always lavished his acquisitions in the instant  nor ever let the wants of yesterday , warn him to make provision for the morrow .


I was now obliged to fly my native country , and enter upon a life of vagrancy , literally for a morsel of bread  without the illusion of hope , or gratification of passion to silence the reproaches of reason , and divert my thoughts from dwelling upon the wretchedness into which I had plunged myself .


The scene was the same wherever we went .
Curiosity , for he took care to  make my folly known , at first procured us momentary relief , which was as quickly dissipated  so that we were always in the extremes of poverty or profusion .


My only shadow of satisfaction was , that my husband desisted from his base sollicitations  in expectation , as I soon saw , that the conversation of such company , of either sex , as I was obliged to consort with , would in time undermine my principles , and reconcile me to enter willingly into all their ways .


But his necessities soon became too urgent , to permit his waiting for an effect , of which he thought himself so secure  and he compleated the villainy of his first seduction , by selling me for a slave to this merchant .


My resentment , as the base wretch never dared to see me more , fell justly upon myself  and I resolved to shorten  the days of my misery gradually , by abstinence , as the least painful way .
But your kind consolations have shaken that resolution .
In the seraglio of the sultan , for which you say I am destined , I shall have tranquillity at least , and that is the nearest approach to happiness which I have any right to hope for in this world .


' 1.13 .
SECTION XIII .


WHEN the fair slave had finished , I left her to recover her spirits , which appeared to be exhausted by the length and nature of her story  and upon considering the circumstances of it , I thought I had found the object of my search , in the source of her misfortunes .
` All the evil in this world , all the errors in the conduct of man , ' said I , ` certainly proceed from wrong education .
How could she escape the snare , into which she was led by those , whom Nature and Reason taught her to look  upon as her safest guides ?
With what colour of justice could her father blame her , for a conduct which was the necessary consequence of his own indiscretion ?
From wrong education certainly proceed all the evils which deform human life . '


I was pleased with this discovery  and plumed myself not a little upon the sagacity which had made it .
But my exultation lasted not long .


` But if her father 's indiscretion , ' I continued on farther reflection , ` was the cause of her first error , was his exertion of the sacred right of paternal authority , a just cause for persisting in that error ?
For aggravating it by direct disobedience to his just command ?
Did this indiscretion of the father , in giving his daughter so wrong an education - Did the villainy of the husband in basely selling into slavery the victim of his base seduction , proceed from  errors in their education also ?
- There is more in this matter than I was aware of .
I should be acquainted with every particular , to be able to form a just judgment of the whole . '


` And even , if I knew all these circumstances , is it safe to extend a judgment formed upon one event , or one series of events , to the infinitely varied tenor of human life ?
I must suspend my opinion , till I shall have seen farther into the interior principles on which it is conducted .
A wrong education is certainly the source of many evils  but it is not equally certain , that it is the source of all . '


Though many circumstances in the story of the fair slave had necessarily lowered her in my opinion , they seemed to have a contrary effect upon my heart .
To the compassion which I had before felt for her sufferings , was now added a desire to correct the errors from which  they sprung  a task which I flattered myself would be as easy as pleasing , from the candor with which she had confessed them .


Happy in this thought , I entered abruptly , at our next meeting , into those particulars , in which I thought she had been most to blame  and examining them closely , proved by arguments more conclusive than complaisant , that all her misfortunes had proceeded from herself .


Though her looks sufficiently shewed that this subject was far from being pleasing to her , she heard me to the end , without interruption  when instead of making any reply to the purpose of what I had been saying , she hummed a tune for a few minutes , and then asked me , if I had heard whether the sultan was fond of music .


 So contemptuous a repulse embarrassed me so much , that it was some time before I could make her any answer .
At length , bowing coldly , I told her , that the sultan 's taste was one of these secrets of the seraglio , with which the voice of fame presumed not to meddle : adding , with a significant smile , that I had pleased myself with the hopes of turning her attention to objects more worthy of it .


She saw my embarrassment , and seemed unwilling to encrease it .
` Your intention , ' she answered , ` did not escape my notice  but I can not accommodate myself to it .
You have drawn so favourable a picture of the life led in the seraglio , that I have fixed my heart upon entering into it .
If the sultan is fond of music , I have no fear but I shall gain his favour .
Such a conquest only can compensate for my past misfortunes  and I would attempt it tomorrow , if I were at liberty , and able  to follow my own inclinations .
Any advice therefore , which you can give me to accomplish this , I shall receive with gratitude .
To any other purpose it will be in vain for you to advise me . '


So peremptory a declaration effectually silenced me .
I bowed my head respectfully , and left her , without saying another word , resolved never to think of her more .


I was soon sensible , that the only way to fulfil this resolution was to avoid her company .
I therefore told the merchant what she had said to me , who thanked me in the warmest terms for the service I had done him , in reconciling her to his views  and acquiesced in my opinion , that it was not necessary for me to continue my visits to her .


Such a sacrifice to reason was not unattended with pain  nor am I certain  that I could have persisted in my resolution , but that our arrival at Cairo produced such an unexpected change in my situation , that if the remembrance of the fair slave would at times force itself upon me , it soon gave place to other objects .


` How unjust is the pride of speculative wisdom , ' interrupted the emperor .
` You were offended at her , because she would not listen to advice she could not follow .
What could she think of , but improving a fate , which she could see no possibility of avoiding ?
In reality , it was you who gave cause of offence .
Impracticable advice is only insult to the unfortunate .
- '


` But stop !
The appearance of the morning calls my attention to other matters .
I have not leisure to listen to thee longer now .
At some other time , my curiosity may possibly require  the continuation of thy story .
In the mean while , remain at thy liberty among my attendants  and set thine heart at ease .
Thou art not now among the Bedouins . '
End of the FIRST BOOK ?
2 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE SECOND .


 2.1 .
SECTION I .


SOME days passed before Temugin could attend to the continuation of the captive 's story  but his curiosity , though restrained , was far from being satisfied .
The first evening he could spare from his weightier cares , he commanded his attendance  when he resumed his narrative , in these words .


 From the general tenour of the merchant 's conversation , I had been led to think his principles strictly just , and generous to the best of his conception  but I soon found that the difference between speculation and practice is equally great , in every station of life .
On the third day , after our arrival at Cairo , he fulfilled his professions of friendship , and gratitude for the service I had done him , by selling me as a slave to the grand visier .


I must not , however , in justice to him , omit a particular circumstance , which happened on this occasion .
When he was delivering me to the visier , he told me , as an excuse of his disappointing the hopes of liberty , which he had always given me , that it had not been his intention to sell me , but the visier , who had been pleased with something in my appearance , offered him so high a price , that he could not possibly refrain from accepting it  ` for you know , he  concluded , that it is a rule with us , who live by buying and selling , never to refuse a good offer . '


This excuse took effect , though not in the manner it was intended .
It gave me such a contempt for the man , who made it , that I left him with pleasure , though to continue in slavery .


The accounts which I had received from my father of the perfection , to which every power of human art and genius had been carried in Egypt , had raised my curiosity so high to see the country , that I almost forgot the wretched state , in which I went thither .
But how was my expectation disappointed !
The ruins of ancient magnificence only made present misery the more remarkable .
The rulers prided themselves in brutal violence , in the destruction of works they could not imitate  and the contempt of sciences above their comprehension .
The people , a mixture of that  draff of all nations , who destitute of principle or sentiment , ramble from their native homes , and submit to all the insults and oppression of foreign tyranny for the sordid sake of scraping up wealth , which they dare not enjoy , had neither leisure , genius , nor spirit to cultivate either art or science .


My soul sickened in the contemplation of such degeneracy .
I would have preferred returning to the Bedouins in the desart , to remaining in a country , once the pride of nature , had I been master of myself .
There was a possibility at least that those savages might be reclaimed in time  but here , every thing was evidently growing worse  nor could imagination set bounds to their fall , when the height , from which they had already fallen , was considered .


But I was soon delivered from the pain of such contemplations .
In less than a moon , after I was sold to the  visier , he was deposed , and strangled  and all his property confiscated to the use of the sultan .


In the dissipation , usual on such occasions , it fell to my lot , to be given to an officer , who was sent the very next morning to execute a like sentence , on Almanzor , the brother of the late visier , who commanded the Egyptian army on the confines of Biledulgerid , and took me in his train .


As it was necessary to the success of his commission , that he should execute it , before the fate of the late visier should come to the knowledge of his brother , to put him on his guard , as his great abilities and virtues had endeared him so highly to his troops , that they would , to a man , have defended his life , with their own , we traversed the inhospitable desart of Barca , with the utmost expedition .


2.2 .
SECTION II .


 ON the fourth morning of our journey , as we sat upon the bank of a river , to refresh nature after so severe a fatigue , we were surprized at the sight of a troop , which came pouring down upon us , from every side .


The state of universal war , in which we knew the rovers of those desarts live with all mankind , left us no room to doubt of their intentions  at the same time , that their numbers shewed it was in vain to attempt resistance .


In such a situation , there was not a moment to deliberate .
I sprung instantly upon my horse , whom I had learned from the Bedouins never to quit  and calling to all those , who preferred death to slavery , to follow me , I plunged into the river : But not above three or four  followed my example  the rest , stupefied by the affright , and fond of life , even in its most abject state , not daring to make so desperate an effort to preserve their liberty .


The rapidity of the stream hurried me away , with a violence which soon diverted my attention from every thing , but the immediate danger of my life .
Thrice was I swallowed in the whirlpools , which foamed among the rocks , that broke the current of the river  but the strength and spirit of my horse , to whom I clung in the instinctive impulse of self-preservation , after I had lost sense of every thing else , bore me through to the opposite shore .


When I had recovered myself a little , and returned thanks to heaven , for so signal a mercy  I looked wishfully around for my companions , but all in vain .
However as I had been borne by the  torrent , out of the view of the enemy , I lingered awhile on the bank , to see if they might not happily have gained some other part  till at length losing every shadow of such hope , and growing apprehensive , that the rovers might find some safer place to pass the river , and pursue me , I turned about , and plunged into the pathless wilderness , ignorant whither to direct my steps .


I proceeded thus , guided only by despair , till the approach of night , when the roaring of the various beasts issuing from their dens in search of prey , warned me to provide for the safety of the present moment , however dreadful the farther prospect , which lay before me .
Accordingly fastening my horse to the root of a lofty tree , I climbed its summit , and imploring the divine protection , disposed myself to rest among the branches , in the best manner such a situation would admit .


 Nature was so exhausted by the accumulated fatigue , which I had undergone , both in mind and body , that I soon sunk into a profound sleep , in which I lost , for some happy hours , the remembrance of my misfortunes .


At the approach of morning , when my senses were refreshed , and the faculties of my mind had recovered their vigour , I saw a vision , and in the power of imagination beheld the same celestial being , which had appeared to me , in my dream , the morning before I left the house of my father .


` Selim , ' methought he said , regarding me with a look of reprehension , ` from thine own presumptuous folly have arisen thy misfortunes .
Let experience teach thee wisdom .
Thou art now launched forth into the great ocean of the world .
Pursue thy course steadily through it , under the direction of reason   nor while thou shalt merit its protection by virtue , fear being deserted by that power , which hath hitherto so eminently protected thee .
Remember , that though the days of man are numbered , and the hour of his death appointed from the beginning , the manner of that death depends upon himself , whether in infamy or glory . '
-


My vision was broken off , as he spoke these words , by a most tremendous noise , at which I instantly awoke  when the first object I saw was an huge-lion , which had just seized upon my horse , and was tearing him piece-meal .


The distress , with which I was affected at this sight , is not to be expressed .
The sense of my dreadful situation , deprived thus of my best assistance to traverse those boundless wilds , was heightened by gratitude to the noble creature , which had so lately saved my life .
I wept in the weakness of my soul  and was  tempted by despair to precipitate myself upon him , and either revenge , or share his fate .


But a recollection of the words , which I had just heard in my vision , prevented my being guilty of such rashness .
I considered that the dangers , which made my present prospect so terrifying , were yet less immediately terrible , than those which I had so lately escaped  and gathering hope from thence , I implored a continuance of the divine protection , and resigned myself with humility to the dispensations of heaven .


This restored my mind to some serenity , and enabled me to consider , which way I should direct my course , as soon as the departure of the lion should permit me to descend from my place of safety  but so many obstacles presented themselves on every side , that reason could find no hope , whereon to form a choice .


 In this perplexity , it occurred to me at length to pursue the journey , in which I had been engaged  and strive to join , if possible , the army of Almanzor , though with a different intention from that with which I had been sent .


No resolution , which was not absolutely impossible , could have been attended with greater difficulties .
I had still an immense tract of this inhospitable wilderness to traverse .
I knew not my way through it .
I knew not even where the army of Almanzor lay .
My only direction was , that I had heard our journey pointed to the west  and I imagined that the traces of so great an army , would be easily discovered , when once I should come into an inhabited country .


On the support of this slender hope , I set out accordingly , as soon as I descended from the tree , and travelled through the wilderness for the space of  forty days , without meeting the footstep of any human creature , or having the satisfaction of any certainty , that I was not involving myself deeper in those inexplicable wilds  chusing my steps by day with the most anxious dread of the serpents , and other venemous reptiles , which hissed continually on every side  and flying at the approach of night to some tree for safety from the various beasts , whose roarings tore the air around me  while I fed on wild fruits , with the birds of the air , except when failing of them I was forced to feed upon the birds themselves , which I slew with my bow and arrows .


At length even these resources failed me .
I was several days without meeting any fruits  and consequently met very few birds , which seldom resort any places , but those in which they find their food .


 My spirits losing by degrees the support of hope , sunk with my strength .
I thought it in vain to struggle longer with a fate , which seemed inevitable  and therefore layed me down to wait for death , in whatever shape he should please to attack me .


2.3 .
SECTION III .


THE place I chose for this purpose was of itself sufficient to throw a gloom over the happiest mind .
Stupendous ruins , inhabited by every animal , the most fierce and poisonous of the savage race , and surrounded with woods , almost impervious to them , hung over a rapid stream , broken into numberless cataracts , by the fragments of the buildings , which had fallen into it .


Imagination wearied itself , in the present contemplation , in reflection on the former grandeur of this scene of desolation ,  till I sunk into a kind of slumber .
But the impression made upon my mind , by such objects , had heightened the sense of my own misery , too much , to permit my sleeping long .
I soon awoke , and raising my eyes , what was my astonishment to see a being , whose appearance was such as must strike the most insensible heart with awe .
His stature arose , above the common size of man .
His beard fell bright as burnished silver down his breast .
A loose vesture shewed his large limbs  and a staff supported him , as he stooped over me .


My heart almost died within me , at the sight .
I was sensible that I was awake  and wanted that intrepidity , with which sleep prepares us to behold its own creatures .
I thought I beheld a being of another world  and though despair had steeled me against every common attack of fear , a sacred horrour seized my whole soul  and for a time suspended all its faculties .


 Recovering at length the power of utterance , ` Defend me , heaven ! '
I exclaimed , ` my life is in thine hand . '
- Then prostrating myself at his feet , ' O gracious being , ' I continued , ` of whatsoever state , for my soul feels thou art above mortality , receive into thy protection , the most forlorn of mankind  and direct me to some end of the misery , under which I am now sinking . '


He saw the distress of my soul , and reaching his hand with a look of ineffable benevolence , ` Arise , my son ! '
said he , ` arise  and fear not .
You behold a man , like yourself !
A man , once as unhappy , as you can possibly be , till resignation , and the lenient hand of time , in some degree healed the wounds of misfortune  and restored peace to my heart .
Nature , at the long disused sight of man , first led me toward you  and sympathy now bids  me offer you all the consolation and assistance in my power . '


Encouraged by these words , and more by the manner , in which the venerable speaker of them addressed me , I arose  and bowing my head , in sign of grateful obedience , for I was not yet sufficiently assured to speak , I followed him toward his habitation , which he shewed me at some distance from the other ruins , by the side of the river .


It was a circular building of vast extent , the walls of which had been so high , that though a great part of them was fallen , in several places , that which remained standing , was still sufficient to exclude every creature , without wings : nor could I perceive a place of entrance , for any other , as he led me all around it .


I was just going to express my surprize at this , when my conductor  stooped  and taking a ladder , which lay concealed at a little distance , he applied it to a narrow aperture in the wall , at a considerable height from the ground , into which , when we had ascended , he drew the ladder after him .


I found myself , now , in a large gallery , arched over-head , and supported by massy pillars , of the most exquisite workmanship .
It looked into an open space , in the center of the building , part of which was planted with fruit-trees of different sorts , and the rest cultivated as a garden , and filled with various kinds of vegetables .


When I had indulged my curiosity for some minutes , in gazing at objects so new to me , we descended into a spacious apartment , under the gallery  in the middle of which there arose a fountain , that filled a bath of the whitest marble   and with its over-flowing watered the garden , through which it was led in channels , cut for that purpose .


2.4 .
SECTION IV .


` AS we advanced to the fountain , we were met by a young female , the sight of whom added to the wonder , with which my soul was filled .
She was clad in a robe of blue silk , which covered her whole form .
A net of the same colour enclosed her hair , which was wrapped in woven tresses round her head  and shone like the plumes of the raven .
Her eyes - '


` Hold ! '
interrupted Temugin , ' I hate descriptions of beauty .
They are always drawn , by an over-heated imagination  and only make the partiality of the painter ridiculous . '


 The captive blushed at this rebuke  and looking down abashed for some moments , sighed and resumed his story .


She started at the sight of me  and gazing with the most eager astonishment , turned her eyes frequently to my conductor , as if to enquire , who I could be .


He soon understood her  and smiling at her surprize , ` Receive , my child , ' said he , ' a stranger whom heaven hath sent to enliven this solitary scene .
Bring your guest a garment to put on , when he comes out of the bath  and then prepare us a repast , from those stores , which the bounty of heaven supplies faster than we can consume  and are always best bestowed upon those who want them most . '


On his saying this , she withdrew  and returning directly with a vesture ,  her father and I went into the bath together .


When I had purified and refreshed myself , after my fatigue , he led me back into the gallery , where she had laid for us , a variety of fruits , some dried in the sun , and others fresh-plucked from the trees , with a vase of living water , just drawn from the fountain .


My host , having thanked heaven for its blessings , reached me some of the fruits  and encouraged me to eat by his example .


Having satisfied the cravings of nature  and being in some degree relieved by his beneficence , from the awe , with which his appearance had struck me , I began to recover my spirits  and look around me , with less embarrassment .


 ' I congratulate you , my son , ' said my host , observing the alteration in my looks , ` on the comfort , which this scene of desolation has administered to your distress .
Be not ashamed .
It argues not any malevolence of disposition .
Nature receives consolation from society , even in misery  from the thought of not being marked for the sole object of the wrath of heaven . '


Distress , great as ever wounded the human heart , first drove me into these wilds  where chance directed my steps to this place .
The view struck me .
I thought such an habitation best suited to my state  and that the hand of heaven had led me to it , to shew me the vanity of this world , and all its grandeur .


This reflection soothed my heart  and time insensibly wore off the edge of my afflictions , so far , that in a  few years I could say , I was not unhappy  nor had a wish to throw away , for any thing this world could afford , beyond what I enjoyed in this solitude .
But alas !
even this absence of unhappiness was too much to last !
I had more to suffer before I was to be released from life .


But I see you are fatigued .
Evening draws on , when we must retire to rest .
While day confines the natural lords of these ruins to their caves , I walk abroad , sole viceroy of their empire  but yield the more pleasant evening , and cool night to the stronger  and retire to this place of safety , while they resume their sway .


In the morning , when rest shall have refreshed your over-laboured body , and calmed the tumult in your mind , I will lead you through some of the most remarkable places of my dominion  and afterwards gratify the curiosity , which  I see you feel , by relating the occurrences of my life  from a comparison of which , with your own , you can not fail of receiving consolation , and encouragement to slight the evils of so uncertain a state .


` Think that you lie this night , among the ruins of a city , once the habitation of myriads  but now for ages lost to human knowledge  and sleep contented and secure , in just contempt of every thing which can happen , in such a world . '
- Saying this , he led me to another apartment in the gallery  and recommending me to the protection of heaven , left me to my rest .


But it was a considerable time , before the working of my mind would permit me to sleep .
The change of my state , from the preceding day , appeared too great and sudden to be real .
I doubted my senses  and feared that all was no  more than a fond illusion of imagination .


Revolving at length the whole progress of my life , my eyes were opened  and I saw the clue , with which I had been led by heaven , through the labyrinth .
Elevated by this thought , I offered up my soul , in prayer and thanksgiving  and resigning myself , in humble assurance , to the same protector , soon found the blessing of quiet sleep .


2.5 .
SECTION V .


 WHEN I joined my beneficent host , the next morning , he saw the change in my looks , and congratulated me upon it . '
I rejoice , my son , ' said he , ` at your having found that comfort , which resignation to the will of heaven , never fails to bring to a virtuous heart .
A placid countenance shews a mind at peace .
As soon as we shall have taken some food , I will fulfil my promise of shewing you my dominions . '


We then sat down , and eating of some fruits , which had been laid in readiness for us , ` Had there never been a less innocent banquet made in this place , ' said he smiling , ` it would not now be an heap of ruins . '


Then observing , that I still looked with wonder at every thing around me , ' I see , ' he continued , ` that you are  surprized at the structure of my habitation .
From ruins of the same kind , which I have seen in places , once under the dominion of a people from the regions of the setting sun , called Romans , a name perhaps unknown to you , I judge that this edifice was raised for the exhibition of shews , to entertain the populace , who , after feasting in these galleries , beheld with savage pleasure the fiercest of the brute creation , let loose in yonder open space to indulge their natural antipathies  and to the disgrace of humanity , men still more brutal , entering into deadly combat with them , or with each other , compelled by tyrant force , or for the sordid sake of hire . '


Struck with horror at such an account , I could not forbear exclaiming in the indignation of my soul , ` Justly hath such an abandoned people been exterminated from the face of the earth !
 Justly hath a place polluted with such crimes , fallen to ruin ! '


` Take care , my son , ' he returned  ` man must not presume to direct the justice , or trace the wrath of heaven , whose ways are all above his comprehension .
If the most virtuous people were brought to a strict account for their actions , the most sacred places judged by what is done in them , the whole earth would long since have been an uninhabited desart  a scene of desolation and ruin . '


But let us go , before the heat of the sun becomes too fierce , and take a view of some of the neighbouring parts of these ruins .
They will reconcile you to the fate , which invariably attends all the works , all the designs of man .


At our return , if your curiosity shall so require , we will beguile the sultry  hours of noon , in the cool shade of these arches , by a recital of the misfortunes which drove me thus from human intercourse .


The scenes , through which he led me , were sufficient to humble human pride  and damp the ardour of ambition , in their highest flights .
Every effort of art to elude oblivion , and guard against the waste of time , was here defeated in the most mortifying manner .
Statues , whose remains shewed traces of the most exquisite workmanship  and columns , which seemed to have been built as firm , as the foundations of the earth , lay defaced and tumbled on each other , in heaps of promiscuous rubbish .


` These statues , ' said my guide , ` seeing me struck by the sight , were finished with so much care to perpetuate the name of some noted person  these columns raised with such strength to  eternize the memory of some famous action  but so effectually hath the vain design been defeated , that during a residence of more than five hundred moons among these ruins , never have I met in all my searches a single inscription , which might direct me to the most distant conjecture , even of the name of a city , on the magnificence of which so much labour and cost were evidently expended  never have I seen the face of an human being , before your 's , except my own immediate companions . '


Such reflections were too painful to be pursued .
I turned away from the objects , which suggested them  and my conductor seeing how deeply I was affected , discontinued his intended walk , for that time  and kindly returned with me , to his habitation  where seating ourselves , on the verge of the fountain , I requested him to relate the history of his life , which he began in these words .


2.6 .
SECTION VI .


 Though the recital I am now entering upon , will lift up the oblivious veil , which time hath kindly thrown over my griefs  and the wounds of my heart open at the recollection of misfortunes too mighty to admit of redress , yet for thy sake , O my son , do I willingly undertake the painful task  as a view of the evils inevitably incident to humanity , can not fail of administering a melancholy consolation under your present distresses , and may convey instruction for your future conduct  the events which rule the life of man , in all its various situations , arising from causes essentially alike , however they may happen to differ in circumstances merely accidental .


But first , as my misfortunes arose immediately from those of my country , and were in every sense connected with  them , it will be necessary for me to look back for a moment to distant ages , in order to give a just view of the latter , and of the causes from which they sprung .


When the intestine divisions , which had so long distracted the councils of the mighty city of Carthage , had at length made that queen of Africa fall a prey to the ambition of the Romans , the few who remained of the illustrious house of Barcas , disdaining to live in subjection to enemies , whom they had so often vanquished in the field , and preferring liberty , under the heaviest inconveniencies which nature could support , to all the luxury and magnificence of their enslaved country , resolved to leave it , and seek some happier habitation .


Communicating their design accordingly , to as many as they imagined willing and worthy to share in it , they all put themselves under the conduct of  Narbal , nephew to the great Annibal  and secretly embarking their families and wealth in ships provided by him for the purpose , they set sail in a propitious hour , committing themselves , and all their hopes , to the guidance and protection of the gods of their country .


The melancholy cause of their flight convincing them of the necessity of directing their course to some very distant region , Narbal , whose genius , turned to pursuits of a milder nature than the rest of his illustrious family , had led him into every climate under heaven to promote the commerce of his country , determined to seek a settlement on the island of Serendib , as the place most likely to be safe from the invasion of the Romans , those enemies to human liberty .


Sailing therefore along the coast of Africa , they passed the mouths of the Nile , and landing at Calixene , journied  by land from thence to Suez  where Narbal , who was well known , and high in respect , soon procured other ships , in which he pursued his intended voyage , till he came within sight of Dira  when a violent storm of wind arose , which in spite of all the skill and efforts of the mariners , drove him back upon the coast of Saquem .
I call places by their present names , to avoid obscurity .


A wise man turns every event to advantage .
Narbal having landed his people , to refresh them after the fatigues of the storm , went to take a view of the country , which he found beautifully blessed by nature , and wanting only proper cultivation to make it afford all the necessaries of life  the few inhabitants , who had fled at his approach , living poorly , content with the spontaneous produce of the earth .


Pleased with this discovery , and construing the storm as a direction from  heaven , he immediately chose a spot , on the banks of a beautiful river , the mouth of which formed a spacious harbour  and laid the foundations of a city , which he named Byrsa , in pious remembrance of the revered place of his nativity , whose unhappy fate made him afraid to adopt the inauspicious name of Carthage .


Misfortune had softened the minds of this new people  and taught them all those duties of humanity , which are too often neglected in the high blood of a prosperous estate .
The tenderness with which they treated such of the natives as happened to fall into their hands , whom they constantly dismissed with presents , soon won the love and confidence of all the neighbouring people , so far that they came to them in crowds , and submitted gladly to an authority , which they saw promoted their happiness .


 With such an accession , their city soon arose to a considerable degree of strength and convenience , for the safety as well as for the necessary purposes of life  and the inhabitants , encouraged by success , applied themselves to every art of industry and genius , to advance their general interest .


The hills echoed with the voice of their flocks and herds .
The plains and vallies smiled in the rich livery of harvest  while the ships , which had served the melancholy purpose of their flight , now brought them the most precious merchandizes of the East , in return for their manufactures , and the superfluous produce of their new country .


2.7 .
SECTION VII .


 WHEN all things were settled in this prosperous course , Narbal , whose views were too extensive to be confined to the present moment , assembled his whole people  and laying before them the present flourishing state of their affairs , resigned into their hands the authority with which they had entrusted him  advising them to establish some permanent form of government , which might give a rational hope of securing the continuance of their happiness .


But they , who had learned wisdom in the school of adversity , were not to be tempted by any allurements of power , to forego the advantages which they experienced under his care .
They not only refused to accept his resignation , but in the warmth of their gratitude and confidence , offered to chuse him directly for their king .


 Though this far out-went the intention of Narbal , he thought proper to accede in appearance to their proposal for the present , as the method for accomplishing the great design he had in view  but declined actually receiving the crown , till he should make some preparations , which he esteemed necessary for so solemn a ceremony .


The opportunities Narbal had had of comparing the various forms of government , in all the various countries thro ' which he had travelled , having enabled him to discover the defects and advantages in each , he directly applied himself with the utmost assiduity and attention , to select from all , such particular parts , as when digested into one consistent system , might be most likely to procure the happiness of the community , the great end of all government , in the purity of its original intention .


 When he had compleated his design , he again convened the people , on a mount which arose in the midst of the city  and having offered up sacrifices and prayers to the gods , to be propitious to his undertaking , the most venerable of the elders informed them of the cause of their being assembled .


An universal burst of joyful acclamation testifying their assent , Narbal advanced to the altar , and waving his hand to demand attention , declared with a determined look and accent , that as he was come there that day , to take upon him the government of the state , at their request , not by his own desire , he expected they would permit him to explain the terms , on which alone it was his invariable resolution to enter upon that equally difficult and important charge .


A silence , still as death , following his words , he drew forth from his bosom a  written roll , and read aloud to them a particular account of the form of government which he proposed to establish , desiring them to make their objections to the whole , or any particular part thereof , which they should disapprove  as the sanction of their approbation that day was to be for ever after irrevocable .


2.8 .
SECTION VIII .


IT is not necessary to enter into a minute detail of all the several parts of his system .
A short sketch of the leading principles of it , will sufficiently shew its excellence .


Justly sensible that the prosperity of a state is necessarily derived from and dependent on the favour of heaven , he ordained , that all the sacred rites of religion should be constantly performed with piety and proper order  and to enable the persons set apart for the performance of them to attend to that  duty , without interruption from the anxieties and avocations of domestic care , and give them that respect in the eyes of the people , which is indispensibly necessary to add weight and influence to precepts , he appointed them a competent support out of the public revenue , without laying them under the dangerous necessity of receiving that support from the voluntary contributions of particulars , who might either want ability or inclination to give it , and therefore would hold the demander in disesteem  as a right to enforce such demand , by compulsive means , the only remedy in such a situation , must raise animosities which would prejudice the people against his precepts , as well as against himself .


The miseries which he had invariably seen the people groan under , in those countries where the prince knows no law but his own will , and executes that law himself , over-balanced every temptation  with which power could assail his generous heart , and determined him against a form of government , where greatness is purchased at so dear a price  as on the other hand , he had before his eyes , in the unhappy fate of his native country , a melancholy proof of the evils attending those governments , in which the supreme power is lodged solely in the collective body of the people , whose councils are too often dictated by caprice or intrigue , and whose motions , where the object is not instantly present , are as slow and feeble , as their resolutions are precipitate and rash .


Between these two extremes , the wisdom of Narbal chose a mean , in which he hoped to avoid the evils incident to both .


To give dignity and vigour to the state , he ordained , that it should be governed by a king  as he also ordained , that the crown should descend by regular  succession in one family , to obviate the fatal consequences which attend the struggles of ambition  being too well read in the human heart , to trust the people with the right of chusing their sovereign on every succession  a right inestimable in its first principle , where reason directs the choice to merit only , but liable to such abuse in the practice , as over-balances every advantage .


To prevent the abuse of power , when thus rendered hereditary and certain , he appointed limits to the authority of the crown , by laws which ascertained the rights of the people  which laws were to be acknowledged by every successive sovereign , on his ascending the throne  and his observation of them made the condition of the people 's obedience .


To assist the sovereign with their advice , in the arduous affairs of government , he instituted a council composed of the elders and chiefs of the Carthaginian  families , who had been the companions of his flight , to whom he joined a few of the natives , most eminent for their virtue , to obviate any apprehension , that their interests might be sacrificed to those of their new fellow-subjects .


That this council should not be subject to the influences of fear or mercenary motives , he appointed them several honourable and important privileges , and consigned to each a considerable property out of the public stock , which privilege and property were to descend to their posterity , who were to be the hereditary counsellors of the king , and guardians of the laws , so long as they persevered in the principles of private as well as public virtue , for which they were raised to such honour  but on their falling off from them , or dissipating the property thus given to secure their independance , all those advantages were to be forfeited , their families reduced to a  private rank , and their places filled with persons more worthy of them .


Lest this preeminence should tempt this hereditary council to infringe upon the authority of the sovereign , or join him in oppressing the people , above whom they were thus raised , Narbal instituted a second council , inferior in rank , to be chosen annually by the people from among themselves , to watch over their interests , and defeat any attempt which might be made either by the sovereign , or the superior council , to exceed the limits respectively appointed to them  which second council was to be convened at a certain time in every year , to examine past transactions , and concert future measures  during their attendance on which duties , they were to enjoy the same privileges as the superior council  but at the end of that attendance , to return to their former private state  and this short duration of their authority was ordained , that in case  this representative council , or any of its members , should deviate from the sense of their constituents , or betray their confidence , the people might have a timely remedy in their power , by correcting their choice  and entrusting their rights into more faithful hands , before any evil or error committed by them should take too deep a root .


By these two councils , in conjunction with the sovereign , were to be framed all future laws for the government of the state , as well in its interior policy , as in respect to its connections and intercourse with other states  which conjunction was so essential , that the dissent of the sovereign , or either council , prevented the establishment of the law proposed : and of all laws , the execution was committed to the king , with a power of appointing persons proper for that purpose  but under this restriction , that no person should be appointed to  execute the laws , who was himself known to persist in the violation of any law .


And lastly , to support the dignity of the crown , and defray the necessary expences of the state , he appointed a certain portion of lands to be cultivated by such delinquents , as by their crimes should deserve the loss of liberty  being sensible of the absurdity and injustice to the public , of depriving it of the service of its members , by punishing any crime , beside murder , with the death of the criminal  and that as all other crimes proceed ultimately from idleness , their proper punishment is labour , the apprehension of which accumulated as far as the strength of the criminal could possibly support , and continued for his life , must be much more effectual to prevent the commission of such crimes , than any other punishment , however severe , but of short duration  and till there should be a sufficient number of such delinquents , or if happily there never should , then  by the lower ranks of the people for hire , to be paid out of the produce of their labour .


To such a system of government it was impossible to make any objection .
The people unanimously testified their approbation of it in the strongest manner  and Narbal , having sworn at the altar to preserve it inviolably , in every respect and instance , to the utmost of his power  and imprecated the vengeance of heaven upon any of his successors who should attempt to subvert it , he received the crown from the hands of the chief priest , amid the universal acclamations and blessings of all present  who in return swore fidelity to him , and obedience to the government , which he planned for their mutual benefit  concluding the sacred solemnity with oblations and prayers to the gods for their blessing and protection .


2.9 .
SECTION IX .


 THE same wisdom and public spirit which had dictated this form of government , appeared in every act of Narbal 's reign .
He promoted virtue , and punished vice .
He secured the civil rights and private property of his subjects , by plain and equitable laws .
He established order in the state  and regulated its internal policy .
He restrained ostentatious expence , luxury , and excess .
He encouraged industry , and application to the useful arts  and his own conduct was the best comment on his laws .


When he had settled these most immediate objects of his care , he extended it to others more remote , though not less important .


He knew that industry is the true parent of strength  and commerce the only inexhaustible fund of wealth to a  state : but he had learned from the unhappy fate of Carthage , that even commerce may be pursued too far , and that excess of wealth is weakness .
He therefore directed the spirit of industry to a more solid object .


Of all the ways , in which the combined force of the human mind and body can be exerted , the most advantageous , and at the same time the most truly honourable , is agriculture .
It creates that wealth , which commerce only collects : it supports the arts , by supporting life for the exercise of them : it increases population , and provides for that encrease .
In a word , as much as the supply of natural , is more important than that of artificial wants  as much as life itself , than the phantastic emoluments of it , by so much is agriculture superior to every other art : and for this reason , the first and great aim of Narbal 's policy , through the whole course of his reign , was to improve agriculture ,  and promote it by every encouragement of interest and honour .


Nor was his care confined within the circle of his own kingdom .
He studied the genius and interests of all the neighbouring nations  and laid down rules for the conduct proper to be observed in every possible intercourse with them .


Though the first aim of Narbal 's policy was peace , and his first laws calculated for the cultivation of it , he was too well acquainted with human nature to expect that such a blessing could be preserved to his people without the support of force , to repel the attacks of envy , interest , and ambition .


To establish this force therefore , in constant readiness for so necessary a purpose , he ordained that all the Byrsan youth should learn the warlike arts , and appear at certain stated times in every year before him , to shew their expertness  at them  encouraging emulation by honorary prizes  but at the same time taking every possible precaution to suppress ambition and an indiscriminate passion for war .


The wisdom of these institutions soon appeared .
His people were held in esteem and respect by all the neighbouring nations .
They were happy in themselves  and their country flourished in all the blessings of industry and peace  and as far as human reason could look forward into time , the firmness of the basis upon which his happiness was founded , secured its duration .


` But why do I dwell thus fondly on the excellencies of a government , which is now no more ?
The theme must be disinteresting to you  but my mind is so filled with the revered idea , that in the over-flowing of my heart , I have insensibly ran into lengths , beyond my  first design . '
- Saying this he wiped away the tears .
-


` Imitate not his prolixity , ' interrupted Temugin , ` by a description of grief , as disgusting in your repetition , as it was groundless in him .
As well may it be expected to make the sea stand still , as to frame a system of government , which will not change .
Every hour produces incidents , which alter its form , as necessarily as the motion of the air moves the face of the waters .
But such is the wisdom of speculative legislators .
Proceed . '
-


The captive bowed his head in submission to a reproof , the force of which he felt  and thus resumed his story .


2.10 .
SECTION X .


 ` HEAVEN , ' continued my host , ` rewarded the virtue of Narbal , in the amplest manner .
He saw all his pious labours crowned with success  and died full of years , and full of glory , leaving his crown to a son , worthy to succeed him . '


The kingdom of Byrsa flourished for many ages , under a long succession of princes of the race of Narbal  who all adhered faithfully to the great principles of his government , every change which became necessary , in the change of times , being regulated by them .


But unhappily the same care was not observed , perhaps was not possible to be observed , in the minuter matters of domestic policy .
A long course of prosperity made the Byrsans forget , that their state owed its origin to misfortune  and wealth , accumulated by frugality ,  was thought to remove the necessity of that virtue .


The natural wants of man are few , and easily supplied  but the artificial are infinite , and insatiable .
Not content with the necessaries of life , he looks around for the conveniences , from which to the luxuries the ascent is insensible .


No sooner had the sumptuary laws , so strictly enjoined by Narbal , began to be relaxed , than the spirit of commerce , consequentially , and designedly restrained by them , broke through all bounds  and ransacked every quarter of the earth to gratify the phantastick demands of luxury and caprice .


The opportunities , which this opened , of bartering from one to another , the various products of all the various nations , with whom they traded , afforded them such gain , that as their wealth had  made them luxurious , so their luxury made them wealthy .


The effects of this were soon felt .
The wealth of individuals exceeded that of the state , in every degree of just proportion : and their expence exceeded that wealth .
A false refinement universally took place of that sublime simplicity of sentiment and manners , which had been the honourable characteristic of the Byrsan nation .
Their buildings were raised more for ostentation than use .
Their garments were fashioned by vanity .
Their food was chosen meerly for its expence , however disagreeable to the taste , or destructive to health .
Respect was measured by riches .
Honours were openly sold  or conferred for services , in their nature most dishonourable .
Virtue and merit were depressed by contempt and neglect  while vice found favour , and injudicious mercy encouraged crimes , by disarming justice of its terrors .


 In a word , the whole business of life was dissipation  and every thing serious , every regard to decency , moral virtue , and religion , was turned into ridicule .


In order to carry on their commerce to greater advantage , the Byrsans planted colonies , in different parts of the earth , which drained their own country of its most useful inhabitants  none who were not possessed of considerable wealth , or whose professions did not immediately minister to the gratification of luxury , finding any encouragement , or even being able to live at home , where the fascination of example had made a profusion in expence unavoidable  and idleness and vanity had so far enhanced the price of the indispensible necessaries of life , as to involve the industrious poor , whose labour is the natural support , as their numbers make the real strength of a state , in all the miseries of want  and oblige them to seek subsistence elsewhere .


 Time shewed the consequence of this conduct .
These colonies , encreasing in numbers , in proportion to the depopulation of their mother country , by such emigrations  and flourishing in all the arts carried from thence , at length felt their own strength  and scorning a dependance no longer supported by sufficient power , took the first plausible occasion to shake it off  and ever after carried themselves like states allied upon equal terms , rather than subjects .


Nor was the exterior polity of the Byrsans , ruled by principles of greater wisdom , or virtue .
Proud of their wealth , they looked with contempt on every poorer nation  and blindly mistaking that wealth for strength , scrupled not to invade their rights , as views of interest or ambition chanced to tempt them .


Such a conduct often necessarily engaged them in wars , with the neighbouring  nations  and gave the sanction of justice to the attacks , which envy of their prosperity had before designed against them  but as these attacks were always made on some particular occasion , and singly by the people then aggrieved , they constantly failed of their effect , and only encreased by such exertion , the power they were intended to over-turn .


In this manner did they proceed for many ages , flourishing in a false prosperity , the cause of which insensibly undermined its foundation , like a tree , growing by the side of a river , whose waters , at the same time , that they make its branches spread , and cover them with bloom , wash away the earth from its roots  till it falls unexpectedly in the midst of its glory , over-turned by the slightest gust of wind  and buries every thing near it , in its ruins .


2.11 .
SECTION XI .


 IN the commotions which shook the earth , when the Arabians , under the pretext of propagating their religion , impiously ravaged and enslaved the greater part of the world , as if the benign Father of creation could be pleased with the misery and desolation of his works , a body of Egyptians , who had escaped their fury , settled themselves in a mountainous and barren tract of land , which lay between the country of the Byrsans , and the desart , over which they had fled with their families , in their despair .
-


Appalled at this arraignment of the religion , in which I had been educated  of principles , which I had ever been taught to hold most sacred , all my respect for my host could not prevent my interrupting him .


 Mercy , gracious heaven !
I exclaimed , what do I hear ?
Can any duty be more incumbent on man , than to propagate the true religion , even by force , where persuasion fails ?
Is not every man , who refuses to receive it , an enemy to God , and as such to be cut off from among men ?
And is it not a most , impious breach of that duty , a prostitution of benevolence to exert it , toward him ?


` Beware , O my son , ' he replied , with a look and accent of the greatest earnestness , ` beware of intruding thyself into the councils of heaven !
Has the Supreme Being told you , that only one religion is acceptable to him ?
And that the religion , which you profess , is that one ?
If you alledge a particular revelation of your religion , do not others rest upon a like foundation ?
And doth not every man believe his own to be true ? '


 ` In such a contrariety , by what virtue have you alone merited the preference of being right ?
Or rather , how hath the place of your birth merited that preference ?
For by that was determined the mode of your religion : And would a matter of such importance have been left depending on a circumstance so meerly accidental ? '


` Beside , to allow what you contend for , that your religion is the only one , which is right , hath the Deity delegated to you a power , which he hath not exerted himself , of compelling all men to think alike ?
Or , if he intends such compulsion , doth he want your assistance to effect it ?
Can not he , who createth the mind , mould it as he pleaseth ?
And is it not in vain  is it not impious for man to attempt controuling that which the Deity hath left free ? '


` Nor is it less so , to attempt usurping his vengeance : If he would punish ,  are not famine and pestilence , as swords , in his hand ?
Does not the thunder roar ?
Do not the foundations of the earth tremble at his word ?
Universal benevolence is the sacrifice most acceptable to heaven  nor can any religion be derived from thence , which would enjoin a breach of that invariable , eternal duty . '


Then observing that I was ready to burst with indignation , and eagerness to controvert what he said  ` Repress your zeal , my son , ' he continued , softening his voice , and regarding me , with a look of inexpressible tenderness  ` and examine dispassionately , before you presume to judge .
Influenced by the same motives , I once thought as you do now  and held in detestation every religion , but my own  or rather that of the country , in which I had happened to be born , which I had received implicitly , without examination , or  proof .
But reason and experience have since opened my eyes , to my error . '


` If only one manner of worship could be acceptable to the Deity , would he not have made that manner known to all mankind , at their creation ?
Would he not have made the mind conceive it as invariably , as he made the senses represent their objects ?
Would he not have made it as self-evident , as the foundation of moral virtue , which is received without variation , by all mankind * .
- If eternal unhappiness was to be the necessary consequence of differing from this manner , would it have been consistent , either with his goodness , or his justice , to have left by so much the greater part of mankind ignorant of it ?
This would have been to create them on purpose for unhappiness .
An imputation ,  which is the greatest offence possible for man to offer to God , so far as respects himself only . '


` Consider , that the mode of worship , which prevails most in the world , is not known to the hundredth , perhaps not to the thousandth part of its inhabitants .
- Consider also how many ages have passed away , before any of the present modes were known at all  and then you will see the impious absurdity of excluding from mercy , all but the few professors of a particular one among them . '


` Who then shall dare to call the man , who professes a different mode of worship , an enemy to heaven ?
And how can it be a duty to attempt propagating by force , an uniformity , which is not prescribed ?
Should he not rather conclude from its not having been prescribed , that the variety is pleasing  in the same manner as the beauty of sensible  objects ariseth from variation in their parts .
Wherever I hear the praises of the Deity sung , my soul shall accompany them , without objecting to the manner  nor will I hazard the profanation of so sacred a duty , by arrogantly attempting to obtrude any other . '


` To prove the necessary obligation of mutual benevolence , man was created in a state of indispensible dependance upon the assistance of others , from the first moment of his life .
Shall he not , then , give that assistance , which he has received  and must continue to receive ?
Have all , who have administered relief to his wants , professed the same religion with him ?
And would their professing another make their assistance ineffectual to his relief ?
Be the religion of a man what it will , while the morsel of bread , which I receive from his hand , yields me wholesome nourishment , never will I think myself absolved from , much less interdicted the duty of administering  relief to his wants .
Nothing less than an immediate interposition of the Deity , by a total change of natural effects , being sufficient to abrogate a law , made necessary by him , to my nature . '


` In a word , my son , the worship , truly acceptable to the Deity , is the immediate act of the soul , and consists in gratitude for his blessings , and resignation to his will  while I pay that with sincerity of heart , I fear not his taking offence at the posture of my body , or any other - '


` Cease ! '
interrupted Temugin , ` nor waste time in repeating the proofs of principles self-evident .
Some mode of worship is necessary  and since no particular one has been universally established by that power , which alone hath the right , every country is entitled to pursue its own  and every individual obliged to observe it , in his actions ,  which only are subject to human authority . '


2.12 .
SECTION XII .


` THE Byrsans , ' resumed the captive , ` who at the time of the arrival of those strangers were beginning to deviate from the sage institutions of Narbal , and turn all their attention from agriculture to commerce , gave no obstruction to this new settlement  either not thinking those mountains worth cultivating , or perhaps not being yet so intoxicated by good fortune , as to forget the origin of their own state . '


For several ages there subsisted but little intercourse between the Byrsans and their new neighbours , who had assumed the name of Coptes  the Byrsans , in the pride of prosperity , disdaining to take notice of a people struggling with distress  and the Coptes , in the sullen diffidence of that distress , keeping at  an equal distance from such unfeeling neighbours .


While the Byrsans therefore were extending their commerce to the extremities of the earth , and revelling in the luxuries which it produced , the Coptes , precluded by their situation from every foreign intercourse , applied themselves entirely to agriculture , in which the natural disadvantages of their country obliged them to exert all their industry , in order to procure the indispensible necessaries of life .


But these disadvantages were more than made amends for by the consequences .
They secured them from the pernicious effects of luxury , and all the train of vices and evils which attend on wealth .
If they possessed but little , they wanted still less !
They were strong in body , and resolute of spirit  and their habitations were filled with a numerous and healthful progeny .


 In the course of time , such unremitted industry changed the face of the country , and remedied all the unkindnesses of nature .
The hills were covered with flocks and herds .
The song of the husbandman echoed in the vallies  and the voice of plenty and content was heard through all the land .


Such a change at length raised the envy and avarice of the Byrsans , who were then in the zenith of their glory .
They sent haughtily to the Coptes , to demand possession of their country , which they alledged to belong to themselves  and without even waiting for an answer , prepared to march a powerful army to seize by force , that which they were conscious they had no right to receive peaceably .


The Coptes naturally were surprized at such a demand  and directly sent an embassy of the most respectable persons in their state , to shew the injustice of it . '
 They alledged the length of the time , during which they had been in undisturbed possession of the country , which their ancestors had found desolate , and unpossessed by any inhabitants .
That the Byrsans , far from claiming any right to it at that time , as they certainly would have done , had they thought it belonged to them , took not the least notice , much less offence at their settling there  nor had ever mentioned such a claim in any of the transactions which had occasionally passed between the two nations since .
And finally , that the title of the Coptes to the country which they inhabited , was equally good with that of the Byrsans to theirs  both people having been compelled by necessity to fly from their native homes , and fix themselves in the same manner , wherever they could find a place of refuge . '


Unanswerable as these arguments were , they had no force with the Byrsans ,  who scarcely deigned to wait till the king should give the ambassadors an audience .


At this unhappy period commences the sad story of my misfortunes , which were so immediately derived from those of my country , that I thought it necessary to give this short detail , as an introduction to the events of my own life .


The entrance of an eunuch to acquaint Temugin with the arrival of an express from the general of one of his armies , interrupted the captive at this place .
He was commanded to withdraw , and wait the emperor 's pleasure to hear the continuation of his narrative at some other time .


End of the SECOND BOOK .
3 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE THIRD .


 3.1 .
SECTION I .


THE curiosity of Temugin , who had heard something of the destruction of the Byrsan state , and was desirous to be better informed of it , was so highly interested by the captive 's story , that he ordered his attendance , the next evening , when he resumed it , as follows .


 ` An illustrious ancestry , ' continued Himilco , ( so was my venerable host called ) ` is the deepest disgrace to a degenerate offspring  but where it excites virtuous emulation , it reflects additional lustre upon every new access of honour , sealing it with the sanction of inheritance  and may be mentioned without incurring the reproach of vanity . '


The house of my father derived its origin from Narbal , by his youngest son , Mago  whose descendants always justified by their merits , the claim which their blood gave them to the first offices in the state .


My father , who beheld with grief every deviation , from the wise institutions of his royal progenitor , took particular care to instruct me in the true sense and spirit of them , from a fond hope that heaven would one day offer some favourable opportunity for restoring the government , to the purity and vigour  of its first principles  as he well foresaw , from its present relaxation , that some great change must necessarily be near .
But happy for him , he lived not to see the accomplishment of his presage .


To prove the excellency of these institutions , by comparison with those of other nations  and to avoid the dangerous influence of such an example , as the manners of the Byrsan youth then exhibited , upon an unexperienced mind , my father resolved that I should travel into foreign lands , as soon as reason was ripened to sufficient strength , to form a proper judgment upon a personal knowledge of the ways of man .


Having prepared all things for this purpose , he led me into his garden , on the evening preceding the day appointed for my departure , and seating me beside him , on the margin of a fountain , addressed himself to me in these words !
 words , indelibly written on the tablet of my heart .


' I see , with delight , ' said he , ` my son , the impression , which the precepts of my care have made upon thy mind  and I fear not but heaven will enable thee to carry them into execution . '


To facilitate this great end , I send thee to search for wisdom in the world !
To read the heart of man , in his actions  and from them learn to distinguish between the appearance , and reality of things .


Were I to consult the tender impulse of nature , I should keep thee still in my bosom  but I prefer thy advantage to my own pleasure  ( should I not rather say that thy advantage is my greatest pleasure ! )
and I part with thee for a time , in assured hope of thy returning enriched with wisdom and virtue to support the feeble steps of my old age  down the hill of life  and crown my urn with the sacred honour of having begotten a son , worthy to serve his country .


When I say , that my hope of thy happy return is assured , I would not be understood to mean , that there are no dangers in thy way .
The floating sands of the desart , the rage of the tempest , or the hidden rocks in the sea , are less dangerous than the allurements , vice lays in the way of the traveller : Allurements , which it requires the immediate guidance of heaven to avoid , they offer themselves in such various shapes , and so speciously simulate the very virtues , which they counteract .


I will not burthen thy mind with a repetition of the advice , which it has been the pleasing task of my life , to instill into it .
The few following hints , as they relate immediately to the scene ,  on which you are just entering , are all I shall say at present  and then commit thy steps to that guidance , which is never withheld from virtue , if sought with humble , and ardent supplication .


Open thine eyes , and thine ears  but bar the door of thy lips .
Ask no questions !
Enter not into arguments .
Concern not yourself in the affairs of others  nor reveal your own , where the importance of the occasion doth not make such a confidence indispensible .


Silence is universally esteemed to be the consequence of wisdom .
It therefore engages confidence  and commands respect .


If you meet any thing , which you do not directly comprehend , conclude that the difficulty arises from your own inattention  and consider the matter again , with better care .
One doubt , thus solved by yourself , will open your  mind more , by exercising its powers , than the solution of many , by another .


As for arguing , instead of elucidating difficulties , it only creates animosity , and confirms error  the pride of man making him more anxious to support his own opinion , than to investigate truth .
And this was the reason of that mysterious silence enjoined to his pupils , by one of the wisest of the western sages .


` This , my son , is the sum of what I have to recommend to your attention .
Careful observation of these few plain rules , will conduct you safely through the multitudes , whom you must mix with to acquire knowledge . '
- Saying this , he laid his hand upon my head  and praying to heaven to confirm the blessings , which he heaped upon me , dismissed me , with a kiss of peace , and paternal love .


3.2 .
SECTION II .


 I will not lead you thro ' every weary step I measured , nor recount common incidents , however interesting to myself at the time .
Such recitals , though flattering to that consequence in which man is too apt to hold himself , only tire and disgu [ ... ] the hearer .


Having passed thro ' several regions , in all of which , under appearances , and by means utterly contradictory to each other , I saw the same end of present gratification universally pursued , with the most anxious and insatiable eagerness , I arrived at length upon the banks of the great river Euphrates , whither I was drawn by an irresistible desire to receive instruction from the mouth of the sage Myrza , the fame of whose wisdom and sanctity had gone forth into all the nations of the East .


 The sun was just disappearing , as I approached the habitation of the sage .
It was a grotto , formed by the hand of Nature , at the foot of an hill , whose brow hung over the river .
He sat in the entrance , contemplating the smiles of nature in that placid hour  and accompanying in his heart the voice of gratitude and gladness , which echoed the adoration of every living thing around .


He no sooner perceived my approach , than he advanced to meet me , preventing , by a friendly embrace , those professions of reverence , which his appearance commanded equally with his fame .


Though report proclaimed him to have measured more than twice the usual life of man , and knowledge was written in characters of deepest reflection in his face , his eye had not lost the penetrating fire , nor his limbs the strength of youth .
He was crowned with all the  honours , but exempt from the infirmities of age .


Having kindly enquired the motive of my coming , he led me to his habitation , at the entrance of which he resumed his seat , placing me beside him , while my slaves pitched their tents among some lofty trees at a little distance on the bank of the river  then observing that I had not yet overcome the awe with which his presence had struck me , ` Knowledge , my son , ' said he , with a smile of the most encouraging complacency , ` is a gift bestowed with a sparing hand , and to but very few  the utmost abilities of man reaching little farther than to discover his own ignorance .
The ambition of it , however , is most laudable  and when properly pursued , seldom fails of a just reward , in the more valuable acquisition of wisdom . '


 ` If the observations of my life can conduce to your acquiring either , I shall be happy in the communication of them .
At present the departing sun reminds us of the debt we owe for the blessings of the finished day . '
- Saying this , he turned his face to the west , and falling upon his knees , poured forth his evening song of adoration and praise , in such exalted strains , as rapt my soul in extasy I had never felt before , while I joined instinctively with him .


Having performed this sacred duty , he arose  and turning to me , his eyes still sparkling with rapture , which seemed to raise him above man , ` My son , ' said he , ` the subject of thy enquiries is too extensive , too complex , to be discussed in a short time .
The evening closeth apace  and nature requireth rest .
To-morrow I will meet thee with the young day , in yonder citron grove   and give thee every information in my power . '


3.3 .
SECTION III .


SOON as the angel of the morning had chased away the spirits of darkness from the face of the earth , I repaired to the grove , where I waited not long , before I was joined by the sage .


After some expressions of benevolence and regard , he led me to a bower , woven by his own hands  and looking at the various birds which winged their way around , ` How different , my son , ' said he , ` are the beauties of this scene , from those which gild the view of evening ?
Satisfied with the enjoyments of the day , the feathered race then seek their homes , and sing themselves to sleep .
Now busy care , awakening with the sun , sends them abroad again to seek the same enjoyments  secure of finding what they want , because their  wants are only those of nature , who has provided amply for all her offspring . '


` So happily would the circle of man 's day wind up , were his desires limited within the same bounds .
I speak of the desires of reason as well as sense  for reason and nature never differ .
A wish for something more would not prevent his enjoyment  nor disappointment break his rest .
Then would he not complain , that the way to knowledge is without end  that every new acquisition only opens a new want  but justly grateful for the portion dispensed to him , reduce it into practice , instead of wasting his days in endless search for more . '


` Surely , ' I returned , ' O my father , the way to knowledge can not be without end to him , who sets out early , and is so happy as to have an instructor capable of directing his steps ? '


 ` Instruction , ' he replied , ` is to the mind , what food is to the body .
As , in this , repletion counteracts nourishment , so objects presented to the mind too suddenly , or in too rapid a succession , by instruction , without allowing time to arrange them in due order , investigate their properties , and prove their agreement by comparison , instead of informing only burden reason , and bring not knowledge , but confusion . '


Wretch that I am !
I exclaimed , surprized , and alarmed at what he said , Have I then only wasted my youth in listening to instruction ?
Are the precepts of my father no more than a burden to my mind ?


' I mean not so , ' answered the sage  ` instruction is of the greatest advantage to a youthful mind .
It awakens its powers , improves their strength by exercise , and points out the proper objects of their exertion . '


 The precepts of thy father have laid a foundation for knowledge .
To raise the superstructure must be your own task .
That which is derived only from precept being no more than a shadow , which vanishes on attempting to apply it to use .


Mustapha Eber Ibrahim was born in the city of Bagdat , where he gained such reputation in his trade of a jeweller , that he soon became rich .


Encouraged by this success , he resolved to breed up his two sons , Kerker and Hassan , to the same trade  and that in such a manner , as he flattered himself would enable them to rise to greater eminence in it , than had ever been attained by any former artist .


Mustapha was himself utterly unlearned .
Practice had taught him to know the value of the gems and metals in which he wrought , and to fashion  and arrange them in such forms and combinations , as should display their colours , and employ their properties to most advantage .
But all his knowledge ended there .
When he was asked the cause of these properties , and why such forms and arrangements produced those effects , he was unable to give an answer satisfactory even to himself , much less to the enquirer .


The pride of wealth being hurt by consciousness of this ignorance , he determined to save his sons from such disgrace , by giving them a liberal education before he should begin to teach them his art .


For this purpose , he procured them the most celebrated masters , in all the several branches of philosophy , who executed their charge with the greatest fidelity , though not with equal success to their pupils , the turn and powers of  whose minds were totally different from each other .


Kerker , the elder , was lively in the extreme degree .
His imagination outran the precepts of his instructor .
Without waiting to examine farther than the first glance , he catched at the conclusion , before they could adduce half the proofs  and his tongue never wanted the happiest words to express his conceptions .


Hassan , on the contrary , was given to doubt .
He paid no respect to authority , nor would admit any thing without the clearest proof , in examining which , he was so cautious and slow , that he wore out the patience of instructors , who hesitated not to pronounce him incapable of learning , and therefore counselled his father to apply him wholly to his trade .


 While Kerker , consequently , was indulging himself in ranging through the boundless regions of theory , and reasoning upon causes and effects according to the various systems of the philosophy he had studied , Hassan was obliged to confine his thoughts to his labour  and to rest satisfied with that small pittance of knowledge , which he could elicit from experience .


Though Mustapha felt this disappointment of his hopes in his younger son with the fondness of a father , he found consolation in the rapid progress made by the elder  and his heart exulted when he heard him display his learning to the crowds whom his fame collected round him .


But this exultation lasted not long .
The knowledge of Kerker was merely speculative  and by misapplication defeated the end it was designed to obtain .
Confiding in it , he had disdained to  apply himself to the gradual practice of an art , with the principles of which he was so well acquainted  and thinking he could execute whatever he thought he understood , he affected to mount at once to that eminence of skill , which can be attained only by long and careful application .


He could explain the nature of precious stones , and account for the different degrees of their perfection  but when they were placed before him , he was unable to distinguish those degrees  and often bought the worst instead of the best .
He could describe the effects produced by the various combinations of their colours , but he knew not how to combine them so as to produce the effects he described .


The consequence naturally was , that his knowledge was turned into ridicule .
He lost his business , and wasted the wealth earned by his father , in so much  that he would have wanted a morsel of bread in his old age , had he not found a resource in his younger son  who thinking for himself , while the elder read the opinions of others , and labouring while he talked , had drawn real knowledge from its true source , experience  and arrived regularly at the end , which his brother had missed , by mistaking the effect for the cause , and beginning where he should have ended .


Surely , my father , said I , observing that Myrza paused at these words to leave the application to myself , the moral of this tale can not have reference to my case !
To think of arriving at excellence in manual arts by speculative instruction , without a regular gradation of practice , were most absurd .
But may I not dare to doubt if science is within the same rule !
Is there not , for instance , an essential difference between polity and mechanism ?
Between knowledge  of the interests of nations , and of the value of precious stones ?


` The difference between science and art , ' replied the sage , ` so far as they have reference to the uses of life ( and to consider them farther were foreign to the present purpose ) is confined to their objects , and extends not to their manner of operation . '


Even in science meerly speculative , which terminates in itself , the mind proceeds by as regular a gradation , as the hand in works of art : but because the steps of this gradation are not so immediately seen , the vanity of man overlooks it , and attempts to rise to the summit at a single bound  and hence proceed most of the errors which defeat his designs .


Instruction teaches the mind the use of its own powers  and points out the directest path to knowledge  but there  its purpose ends .
To acquire that knowledge , the mind must prove the truth of precept by practice .
A speculative jeweller is not liable to commit greater errors in his profession , than is a speculative king .


Can it be thought less difficult to discover the different characters , and apply their abilities properly , which is the perfection of the art of governing , or polity  than to know the value of jewels , and combine their colours ?
Why is not government arrived at greater perfection  and the interests of nations more improved ?
Is it that they will not admit of more improvement  and that the nature of man can not be better governed ?
By no means .
The fault is in the agent , not the subject .
The errors of a prince , lifted from the cradle or seraglio to the throne , of a visier chosen meerly from favour , undo in one hour the work of an age , and require the wisdom of another  to bring things back to their first state : and this it is which hath prevented polity from arriving at greater perfection .


3.4 .
SECTION IV .


` YOU have shewn me , O son of Wisdom , ' said I , ` the error in which I have set out !
Shew me also how to correct it . '


` The wisdom of thy father , ' returned the sage , ` hath sent thee forth into the world , with a mind well prepared by instruction to draw from experience that practical knowledge , which is necessary to conduct thee safely through life , and enable thee to fulfil the duties of it  but his fondness hath thrown obstacles in thy way , which if not timely removed , may disappoint his hopes . '


Surrounded thus by a crowd of slaves , you see only with their eyes  and while  they minister to unnecessary convenience , they debar you from that intercourse with other people , by which alone experience in their ways is to be acquired  and not by running from place to place , viewing superficially the face of nature , the works of art , and studied manners .


Before the wealthy , all men wear a mask .
His equals in wealth disguise their sentiments under an appearance of politeness  and shew only the bright side of their country , from emulative pride .
The poor run into the opposite extreme , vilifying their country to flatter him by the comparison  and throw the blame of their misery from themselves , in order to excite his compassion and draw relief from his bounty .


To see the world properly , you must enter into it .
You must dismiss your long train of attendants , lay aside your purple robes , and mix with the multitude without any mark of distinction to  put them on their guard .
Thus only can you learn their real sentiments , and trace the motives of their actions .


` But is there no danger in doing this ? '
I returned , hurt at an injunction so humiliating to the pride of condition , so contrary to the course of life in which I had been brought up .
` Is not a traveller subject to many accidents and disasters , which require care and assistance ?
Are there not menial offices , which a man can not so well perform for himself ? '
-


` And who performs them for thy slave ? '
replied the sage .
` Who spreads a carpet for the pilgrim in the wilderness ?
or guards the mariner from the dangers of the sea ? '


` But this is the vanity of man !
Is thy nature superior to theirs ?
And is not the distinction between you merely accidental ?
Man wants not assistance  to perform , for himself , the very few offices which are really necessary for him !
Nor is one state of life exposed to greater dangers than another .
Be superior to this vain weakness .
The power which protects and provides for every living thing , will not neglect you , while you deserve his care . '


The force of truth is irresistible .
I was humbled in my own eyes  and hung down my head abashed before him .
After a pause of a few moments , I threw myself at his feet , and embracing his knees , ' I see , I acknowledge my error , said I , and will correct it .
I will go directly to Bagdat , and there sell all those slaves , of whose attendance thou hast shewn me the evil  happy if by this obedience I may appear not unworthy of thy farther instruction  to implore which , I will return to you . '


 ` And why should ` st thou sell them ? '
he returned , raising me tenderly from the ground .
` Why not restore them to that liberty which is the common right of all mankind  tho ' so many are unjustly deprived of it , that grown familiar , and in a manner sanctified by use , the injustice hath almost lost its native appearance , and passes for a right . '
-


` Are then all men equal ? '
said I , amazed at what I heard .
` And have all a right to the same stations in life ? '


` That all are equal in their nature , ' he replied , ` Reason will infallibly shew you  as it will also shew , that they have an equal right to the same stations , if they can arrive at them , by just means .
But as there is a subordination indispensibly necessary for the purposes of life , so all must remain in those stages of the ascent , which have fallen to their first lot , till they rise to higher , by their  own merit : and this , instead of being an unjust partiality in the oeconomy of nature , is the best incentive , and reward of virtuous emulation . '


His words instantly dispelled the clouds of prejudice , in which my mind was involved , opening my heart , with delight , to sentiments , which vindicated human nature from such indignity .
I set all my slaves at liberty  and was proceeding to divide among them the wealth , which my father had given me , to defray the expences of my journey : but Myrza restrained me .


` Hold , ' said he .
` Prudence is a virtue , equally with generosity  and a man may be unjust to himself , no less than to another .
Give them the means of supporting life , by honest industry , or the gift of liberty will be of little value to them .
But make not yourself poor , to make them unnecessarily rich . '


 I perceive that the greatest part of the wealth , given to you by your father , consists in precious stones .
Reserve these for yourself .
They are light of carriage , and may be easily concealed .
Poverty is subject to many inconveniences  and riches are a blessing , when rightly used .
The time may come , when your 's may be necessary to you , if only to relieve the necessities of others .
For your slaves , the equipage and implements of luxury , and the utensils of their own servitude , for which you can have no farther use , when you dismiss themselves , will be sufficient , if they apply them properly !
If not  they will be too much .


Nor would I counsel you to dismiss all your attendants indiscriminately  and launch into the world absolutely alone : You are yet too inexperienced in its ways , for such an adventurous enterprize .
Is there not among them some one , whom your father hath particularly  recommended to your confidence ?
I have observed one , whose looks bespeak an heart , honest in itself , and affectionate to you  and whose years promise experience .
You have given him his liberty , in return for which he will give you his friendship  and be the faithful companion of your travels .
So shall you avoid the discomfort of journeying alone  and enjoy in his conversation , a pleasure more sublime , than you could possibly receive from the attendance of a slave .


These cares consuming the rest of the day , I remained that night the guest of Myrsa , who , after we had closed the evening , in the same manner as the preceding , lodged me in one of the recesses of his grottoe .


It is impossible to express what I felt on this occasion : My heart at first revolted against a change in my situation , by which I fancied myself dishonoured .
 But a moment 's reflection restored me to reason  and the thought of having made my servants free and happy , compensated well for the want of their service .


3.5 .
SECTION V .


I WOULD have departed the next morning  but Myrza insisted on my tarrying with him for a few days , every hour of which added to my knowledge , as he always turned his conversation to the subjects most instructive  and encouraged me to declare every doubt , which opposed my assenting to his words .


The wisdom , which he shewed in solving these doubts  and his sagacity in frequently anticipating my declaration of them , as if he saw into my very soul , confirmed me so strongly in the opinion propagated by fame , of his holding converse with the spiritual beings ,  who watch over the actions of man , that I could not forbear taking occasion , one evening , as we sat on the bank of the river discoursing on various subjects , to ask him how it might be possible to obtain the happiness of an intercourse with them .


` That there are spiritual beings , my son , ' said he , after a pause of some minutes , as if to consider so difficult a subject , ` which inhabit the several elements of which this world is composed , as well as the earth is inhabited by man , is an opinion , founded on such testimony of the fact , and which hath so universally prevailed in every age , and country , that it were offering an affront to the human mind to suppose it utterly without foundation . '


Nor doth its credit depend solely on this invariable consent .
Reason receives it with reverence , as one of those sublime probabilities , which though above its  power to prove , yet contradict none of those tests , on which it rests the proof of matters , incapable of direct demonstration .


The infinite variety of animated beings , which we behold cover the face of the earth , so as not to leave one atom of it uninhabited , gives cause to conclude that the other elements are peopled also as fully , by beings to whose organs of life they are adapted , though imperceptible to the grosser senses of man  as else there would be a void , an useless part in the works of the Deity  a supposition contradicting the sacred , and self-evident truth , that he doth nothing in vain .


But though reason can thus rest itself satisfied in the existence of such beings , its researches into their nature and occupation meet not with equal success : Whether they are immortal , and were all created at the same time ?
Or if not ,  in what manner the species is continued  and whether they are immaterial , or only composed of matter more subtile than the objects of human sense  being questions , in the pathless , illimitable contemplation of which , the mind wanders at a loss , for any certain point , whereon to rest belief .


As to their occupation , the same universal opinion , which agrees in their existence , agrees also in assigning to them the conduct of man 's actions , which are supposed to be good or bad , according to the nature of the spirit , which directs them .
But this opinion , beside that it is unsupported by other proof like the former , is attended with great difficulties , and must for many reasons be received with great , and most cautious limitations .


If the actions of man are entirely directed by such beings , what becomes of his free-agency , on which alone can  depend the merit , or demerit of those actions ?
And are not those beings justly chargeable with them , not he ?


But this difficulty , and many others attending this opinion , which are so evident that it is unnecessary to repeat them , will vanish , if instead of assigning to those beings the direction of man 's actions , we suppose them employed in his protection from the many dangers incident to his nature , and in which his passions every moment entangle him .
An occupation , by its benevolence better suited to a being of a superior nature .


3.6 .
SECTION VI .


 ` IN respect to what you mentioned of an intercourse between man and these beings , that also is a question , attended with many difficulties , and to be most cautiously received . '


How !
I exclaimed , astonished and disappointed at what I heard .
Is not the testimony of so many wise , and holy men , who assert their having both seen , and heard them , a sufficient proof of this intercourse ?
-


' I deny not the reality of the intercourse , ' replied the sage . '
I only am in doubt concerning the manner of it  whether perceptibly to the senses , or only in the power of imagination . '


If they are immaterial , how can they have a form to be seen ?
How can they emit a voice to be heard ?
If they are  material , how can they appear instantly close to a man , without any appearance of gradual approach ?
How can they melt into air , and disappear totally , in an instant , without gradual departure ?
And is it not more consonant to reason to suppose , that being mind themselves , they hold intercourse only with the mind , and are reflected upon the senses , by the power of imagination , in the same manner as objects in a dream .
A supposition , on which that testimony may possibly be found to depend chiefly for credit  so many absurdities and contradictions being supported by it , equally with the most important truths  that without this method of accounting for the deception of the testifier , the mind would reject the latter , because of the former .


Not that this supposition is unattended with difficulties either .
Such a manner of conversing is certainly above our comprehension  but then it contradicts  not reason  and if we refuse assent to every thing , which we can not clearly comprehend , our knowledge will be reduced within very narrow limits .
I know that my hand moves in obedience to my will  but I know not how my will operates upon my hand to effect that motion .
We deceive ourselves with vain words .
Our boasted knowledge extends only to facts  but the manner , in which these are effected , is hidden from us .


` But doth not the admission of this possibility of deception , ' I returned , ` at the same time weaken , if not over-turn all historic faith , which depends entirely upon testimony ? '


` Not in the least , ' replied the sage .
` Testimony is certainly sufficient proof of facts , which run in the regular course of nature .
But where this is deviated from , too much caution can not be taken in examining the end of that  deviation  and the competency of the testimony , by which it is supported . '


When you tell me , that the city of Byrsa was founded by Narbal , on the destruction of Carthage by the Romans , I hesitate not a moment to give credit to your words  because people who lived at the time , and therefore may be justly supposed to have been acquainted with the fact , have left written memorials , which have been handed down regularly from them to us , that there was such a city as Carthage  and that it was destroyed by a people called Romans - because there is nothing out of the common course of things , in such a destruction  or in a prince 's flying from the conquerors , with a number of the citizens , and founding a state , in another country  and because you have sufficient ability , and may have had sufficient opportunity to trace the state , in which you were born ,  to its origin  and can have no sufficient reason to attempt imposing a falsehood upon my credulity .


But should you tell me , that the flight of Narbal was in consequence of a spirit 's having appeared to him  and commanded him to leave his own country , and go to that where he founded his state , I might receive the relation with respect , because of the virtue of the relator , and the importance of the end proposed by such appearance  but not without a doubt , when I balance against his testimony the possibility of its being only in the power of imagination , and the irregularity of the fact , in the common course of nature  and also , because it may have been feigned by him to promote an expedition , on which he was intent , and doubted the sufficiency of his own influence to carry into execution , without the assistance of such an authority .


 But should you add , that on his arrival at that place , the stones and trees instantly formed themselves into a city for the reception of his people , to save them the delay and labour of building , I should directly reject the whole , as a fiction devised since his time , for the purpose of imposition .


Nor is there any danger of this principle 's breaking the vigour of the mind , by inducing a general doubt , if it [ ... ] s not applied beyond its proper limits .


Credulity , and scepticism are the extremities of a line , in the middle of which true knowledge is placed .


By believing indiscriminately , the mind lies open to receive the grossest , and most dangerous errors  by indiscriminate doubt , to reject the most important truths .
To find the mean , between these , is the business of reason , which it seldom fails in , when permitted  to seek for it , without prejudice .


I have said , that if we deny every thing , which we do not clearly comprehend , our knowledge will be reduced within very narrow bounds !
Perhaps these bounds are already narrower , than we are well aware .


I know that I exist , because I perceive the operations of my mind .
I know that I derive not my existence from myself , because I know not how I came to exist .
I therefore know that another being , from whom I derive my existence , must also exist  and I know that this being must exist necessarily , without deriving existence from any other , because an endless succession is impossible : And lastly , I know , that as all other beings derive their existence from this being , so they can exist only by him  and therefore that it is their duty to obey those laws , which he hath  thought proper to prescribe to them : but farther than this , I know nothing .


And with this portion of knowledge , I am humbly and gratefully content  not will I misapply the gift , by attempting to pry farther , satisfied that , little as it may appear , it is amply sufficient to conduct me in safety , through the dangers of this life , to the happiness of the next .


Though the pleasure , I found in the conversation of Myrza , encreased every hour , with the increase of knowledge , which I derived from it , I forgot not myself so far , as to engross too much of that time , which should be a common benefit to all mankind .
At the end of fifteen days , I departed from him , and committing myself with humble resignation to the guidance of heaven , resumed my travels , in company with the friend whom he had selected for me .


3.7 .
SECTION VII .


 THE sun had but just began to gild the firmament , with the first beams of day , when I left the grottoe of Myrza .
The sound of his voice was still in my ears .
I exulted in the proficiency I had made under his instructions  and thought myself superior to every incident of life .


But I had not proceeded far , before this confidence began to cool .
I soon felt the fatigue of travelling , in a manner to which I was unaccustomed  and the thought of my being alone , for with a single companion I esteemed myself little better , awoke sensations , in no respect pleasing .
I started in affright  and blushed at my own weakness !
I reasoned against it  but it eluded my reasons .
At length , I compounded the contest .
I resolved to continue my journey to Bagdat  and if I should find the  inconveniencies overbalance the advantage , to provide new attendants there .


But my fellow traveller , and friend , saved me from such a weakness .
He perceived my uneasiness , and was alarmed for my health  by limiting his enquiries to which he persuaded me that he had not discovered my disorder to be in my mind , and rouzed the spirit of pride to conceal my shame .


This employed my thoughts , till the cause of my uneasiness became familiar to me , when it totally vanished  and I only wondered that I had been uneasy .


On the third day of our journey we joined a numerous caravan of merchants , who had pitched their tents on the bank of the river , to avoid the heat of the sun , which had now mounted high in the heavens .


 The habits of Faquirs , which we had assumed by the advice of Myrza , gained us immediate admission into their company , where I was instantly struck with the openness of their behaviour , which seemed to flow directly from nature , without design or reserve .


This was entirely new to me . '
I revere thy wisdom , sage Myrza , ' said I to myself ! '
I now see life , in its genuine colours !
How happy am I at being freed from the crowd of attendance , who have hitherto stood between me , and mankind ? '


But this happiness did not continue long unclouded .
They were going to eat  and desired me to taste a morsel of bread with them .
I sat down accordingly  but started to see a slave seat himself next to me  and my heart revolted at my being obliged to fetch water from the river for myself to drink .


 A very little use , however , reconciled me also to this debasement , as I at first thought it , better than all the instructions of Myrza had been able to do  and convinced me of the vanity of that wisdom , which is acquired only by instruction .


On being informed that the caravan journied to Bagdat , I desired permission to continue with them  which was readily granted to me  and I resolved to begin the practice of Myrza 's precepts .
I accordingly observed with the strictest attention every thing I saw , and heard  and the doubts of one day were generally solved by the next , without my asking any solution of them .


This conduct soon gained me the respect and confidence of the whole company .
I was esteemed wise , because I betrayed not my ignorance , by asking information : And every one was eager to communicate his secrets to me , because  I never enquired into them  there being nothing which so effectually counteracts curiosity , as the discovery of it .


The scenes , which this confidence opened to me , would have amply overpayed my silence , had it been never so contrary to my temper .
I now saw things , in colours the most different from those , in which they had appeared to me , at my first joining the caravan  and found that the same passions rule the human heart , in every state of life  even the coarse jest , the loud laugh of merriment , those reputed characteristics of vulgar happiness , I could too often trace to motives the most unhappy  and see them joined in and enjoyed only in proportion to the malignancy of the allusion .


This general confidence though was not unattended by its inconveniences .
Every one , who told me his secrets , taking my silence for approbation , expected  that I should enter into his views  and was continually obtruding upon me his schemes for their accomplishment , in which he thought himself entitled to my assistance , so far as to look upon my holding the common intercourse of humanity with his adversary , as an act of treachery to him : A situation too embarrassing to have been long supported .


One evening , as I was ruminating upon these inconsistencies , and considering how I should disentangle myself from the consequences of them , one of the principal merchants in the caravan accosting me in a friendly manner 


` Hassan , ' said he , ( for I had changed my own name of Himilco , for this , to avoid being traced by any of my late attendants ) ' I have observed your demeanor , ever since you have come among us  and see that your wisdom  exceeds your age .
I have therefore resolved to make a proposal to you , which will give you the strongest proof of my esteem . '


You have been informed that this caravan journies to Bagdat .
It is not my intention to accompany it , so far .
I shall turn off to-morrow evening to the country of Farsistan , whither some matters of importance call me  after I shall have executed which , I propose continuing my travels , through that once flourishing country , to the regions , whose happy people are first blessed with the sight of the sun , on his emerging from the ocean , to enlighten the world .


From your habit , I judge , that the motive of your travelling is to acquire knowledge .
If so !
this is the path , which leads directly to it .
The sages of antiquity never thought their thirst  for wisdom satisfied , till they came , and drank at this fountain head .


If you chuse to accompany me , in this journey , we will drink out of the same cup , as brothers .
My people are sufficient in numbers to defend us from the dangers of the way  and the profit , which I shall gain by my merchandize , will enable me to make provision for the wants of both our future lives .
I shall not attempt to influence your compliance by any arguments of persuasion .
You best know the motives which ought to direct your conduct , and will be guided by them .


It is impossible to express the emotions , which I felt at this proposal .
I had long had the strongest desire to see the countries , whither he was going  but then the length of the way must detain me much beyond the time prescribed by my father for my return .


 The difficulty was most distressing .
But after revolving various schemes , I at length thought of one , which appeared to reconcile my duty to my inclination .
I resolved to send back my companion to my father , in order to inform him of my intended journey  and obviate his apprehensions at my protracted absence .


The merchant approving of this design , I proceeded immediately to put it in execution .
The parting between my friend and me was most tender .
Gratitude for the restitution of his liberty , had exalted his attachment to me , into the warmest affection .
He embraced my knees , he besought me , with many tears , to let him accompany me , in my long , and perilous journey  and send some other in his place .


` Who will serve you , in the day ?
Who will watch over you , in the night ? '
said he wringing his hands in anguish of  soul .
` You are not sufficiently inured to hardship !
Your years are too few  your strength is unequal to the fatigues , into which you are plunging !
Should sickness or disaster befal you , who is to administer relief ?
- '


That power , I answered , in the words of Myrza , whose goodness is the support of all his works  or human care and relief would be in vain .
A support , in which the piety of my father will think me safe .
Not that I am insensible to your affection .
I would gladly send another , but you know it is not in my power .
Of all , whom I might have sent , you only remain with me  nor would my father give the same credit to the words of any , as he will to your 's !
-


He saw that it was in vain to urge me farther , and would not distress me , with fruitless solicitation .


 My mind was so full of the gratification , I promised to my curiosity , in this journey , that I never attended to the circumstances in which I undertook it .
Circumstances in reality much more terrifying , than those which had lately struck me with so many terrors .
I then had an experienced , a careful , and an affectionate friend with me .
I had now implicitly entrusted myself to the faith of people , who were in a great measure strangers to me .
But it was too late to look back .


3.8 .
SECTION VIII .


 ON our entering the empire of Farsistan , I was struck with horror , to behold the desolation and havoc which deformed the face of a country , made so beautiful by the hand of nature .
The lands were uncultivated the cities lay in ruins !
and the few wretched people , destitute of every comfort , and almost of every necessary of life , wandered from place to place , to seek the precarious subsistence of the day .


But this universal misery affected me not more than the advantage taken of it by the merchant , who exacted the higher prices for his commodities , the greater he saw necessity for them  aggravating public calamities , by turning them to private gain .


Nor was my abhorrence of such sordid inhumanity greater than my surprize ,  when I compared it with his conduct on other occasions .
For tho ' the habit of taking advantage in his dealing had gained so strong possession of his heart , that he could not refrain from it on any consideration of circumstances  in every other instance he was generous and humane  and would readily bestow upon the same person of whose necessities he had taken such cruel advantage , more than he had exacted from him  as , should he come the next moment to purchase any thing else , he could not avoid repeating his exaction of the very money which he had just before given him in charity  and would give him again , if requested , from the same motive .


Our journey through the territories of Farsistan afforded no incident worthy of relation .
The country continued to exhibit one scene of desolation , more painful to the view than the barren desart  the traces of former prosperity  aggravating the contemplation of present misery .


My fellow traveller saw what I felt , and endeavoured to divert my thoughts to more pleasing objects .
` When we shall have passed the great river of Indus , ' said he , ` the sight of that country will amply compensate for these disagreeable scenes .
Industry there flourishes in the smiles of freedom .
Commerce is encouraged in all its various branches .
An universal plenty covers the land  and the people are numerous , healthy , and happy . '


` Nor less so were the people of this country once  till ambition overturned the works of art , and marred the blessings of nature .
The magnificence of the ruins , which still remain , sufficiently prove its former happiness .
But among slaves , nothing can flourish .
Heaven !
that a lust of rule should tempt a man to make his own species miserable . '


 ` Cease ! '
interrupted Temugin  ` nor waste time in repeating the words of a fool !
The monuments of magnificence , which he instanced as proofs of the freedom and happiness of a people , prove only their slavery .
Were they not the works of compulsion , raised merely to gratify the vanity of the rulers , without regard to the miseries of the people employed in raising them , to whom they could be of no advantage ?
Men who are free , labour only for themselves  for their own respective use and convenience  nor are such monuments of tyrannic ostentation ever raised among them .
But such are the dreams of idle speculation .
Proceed . '


3.9 .
SECTION IX .


 ` THE appearance of the country , after we had passed the great rivers , ' resumed the captive , ` supported not the representations of the merchant .
He started  and looking around him with astonishment and grief , ` Whence can this proceed , ' he exclaimed  ` this melancholy change ?
An hundred moons are scarce elapsed , since I was here last .
All things then wore a different aspect .
The wrath of heaven must have fallen , in famine or pestilence , upon the land . ' '


While he was preparing to exhibit his merchandize for traffic , in the first city at which we arrived , I walked forth , as was my custom , to view the place , and observe the manners of the people .
But what was my surprize at my return to the caravansera in the evening , not to find any trace of him !


 The admonition of my father , that moment recurred to my mind .
I resolved to wait for information , from accident , without making any enquiries , for fear of involving myself in whatever misfortune had happened to him .


Accordingly , I seated myself among other strangers , in the gate  where my habit of a Faquir attracting the notice of a Bramin , who was passing by , he kindly invited me to taste a morsel of food , and sleep under his roof that night .


When we had finished our repast , ` The composure in which you sat , ' said the Bramin , ` persuades me that you were unacquainted with what had happened in that caravansera but a few hours before . '


A respectable merchant , who had trafficked in this unhappy country for many years , without committing injustice ,  or suffering injury , being a stranger to the tyranny under which we groan at present , had no sooner begun to expose his commodities to sale , this morning , as usual , than he was seized by a set of rapacious intruders , who abusing the false policy , by which they were at first admitted into our country , have fastened themselves upon us , and now prey upon our vitals .


In vain did the honest man desire to know the reason of such an outrage  in vain did he call upon heaven and earth for justice !
He was dragged away , before a tribunal , where his accusers were his judges  who aggravating their iniquity , by a mockery of the forms of law , confiscated all his merchandize to their own use , and threw himself into a loathsome prison , for having presumed to attempt trafficking in this country without their permission .


 I see you are astonished at such a violation of every principle of justice .
I will therefore unfold the rise of this usurpation to you .
The hour of rest is yet sufficiently distant , and the recital worthy of your attention  as happily it may enable you to put your own country on its guard against a like misfortune .


End of the THIRD BOOK .
4 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE FOURTH .


 4.1 .
SECTION I .


` THE difference in the produce of the different parts of the world , ' continued the Bramin , ` hath been justly ascribed to a beneficent design in the Creator , to raise a friendly intercourse between the inhabitants , by laying them under a necessity of applying to  each other for the mutual supply of their wants . '


In such an intercourse , this country , of all under heaven , should naturally seem entitled to the preeminence , as having not only every necessary , but also every convenience , and unhappily , almost every luxury of life within itself .


But alas !
it is the use which consecrates the blessing .
This very plenty is made to disappoint the end for which it was given .
It blunts the relish of enjoyment  and deprives the body of strength and the mind of vigour , by taking away the necessity of care and labour .
Wanting nothing , we wish not , we strive not for any thing  but sit in indolent expectation of that which we know the revolving season will bring to us , till we become an easy prey to those , whose fortunately less favourable clime and soil oblige them to struggle with difficulties , and brave dangers , in  order to procure elsewhere , those things which Nature has denied to them at home .


Some years since , a company of these prowlers , who had wandered across the great ocean , from the remotest regions of the West , landed upon our coasts , in want and wretchedness .
The hardiness of such an undertaking struck us .
We received them with humanity .
We relieved their necessities  and gave them the good things of our land , in exchange for trifles , whose only value arose from their novelty .


Nor did we stop there .
Engaged by the artifices , and respecting the undaunted spirits of those our new acquaintances , we permitted them to erect habitations on our coasts , to which they might bring their merchandizes in future times  and from this ill-judged hospitality have proceeded all the miseries which at present overwhelm our  country , and will probably bring it to utter ruin in the end .


The accounts which these adventurers gave of our wealth , and easiness to part with it , at their return home , encouraged others to make the same adventure .
They came in such numbers , as should have alarmed a just suspicion of their design .
They fortified their habitations , under pretext of defence against injuries never intended them  but in reality to secure their depredations , and over-awe our sovereigns , whom they forced to enter into treaty with them , on terms of equality .


Since that time , their conduct hath been a continued series of the most atrocious crimes .
Hardier in their nature , they take advantage of our pusillanimity and weakness  and unrestrained by those obligations , which are the safeguards of society , the assurance of justice and peace , they break through  every thing which would oppose their will  and laugh at our credulity , for having thought them capable of good faith .


They grind the faces of the poor .
The husbandman dares not to taste the fruits of his own labour  the artificer to sell the work of his hands , without their permission  a permission for which they make the wretches pay so dearly , that all industry is discouraged , and the blessings of nature turned into the severest curse , by being thus withheld from them , though within their reach .


Nor are their outrages confined to the poor .
They make our princes pass under harrows of iron  and lead our kings into captivity to extort their wealth from them .
How long Heaven , in its wrath , will suffer them to continue this flagitious course , I presume not to divine .
But this is evident  that if there is not a sudden stop put to  their ravages , this country will be reduced to the same state of desolation with its unhappy neighbour , Farsistan .


4.2 .
SECTION II .


WHEN I was preparing to depart , the next morning , my host asked me , how long I intended to remain in that city  and with an air of benevolence , offered me every service in his power .
` As I never interfere with the concerns of any man , ' said he , ' I flatter myself , that I am beloved by the people of my own nation .
Nor am I persecuted by the strangers , because my profession is a pledge for my poverty .
On the contrary , they affect to shew me kindness , in order to lighten the charge of their treating all the natives with indiscriminate cruelty . '


His saying this , struck me with the thought of soliciting his intercession for my unfortunate fellow-traveller .
It was  possible he might be able to serve him  and the attempt was a duty superior to those prudential motives , upon which the admonition of my father , against interfering in the concerns of another , was founded .


I should be undeserving of your service , I answered , O venerable father , could I hesitate a moment to accept the offer of it , in an instance which will over-pay to your benevolent heart , any trouble it may give you .


I left my native country to travel in search of knowledge , and came to this city in company with the unhappy merchant , whose misfortune you related to me yester-evening .
If you can procure his release from prison , that will be the highest service which can be done to me in this place .
As for his wealth !
let that remain with the spoilers !
His liberty is all I ask .


 This was the first time the Bramin had heard the sound of my voice .
He fixed his eyes stedfastly upon me , while I was speaking , and as soon as I had ended , ' I equally respect the motive of your travelling , ' he answered , ` and the advances you have made in the attainment of it .
Wisdom only could have maintained silence , on so interesting an occasion , till a reason of such weight made it necessary for you to speak . '


But , O my son !
you over-rate my consequence with these people .
They are civil to me , only because I require not any thing from them .
But though I may not be able of myself to accomplish your beneficent purpose , I may possibly find the means of enabling you to effect it : and Heaven this moment inspires the lucky thought .


The stranger , who rules in this city , has a desire to inform himself in the affairs of all the neighbouring nations   and spoke to me , not long since , to seek a person capable of giving him this information .
If you , therefore , can speak the language of his country , for he knoweth not any other , and will undertake so irksome a task , I will this day lead you to him  and Heaven may give you an opportunity of serving your friend , in some favourable moment of that intercourse , which such an occupation must necessarily give you with him .


I was involved in the greatest perplexity by this proposal .
To embrace it must put a stop to my travels , which was contrary to my firmest resolution , as the time drew near , when I had promised to return to my father .
If I rejected it , I gave up the hope of delivering an honest man from unjust oppression and misery .
The choice was distressing  but I hesitated not long .


 I have some little knowledge , I answered , O my father , in the language you mention .
I learned it from this unhappy man  and can never apply it to better purpose , than to serve him in his present distress .
The task , it is true , will interrupt my travels  but it will at the same time bring me nearer to the end of them .
In the practice of virtue consists the only true wisdom .


The Bramin applauded my resolution .
We went directly to the habitation of the ruler  in whose anti-chamber we were obliged to wait a considerable time , before we could be admitted to the honour of his presence .


4.3 .
SECTION III .


 I had seen something in my native country of the slavery of such attendancies  but never had I formed any conception of such a scene , as I was now in .
Every passion which could agitate , every vice which could deform the heart of man , was painted in the various faces round me  while suspicion , deceit , envy , cruelty , and avarice dictated every word , they spoke to each other .


Figure to yourself a set of men , thrown together by the incidents of an indigent life , from every class of mankind , and every country under heaven , acting , or rather preposterously attempting to act the most important parts , and you will have some notion of the company in which I was : a company , to whose characters the powers of description are so unequal , that nothing but  the indisputable proof of facts could make them pass for other than meer creatures of imagination .


My soul sickened at the sight  and I was almost driven to give up my purpose , and depart , for fear of being infected by such society , when the Bramin and I were summoned to our audience .


We found the great man lolling on a sopha , in all the mimickry of state  his awkward uneasiness under which , shewed his inexperience in the reality .
All was bustle , hurry , and confusion .
His orders contradicted each other , every moment .
He knew not what he ought to approve , and therefore placed his judgment , in finding fault  as he shewed his greatness by looking with contempt at every thing around him .


Our entrance was announced to his excellency , by a servant , on a bent  knee  but though he was at that very instant looking at us , he continued to adjust his dress , for some time , before he condescended to honour us with the least notice  till at length , throwing his eye toward us as by chance , he superciliously asked the Bramin the occasion of his visit .


` Son of good fortune ! '
answered the Bramin , ' I have found such a person , as you desired me to seek for you , the last time I had the honour of paying my duty to your greatness  and have brought him to receive your commands . '


His excellency , rolling his eye back and forward from the Bramin to me , for some moments , with a suspicious stare , at length demanded to know , what person he meant .


' A person , ' answered the Bramin , ` who hath travelled through all the  neighbouring nations , and is acquainted with their customs and manners , in which you expressed a desire to be instructed . '


` Not I indeed ! '
replied his excellency , with a look and accent of offended importance .
` You quite misunderstood me .
I want no instruction in such matters .
What I spoke to you about , was a secretary for foreign affairs , who understands the languages of those countries , and can write my orders to the sovereigns of them  as I have not time to throw away , on learning their jargon myself .
I regard not their customs  and will teach them good manners , if they misbehave themselves to me . '


` The mistake , ' returned the Bramin , ` is not material .
My friend is qualified for either office .
His capacity will be found on trial  and I will vouch for his fidelity . '


 Such a recommendation had the necessary weight , with his excellency , who knew the integrity of the Bramin , and had kept his eye , fixed upon me , all the time he spoke , as if he would read my soul .
He graciously nodded his assent , and saying that I might come , as soon as I pleased , my conductor and I withdrew , rejoiced at the happy omen of having so easily succeeded in the first part of our design .


4.4 .
SECTION IV .


 ON our return to the habitation of the Bramin , ` As you are now entering into a scene of life , ' said he , ` utterly new to you  it may not be unnecessary to give you a sketch of the character of the man , to whom you are going , in order to direct your conduct toward him . '


The manner , in which he bears his present elevation , shews that it is not natural to him .
But you must not form your judgment of him , in other respects , from thence  few men exhibiting a stronger proof , that superior talents are far from being the sole property of the superior ranks of life .


Born in the lowest class of mankind , and bred to one of the meanest professions , by which industrious poverty strive to earn a scanty subsistence , he  has raised himself by the meer force of his own genius , to his present height of affluence , and power  a rise , it is true , to which his principles have contributed little less than his abilities , as they never restrained him from any thing , by which he could propose advantage : A qualification , common to almost all the men , who have been honoured by the world , with the name of Great .


It is but justice though to acknowledge that the actions by which he has thus raised himself , have , in their first effect , merited from his superiors ( for even he , high as he holds himself here , is no more than the servant of subjects in his native country ) all the rewards , which they have bestowed upon him .


But if we strip those actions of the blazonry of success , and measure them by the rules of public , as well as private virtue  we shall find , that by  blackening ambition with perfidy , corrupting private fidelity , and staining victory with murder , he has exceeded in the most nefarious iniquity all the ravagers of the earth , who have built their greatness upon the miseries of mankind  as the consequence will prove , that instead of giving sanction to such crimes , by loading him with honours , his superiors should have punished him with the most ignominious death , to have given permanency to the very advantages , he has acquired for them  the divine vengeance , though hitherto suspended , being now ready to burst in thunder on their heads for this injustice .


His associates , emulous of his success in amassing wealth , but incapable of effecting it , as he had , by actions at the same time serviceable to their superiors , have imitated him in the most flagitious parts of his conduct , and laid the axe to the root of the advantages ,  which they drew from this country , by robbing the wretched natives of the means of supplying it  for who will work , when he knows that the fruit of his labour will be ravished from him ?


Of this , indeed , they seem to be sensible themselves .
But instead of being moved by that sense to change their measures , they have only changed the object of them .


Seeing that the ruined land can no longer supply matter for their rapacity , they have turned it against their superiors , whom they have brought to the verge of equal ruin , by a peculation of the wealth , entrusted to their care  lavishing it , in erecting fortresses to guard against impossible assaults  and maintaining forces to fight against enemies , who do not exist , that they may have an opportunity of appointing each other to all the lucrative employments ,  which attend armies , and make war at present , little less ruinous to the victors , than to the vanquished .


Thus one is to supply materials , another to superintend the building  this to provide food , that cloathing for the men  and so on , arms , ammunition , every article possible to be wanted by an army , for all which , as they are to pay themselves , they contract in the greatest quantities , and at the highest rates , which mutual connivance can venture to impose upon common sense  at the same time , that not one of them hath the remotest intention of fulfilling such contracts , either in the quantity , or quality of the things to be provided  but suffer the miserable bands of robbers , which they call armies , to struggle with all the severities of climates not natural to them , and the want of every convenience , and almost necessary of life , if they can not plunder them from the defenceless , and therefore more miserable  natives : Iniquities , which however glaring , they practise without fear of punishment , the wealth , they acquire by them , enabling them to laugh at justice , and hold the laws in defiance , in their own country , whither they return to enjoy it  and make room for another hungry set to pursue their steps .


This faithful representation will prove the truth of what I have said before , that if a sudden stop be not put to these ravagers , our country must be ruined .
In fact , they will soon be forced to stop of necessity .
Their iniquity hath undermined itself  and heaven , by a signal instance of its justice , hath made them avenge our wrongs , upon their own heads .
Whether we may be able to survive the shock , and enjoy the fruits of that vengeance though , is more than I can foresee , so deep are the wounds , with which they have pierced our hearts .


4.5 .
SECTION V .


 ON my repairing next morning to the pavillion of the chief , I found him in conversation with a few of his associates , on some subject which seemed to embarrass them not a little .


As soon as he cast his eyes upon me , he turned short to the others , and told them , with an exulting look , that I could give them the information they wanted , having travelled lately through all those countries .


One of his associates having presumed to express some doubt , whether it was safe to entrust a stranger with a matter of such moment , the sagacity of the chief took instant offence .
He asked , with a supercilious air , When he had been known to be mistaken in any man ?
Adding , that he had taken me for his secretary , on the recommendation  of a man of honour : not that I wanted any better voucher , to a man of discernment , than the honesty written in my countenance .


The other believing , or at least not thinking it proper to disagree with him , asked me if there was not a prospect of the greatest plenty , in those countries , at the approaching harvest  and on my bowing in affirmation , added a number of questions , concerning the prices of the different necessaries of life in different places .


It instantly occurred to me , that this was such an opportunity as I sought , to serve my fellow-traveller .
I answered therefore , that these were matters with which I was utterly unacquainted , having never bought any thing but what was immediately necessary for my own use , the purpose of my travelling having been only to indulge curiosity , and acquire knowledge : but that I knew a  person , who had followed the profession of a merchant for many years , and was able to give him every information he could wish , in every branch of commerce  and on informing him whom I meant , gave so high a character of the merchant 's judgment and probity , that they all seemed inclined to employ him .


But there was a difficulty in my way , which I plainly perceived would defeat my design , if it could not be removed .
This was his merchandize , which they had seized , and thought he would expect to have restored to him , before he would enter into their service : a sacrifice to justice which they could not prevail upon themselves to make , to any uncertain prospect .


On their expressing doubts , therefore , of the danger of placing confidence in a man utterly unknown to them , I replied , that they had a security for his honesty in their own hands : that they might retain  his merchandize till he should execute their commission  and then return it , or not , as he should deserve  by which means they would make it his interest to be honest to them .


This thought settled the whole affair .
The chief instantly approved of my proposal , paying a compliment to my judgment , in making interest the best motive to honesty  and I was directly sent to conduct the merchant to them .


4.6 .
SECTION VI .


I can not express what I felt , on entering the dungeon where the unhappy man was confined , even without any charge of a real crime .
Dark , damp , and noisome , it seemed to have been designed to render the horrors of imprisonment still more horrible .


In the indignation of my soul at such tyranny , I could not forbear exclaiming  in my native language , ` What a reproach is it to human nature , that the men , who have themselves been subject to the heavy hand of power , are the least proper to be entrusted with it over others ! '


As soon as he heard my well-known voice , he raised his head from the ground , on which he lay , loaded with chains  and looking eagerly at me , ` Oh , my friend , ' said he , ` have my misfortunes overwhelmed you also ?
Is your innocence ruined , merely for having known such a wretch as me ?
And yet , what is my guilt ?
What have I done , to draw this ruin upon me ? '


His fears had taken such possession of his heart , that it was difficult to undeceive him , as to the cause of my coming  difficult to persuade him that there was any prospect of his being restored to his liberty .


 At length , when he saw his chains taken off , and the doors of the prison opened to him , a new anxiety seized his soul  ` But will they restore me my effects also ? '
said he , stopping short at the door of the prison , and fixing his eyes earnestly upon me : ` if not , of what advantage is liberty ?
I had better die here , than be obliged to beg my bread among strangers .
My misery will be shorter , at the least . '


I could scarcely suppress his emotions sufficiently for him to appear before the arbiters of his fate .
I soothed !
I comforted !
I encouraged him to hope the best  till I in some measure recalled his reason , and made him present to himself  for I was not permitted to unfold to him the immediate occasion of his release .


When at length I introduced him to them , he answered all their questions with precision  and undertook to execute  their commission without hesitation , on condition of having his property restored to him , at his return with success .


The nature of this commission , and the readiness with which he embraced it , struck me with such horror , that I resolved directly to separate myself both from him and his employers .
But that very readiness defeated my design .
It made them suspect that he wanted only to get out of their power , and therefore they insisted that I should remain as an hostage for his fidelity .


It was impossible for me to avoid agreeing to this condition , without exposing him , and probably myself also to destruction  as they would naturally have concluded , that we had concerted a scheme to deceive them .
I assented therefore , with an appearance of readiness , to that which I did not dare to refuse  and purchased my fellow-traveller 's  liberty at the price of my own , at least for some time .


The commission entrusted to him was to buy up all the produce of the year from the possessors , in order to sell it back to them at an higher price , when their necessities should become so pressing , as to oblige them to give whatever should be required for it : the chief having an assured persuasion , that they had buried immense treasures in the earth , to evade the exactions of himself and his associates .


It may seem improbable to you , as it did at the time to me , that any people should be so infatuated , as to put themselves thus into the power of their known oppressors , for their very subsistence  but there is nothing so absurd , which the force of avarice can not effect .


The merchant , on my objecting this difficulty , treated it with contempt .
 ` Give them , ' said he , ` this day , one penny more than the current price , and they will accept it greedily , without ever considering what may be the consequence to-morrow .
Present gain is all which is now looked to in the world .
Beside , am I not armed with power to compel them , should they unexpectedly have the imprudence to refuse complying with my proposals ?
They are in a snare , out of which they can no way escape . '


Nor did he pay greater respect to the disapprobation which I could not forbear expressing , at the readiness with which he undertook such horrid work .


` Your virtue , my friend , ' said he , ` is too refined ever to be carried into practice , when placed in the scale against the most powerful principles of human nature .
I would not willingly commit injustice , nor lead any man to ruin  but when either he or I must be ruined , the trial is too severe  and nature will  preponderate , in spite of all the dreams of speculation . '


The scenes of which I was a melancholy witness , while the merchant was engaged in the execution of his commission , were too horrid for description .
I shall only say , that every act of injustice and oppression , which avarice and cruelty could suggest to lawless power , was practised openly , and with such insolence that the unhappy sufferers did not even dare to lighten their grief , by a plaintive sigh .


4.7 .
SECTION VII .


THE return of the merchant released me , at length , from the sight of such misery , from the society of men , who were a disgrace to the human name .


He had executed their commission , with unexpected success  and , as I thought , much more faithfully , than  they performed their promise of rewarding him for it .


Every time he claimed the restitution of his merchandize , some new difficulty was started , some new delay made , under pretences the most frivolous , and shameless  till growing apprehensive that they might compleat their injustice by taking away his life to free themselves from his importunity , he reduced his demand to the means of support in his return to his native country  their condescending to grant which , after much entreaty , they affected to consider , as an act of the greatest generosity , and favour .


When he was ready to depart , he affectionately pressed me to accompany him .
` Do not be discouraged , my friend , ' said he , ` at the unfortunate issue of our journey hither .
Matters are not so bad , as they may appear to be .
I knew my employers too well , to trust entirely to their justice .
An  agent understands but little of his business , who can not make it pay itself . '


Had I not before covenanted with my own heart to separate myself from him , the very argument on which he rested his solicitation , would have determined me to decline it .
I wished him an happy journey , saying that my fate led me another way .


I was too well acquainted with the power of habit over the human heart , to be surprized at this instance of the merchant 's measuring justice by the rule of his own interest .
It was but consistency of character .
Not that I can say , I was displeased with the consequence , how much soever I disapproved of the motive of his conduct .
His employers , and he , had been guilty of equal breaches of trust  and I therefore adored that Power , which thus  made one act of injustice punish another .


The condition , upon which I had consented to stay among these people , being thus fulfilled , I resolved to take the first opportunity of departing , without giving them any notice of my design  being taught by their treatment of the merchant , what confidence was to be placed in their promises , and apprehensive that they might think me too deeply acquainted with the mysteries of their iniquity to dismiss me .


While I waited for such an opportunity , the success of the merchant 's commission appeared in effects , not to be recollected without horror .


The natives , as he had predicted , either from avarice , or compulsion , had sold him all the produce of the land , which his employers no sooner got into  their possession , than they raised the prices to such an height , that the wretches , after having expended every resource to purchase indispensible support , were reduced to all the dreadful extremities of famine  while the authors of their ruin looked on , with unconcern  nor would relax their extortion to save the very name of the people from being blotted out , from among the inhabitants of the earth .


Virgins offered themselves to violation in the streets , for a mouthful of food .
The son sold his father into slavery .
The mother devoured the infant , which sucked her breast .
The living were not able to bury the dead .


Amid all these horrors , my soul had a peculiar consolation , for some time .
The jewels , which I had retained by the advice of Myrza , now served the beneficent purpose , for which he had advised me to reserve them .
I gave them to  my friend , the Bramin , who disposed of them , and applied the price to the relief of the general distress .


But alas !
he proceeded not with sufficient secrecy .
He was discovered , by the inhuman tyrants .
He was seized .
He was put to torture , to discover if he had any more , and from whom he had received them .
He preserved his faith to me  and died under the torture , without making any discovery .


Unfortunate was it for him , that I knew not of his sufferings , till they were at an end .
My life should not have been saved , at the price of his .


Such scenes are difficult to be believed .
The pride of conscious virtue is unwilling to admit even a possibility of the human nature 's sinking so low .
But when it is considered by whom these crimes were perpetrated , it will be  owned , that they were no more , than might have been foreseen .


The weight of power is too great to be sustained , under the most advantageous circumstances .
It too often intoxicates the best head  and warps the best heart .
What then must its effects be , in the opposite extream ?
How could it rationally be expected , that men raised to absolute power , from the lowest state of servility , and from the lowest poverty , should be able to resist the temptation of abusing that power to acquire wealth  when such abuse was , in a manner , justified by practice , and encouraged by impunity ?


4.8 .
SECTION VIII .


 AS I had been detained by these events , beyond the time of my promised return to my father , I felt the anxiety of his love , for my safety  and therefore , for the greater expedition , embarked secretly in a ship , which was intended to sail directly for Suez , preferring the performance of so dear a duty to any pleasure or advantage , which I could promise to myself , in the further pursuit of my travels .


Heaven seemed at first to smile upon our way .
We sailed with a favourable wind , till we entered the straits of Dira , when a violent storm arose , which in despite of all the efforts of our mariners , who struggled with it , for several days , at length drove our ship upon some rocks , where she was instantly torn to pieces .


 It is impossible to describe what I felt in that dreadful moment .
The darkness of midnight was condensed tenfold , by the fury of the storm .
All was horror , and dismay .


Though the most resolute had lost every hope of escaping  we all , in the instinctive impulse of self-preservation , laid hold on such pieces of the wreck , as chance threw in our way , and clinging to them , were driven about at the mercy of the winds and waves , in which many perished by a milder death , than awaited most of those who gained the land .


It was my fate , to be thrown upon the shore , without any appearance of life  a situation , to which , as I afterwards found , I owed my safety .


The day had just begun to dawn , when I recovered my senses , the first efforts of which served only to present  me with scenes still more horrible , than that from which I had escaped .
I found myself entirely naked , at some little distance from the sea , whither , I suppose , I must have been dragged for the better convenience of stripping off my cloaths .


But this treatment , however cruel in itself , was kindness in comparison , of what I saw inflicted on my unhappy companions , as many of whom as reached the shore alive , were instantly slaughtered , and then stripped by the natives , who instead of relieving a state of distress , which should have moved every humane passion , looked upon them , and their property , as lawful prey .


Shocked as my soul was , at such barbarity , nature directed my first thoughts to my own safety .
I lay , as motionless as if I was really dead , till I saw the savages depart , laden with the spoils of the wretches , whom they had slaughtered   when raising myself , as well as weakness and the pain of many bruises would permit , I crept to the sea side to try if I could happily administer relief , to any , who might have escaped , in the same manner with myself , and find some cloaths to cover me , which had been over-looked by the ravagers , in the hurry of their rapacity .


But I was disappointed at the first in either hope .
They were too well experienced in the work , to leave it unfinished  and I was just going to depart , though I knew not whither , when casting my eyes , once more , wishfully to the sea , I thought I perceived something floating toward the shore .


The storm having by this time nearly spent its force , I ventured into the water to see , what the object before me might be  when I found one of my fellow-passengers , with whom I had contracted a particular intimacy , with his arms  clasped round a coffer , to which he was tied .
I instantly raised his head , above the water , and perceiving some signs of life , exerted all my strength , to draw him up on the dry land , where my care soon restored him to his senses .


The moment he opened his eyes , and saw me busied about him , his situation suggested itself to him in the worst light , my being naked preventing his knowing me  and making him imagine I was one of the spoilers , with whose nefarious practices he was too well acquainted .
Lifting his hands therefore , in a suppliant manner , ` O !
spare my life , ' said he , ` spare the life of an old man , who will never disturb your possession of what you have acquired . '


` What ! '
I returned : ` Do you not know me ?
Can Hassan be taken for a spoiler , by his friend ? '


 He started , on hearing my voice  and looking eagerly at me , ` Is it possible ? '
said he , ` Can I be so happy ?
But where is the coffer to which I was bound ?
If that is lost , my life is of little value to me . '


I then shewed him the coffer , where it still lay in the water , upon which he arose with a vigour , not to have been expected from his situation , and running toward it , ` Let us then secure it instantly , ' said he , ` before the spoilers come , or they will not only rob us of all it contains , but murder us also , to secure the spoil . '


As soon as he had drawn it to the land , he opened the locks , and taking out a casket , put it into his bosom , and was preparing to depart , without seeming even to think of any thing else .


 Such an insensibility to the situation I was in , affected me .
` How ! '
said I  ` and will my friend desert me , thus naked and alone ? '


He started  and pausing for a moment , as if just awakened from a dream , ` Desert you ! '
he returned  ` no , never will I desert my preserver .
But what can we do ?
The spoilers will come upon us , the moment they discover that our ship has been wrecked .
The vulture is not more quick to find his prey , nor the tyger more cruel , than the inhabitants of the sea-coasts to destroy those , whom the more merciful waves throw into their power . '


I then acquainted him , that they had been already there , shewing him the slaughtered bodies on the shore , to which I added my own condition , as proofs of their bloody rapacity .


 His thoughts were so intently fixed upon himself , that he seemed to have no feeling for the misfortunes of any other .
` Thank heaven , ' said he , embracing the casket , ` that we have escaped though  and that my jewels are safe !
But we must not remain here !
As soon as they have left their spoil at home , they will return , to try if they can glean up any more .
I will share my garments with thee for the present .
We shall soon be able to procure every thing we want . '


He was proceeding to strip himself , when the occasion was unhappily removed .
The sea threw up , near to the place where we stood , the body of one of our companions , whom finding to be dead , I yielded to the horrid necessity of taking his cloaths to cover myself .


4.9 .
SECTION IX .


 WE had not advanced far into the country , before we discovered a cottage , the poor appearance of which shewed the poverty of its inhabitants .


On our approaching the door , which stood open to give light to the family , whom we found seated around a little fire , at a meal of simple vegetables , the master invited us in the most hospitable manner to partake of his humble fare .


Though I knew him , at the first cast of my eye , to be one of those , who had been most active in murdering and spoiling my unhappy companions , my astonishment was not greater at the present contrast in his conduct , than to hear him address us , in the Byrsan language .


 ` Gracious heaven ! '
I exclaimed , ` where am I ?
Is it possible that this is the country of the Byrsans ?
That such barbarous crimes should be committed , in defiance of the most beneficent laws ? '


The cottager , who knew not the cause of my exclamation , appeared to be surprized  nor made me any answer , till I repeated my question , when he informed me , that I was in my native country .


But my companion , who understood my meaning , having often heard me boast of the laws of Byrsa , as superior to those of all other nations , would not miss such an occasion of reproving my vain partiality .
` Why should not such crimes , ' said he , ` be committed in this country , as soon as in any other ?
It is not the laws , but the execution of them , which hath an effect upon the manners of a people .
The best laws , if badly administered , only encourage  the crimes , which they were designed to prevent . '


The cottager , having directed us the way to Byrsa , returned to the sea-coast , to seek for more spoil , in contempt of every argument , I could use to dissuade him  while we proceeded toward the house of my father , my heart panting with filial love and joy , at the thought of being so near him .


The contradiction between the conduct of the cottager , when at home , and on the shore , was so striking , that I could not forbear expressing my surprize to my companion , who accounted for it , in a manner most disgraceful to the polity of any civilized people .


` The nature of man , ' said he , ` is in itself benevolent .
Cruelty is ever the consequence of error in opinion or of bad example .
In his cottage you saw this man , in his natural character .
 His conduct , on the shore , proceeded from a notion derived from the laws of times of ignorance , and barbarity , that the plunderers could not be compelled to make restitution of their spoil , if no man belonging to a ship , which was wrecked , remained alive to claim it . '


` If then , the legislature of Byrsa really merited the praise , which you have so lavishly bestowed upon it , would not proper means have been taken to eradicate such a notion , and prevent its horrid consequences , by confiscating to the state every wreck , where all the people perished  and on the other hand , allowing a part thereof to the inhabitants of the coast , in proportion to the number of lives saved by them  instead of the present absurd method of punishment for plundering , which they evade by murdering all , who might prove their guilt ? '


 [ ... ]  [ ... ]  Though this objection was not to be answered , I could not suppress the exultation of my heart , at the appearance of happiness , which shone in every place we passed through , as we advanced toward the capital  nor forbear pointing it out to my companion , as the best vindication of our laws .


But he viewed matters in another light .
` Moderate your pride , ' said he , 'till you see whether it is well founded .
When I view the face of the country , I think myself in paradise .
But when I consider the inhabitants , my opinion is much less favourable .
The extremities of the land are uncultivated for want of people , who croud to the metropolis , where their labour is wasted in works of vanity .
The whole nation is drowned in luxury .
They are poor in the midst of plenty .
They have much , but they want still more .
Their powers both of mind and body are  weakened by excess , their principles debauched by prosperity .
In a word , their happiness hath overflowed its bounds  and if this calm continues much longer , Byrsa will over-set , in the first storm , which shall fall with any force upon it . '


4.10 .
SECTION X .


MY meeting with my father is not to be described .
He had been for some time sinking under the infirmities of age  and seemed to have struggled to preserve life , only till he could resign it , in my bosom .


The moment he was informed of my arrival , he called me eagerly to him  and throwing his arms around my neck , as I kneeled by the side of his bed , ` It is enough ! '
said he  ` Gracious heaven , it is enough .
I embrace him once more  and now I die content . '
-


 Then pausing a few moments to recover his spirits , unequal to such an excess of joy , ` O !
bless my son ! '
he continued  ` Enable him to save his ' - he would have added , country  but the word died unfinished on his tongue , ( heaven not permitting him to prefer a prayer , which must be ineffectual ) and he expired without a groan , in my arms .


Having performed the last duties to his honoured remains , I determined to devote the residue of my days to the cultivation of my mind in retirement , every thing I saw around me , giving me a disgust to the world .


I had found such pleasure in the conversation of my late fellow-sufferer in the shipwreck , whose benevolence of heart , and judicious acquaintance with the ways of man opened themselves upon me , more and more , every hour ,  that I would have persuaded him to remain with me .


But all my persuasions were ineffectual .
He had fixed his mind upon returning to his native city of Cairo , and there ending his days , among his family .
We parted with the sincerest sentiments of mutual esteem .


4.11 .
SECTION XI .


I have informed you of the claim , which the Byrsans made to the neighbouring country of the Coptes .
It had pleased heaven to lead me home , just as their army was preparing to march , to inforce that claim .


Though I had determined upon a retired life , the principles , in which I had been educated by my father , making me disapprove a measure , so contrary to justice , I thought it my first duty to endeavour to prevent it , before  I would attend to any thing , which related solely to myself .


I resolved therefore to demand an audience of the king , to whom my rank in the state gave me a right of speaking my sentiments on public affairs  and lay before him the reasons of my dissenting from the general voice , on so important an occasion  not doubting but I should be able to open his eyes to the evils , which must necessarily result from it .


The war appeared to me so flagrantly unjust , that I imagined there must be some secret reasons for it , to which my absence had made me a stranger , or it could never have been resolved on .
Before , therefore , I would presume to oppose it , I thought it necessary to enquire more particularly into the matter , as I knew the danger of judging , on a partial view .


 For this purpose I went directly to a person , whose having held several of the first offices in the state , I concluded must enable him to give me the information I wanted  and which an alliance between our houses gave me a right to require .


On entering his habitation , I was surprised to find every thing wear a gloomy aspect .
The very looks of the servants spoke an unhappy master .
He received me , with an air of dignity and respect , but clouded with a reserve , which made it disagreeable , and seemed desirous to confine his conversation to general questions , relating to the countries , which I had seen in my travels .


This , however , gave me an easy opportunity of leading him to the subject of the approaching war , without expressly declaring the purpose of my coming , which I apprehended might have made him still more reserved : I  therefore , as occasionally , desired to know his opinion of it , as a direction to mine , which , probably for want of proper information , I owned to be against it .


At the first mention of the affair , I saw his eyes sparkle with indignation , which arose as I proceeded , till it entirely dissipated the gloom , which hung upon his brow , and broke through his reserve .


' I am happy , ' said he , with a look of the warmest complacency , ` to find your sentiments concur with mine , on this important occasion , for , if you are not satisfied with the apparent , much less will you be , with the real motives of this war .
The former have at least something like a colour , however false , of justice  because it was necessary to deceive the people , who can never be led into any thing , which they know to be unjust , how easily soever  they may be deceived  but the latter are a mystery of the grossest iniquity , in every sense . '


` Good heaven ! '
I returned  ` Whence can this proceed ?
The youth of our sovereign opened with the fairest hopes . '


` Nor hath he ever fallen from those hopes ! '
interrupted he , eagerly .
` One vice hath never stained his private life , one act of injustice warped his public conduct .
Yet still , a character , less pure , might have proved more advantageous to his people .
To form a proper judgment of a man , his station must be considered .
The virtues most sublime in a subject , are often but amiable weaknesses in a sovereign . '


I see that your absence hath made you a stranger to the secret springs , upon which our government moves at this time .
The balance between its parts , and their mutual check upon  each other , which gave it the pre-eminence over all the other governments upon earth , exist now only in name .


The superior council , by dissipating the property , appointed to support its independance , is fallen absolutely under the influence of the crown  as the inferior daily betrays to it the trust committed to them , to acquire matter for a like dissipation  the gratification of luxury being the only object attended to by every class of mankind .


You may naturally conclude that the power of the sovereign must become absolute by this prostration of the fences , instituted to restrain it .
But the contrary is the fact .
All the power , which he seems to obtain in this manner , is wasted in the very means , made use of to obtain it  and himself kept in a kind of slavery to the instruments of this corruption , in which they have so entangled the whole system of government ,  that it now appears to be one of its first principles  and often compels him to give the sanction of his name and authority to measures , the most contrary to his own sentiments  of which there can not be a stronger instance , than this war , which is literally forced upon him , by his servants , though as contrary to their inclinations , as to his  their ambition and abilities being equally limited to the dark works of seduction .


But the people have of late begun to look so narrowly into their conduct , and to shew such symptoms of discontent , that apprehensive of the consequence , they adopted this expedient to turn the attention of the public from themselves , blazoning the war , with such hopes of private advantage , as have made the injustice of it easily pass unnoticed .


 Nor is the power of this hope to be wondered at .
We have lived so far before-hand , that it is terrifying to look forward .
Not only private fortunes are wasted by the luxury , which is expressly encouraged by the court for that purpose , that people may become dependant on its favour for support  but the very resources of the state are anticipated to such a depth , in order to support this system of corruption , that far from being able to stand any violent shock , we must of necessity sink by our own weight , if we are not saved by some means , impossible for human reason to provide .


The whole system of men 's souls , if I may use the expression , must be changed  and another adopted , in every respect opposite to it : An effect , which can be produced only by some heavy misfortune ( if such can be surmounted ! )
which shall bring the government back to its first principles .


 For my own part , I am so sick of a world , in which I see nothing but folly and vice , that if there is not a sudden change , which I have no reason to expect , I will anticipate the stroke of fate , and quiet it .


The horrid resolution , with which he concluded this melancholy representation , aggravated the pain it gave me , ten thousand fold .
` O !
beware , ' I exclaimed , ` of indulging so dangerous a thought  of tempting the wrath of heaven , by diffidence in its goodness , and power !
A crime , which reason and religion equally forbid  and madness only can excuse . '


` Reason , ' he answered , ` prompts me to fly from evil . '
-


` But not to a greater , ' I interrupted eagerly : ` Not to evils , from which there is no flying , no hoping for relief . '


 ` Of those evils , ' he replied with a contemptuous smile , ' I know nothing .
The phantoms , with which superstitious ignorance was so long terrified , are at length seen through .
Nature seeks happiness  and if I can not find it , in this life , I must follow the pursuit into another  if such there is !
It is better not to be , than be unhappy ! '


I attempted not to argue with him farther , as I could plainly see , by the manner in which he expressed himself , that contradiction would only confirm him more strongly in his opinion , and perhaps stimulate his vanity to hasten the execution of it .


4.12 .
SECTION XII .


 I was diverted from the painful reflections , which such a scene naturally suggested , at my return , by the entrance of a person , who had been one of the most intimate acquaintances of my early youth .


As I had been informed , that he had wasted his fortune , in every mode of idle dissipation and expence , I was most agreeably surprized at his appearance , every thing in which spoke affluence , and a mind at ease .
He saluted me with the warmest professions of regard  and we instantly continued our former intimacy , as if it had never been interrupted .


After some reciprocal inquiries of personal affection , I informed him of the conversation , which had passed , at  the visit , from which I was just returned .


He paused a few moments , as struck by what I had said , then with a look not well assured , ' I shall not pretend , ' he answered , ` to vindicate in all things , either the measures of the government , or the manners of the age !
But the motives of this person 's disapprobation , greatly weaken the force of it .
He speaks from the rage of disappointment , not from principle . '


` That political corruption , against which he inveighs with such acrimony , did he himself carry to such lengths , when in power , that it was too gross to be supported  and occasioned his deposal  nor is there a moral vice , which hath not stained his character  but as some of these vices have been retorted against himself , and he is no longer permitted to practise that corruption , he now declaims against it , in this  manner .
But you must not trust too implicitly to his representations .
Because the world does not go , as he likes , he modestly says it is going to ruin . '


The human heart is so fond of happiness , that we give easy credit to what we wish .
I looked upon the gloomy picture , which had been drawn to me , to have proceeded meerly from the clouds , which over-cast the painter 's mind  and did not doubt but my friend would set every thing in a very different light .


I therefore desired him to acquaint me , if there were any reasons for the approaching war , beside those publicly given , which I scrupled not to say were so flagrantly unjust , that I had resolved to exert my utmost endeavours to prevent it .


 ` My dear friend , ' he answered , staring at me with ` surprize , what you say , may possibly be very true  but these are matters , about which I never give myself any trouble . '


` How ! '
I returned , astonished at what he said , ` not give yourself trouble about matters of the greatest importance to a state , in which you hold so high a rank ?
In the government of which you have ever undertaken a part , not to be executed without trouble ?
You are not  you can not be serious !
But this is a subject , most improper for pleasantry ! '


' I speak my sentiments , I assure you ! '
he replied . '
I never did , nor ever will give myself trouble about any thing .
If I would have taken trouble , with matters of this nature , I might probably have conducted them myself .
My purpose is to enjoy the pleasures  of life , while I can , without troubling myself about consequences , which all my trouble may not be able to prevent . '


` But ! '
said I , interrupting him shortly : ` If you were determined not to take trouble , why did you take an office , which required it ?
You know my plainness !
Is it consistent with a just sense of honour , or even with common honesty to take the wages , without doing the work ? '


` You were always an enthusiast ! '
he answered with a forced smile  ` and I find you will ever remain one .
I was in hope , that seeing the world would have opened your mind  and shewn you the absurdity of such antiquated notions .
I took the office , because I had occasion for the emoluments of it  as the visier gave it , to attach me to his interest : And on the same terms , is every office given and accepted . '


 ` If you imagine , that any one under the visier presumes , in virtue of his office , to do any thing , you are utterly mistaken .
It is he , who virtually does every thing  and all the other officers of the state are no better than cyphers following him , to add to his consequence . '


4.13 .
SECTION XIII .


BUT let us wave a subject , on which we only waste our time .
I have come to request a favour from you , which I promise myself you will not refuse me .


You must know , that I am in one of the most whimsical situations , possible to be conceived .
You remember our old friend Mago .
The intimacy , which begun with our lives , hath continued to this day  though it was lately endangered by one of the oddest accidents , which ever happened .
Can you  think it possible , that he and I should fall in love with each other 's wife , and succeed in our loves too ?


For some time , matters went on , as smoothly as we could wish , neither of us suspecting the other , till growing too secure , he happened one day to surprize his wife and me in a situation of more familiarity , than common forms allow .
You know his hasty temper .
He drew his sabre instantly , and advanced to attack me .


I am not a coward : but I know not how it happened .
A qualm of conscience I suppose came upon me  and I did not care to run the hazard of losing my own life in so foolish a cause , or adding his death to the injury I had already done him .


I therefore demanded a parley , sword in hand  and after some preliminaries , in making which I believe I looked  silly enough , I frankly told him , that in the way he sought satisfaction , the odds were against him  but that if he would take my advice , I could direct him to a better , which would bring us more upon a level  this was , to return me in kind the good office I had done him  and then there would be nothing to complain of , on either side .


The look he gave me , as I said this , is not to be described .
He fixed his eyes upon me , for a few moments , to see if I was serious , then bursting into a loud laugh , ` Give me your hand , brother  ' said he : ' I applaud your prudence  and to tell you a secret , have not waited for your permission , to do what you propose .
So let us e ` en shake hands , and make the best of our bargains . '


From that day , all was harmony and good-fellowship between us  to make which , as we thought , the stronger , and  as the affair had some way taken wind , we repudiated our own wives respectively , and wedded those of each other , to satisfy their delicacy , and repair their reputations .
-


My indignation , which had been rising still higher , at every word he spoke , could be restrained no longer .
` How , ' I exclaimed , ` wed a woman of whose dishonour you were yourself a witness !
What !
though you were an accomplice in her guilt , your participation lessened not the crime in her  nor can you expect that she will be more faithful to you , than she was to your friend .
In the first step is all the difficulty .
A woman , who hath once surmounted that , seldom feels any reluctance to proceed in the same way .
Beside your own honour -


` You are too squeamish !
quite too squeamish ! '
he interrupted , not desiring to hear more .
` The world is  grown wiser , than to view these matters in so serious a light , as formerly .
How can a man 's honour be injured by the levity of a woman ?
That is another of those antiquated absurdities , which are now only laughed at  and you will soon be ashamed of . '


As to her future conduct , that is her own affair .
If she should be caught tripping , she knows the consequence .
What is past is nothing .
Custom has sanctified these matters .


But to return to my purpose .
The mischief now is , that this second marriage has spoiled all .
Whether it is the thought of restraint , or that there is something disgusting in the name of matrimony , I know not  but so it hath happened , that we were all soon surfeited of our exchange  and wished for our own back again .


 Now as this is a new case , which will create a good deal of impertinent noise , and be attended with much trouble and delay , what I propose is to have a law made , which shall authorize an exchange of wives , as often as all the parties are willing  and then the numbers , who , I know , will take advantage of it , will keep us in countenance .


The favour , therefore , which I have to request of you , is to introduce the matter for me to the legislature , as a thought of your own , which occurred to you , in your travels , on observing the evils , which universally attend indissoluble marriages .


The sobriety of your character will give weight to the scheme  and obviate the personal allusions which would be made , if I were to take the lead in it myself .
You may also , to make the  thing still more popular , add , that no single man shall suffer for having an amour with a married woman , provided he will take her off her husband 's hands , and marry her himself , which will endear you to all ranks of people , much more than opposing the war  such marriages , though allowed at present , and sometimes practised , being attended with so much trouble and expence , that very few can afford them , whereby many a wife is obliged to baulk her inclinations , and many an husband to wear his horns in silence , for want of such a law to relieve them .


4.14 .
SECTION XIV .


 I know not whether my indignation or contempt was most moved by this proposal .
` Such a law , as you mention , ' I replied , ` seems to be the only thing wanted to compleat that dissoluteness , which marks the character of the Byrsan nation , with deeper disgrace , than ever dishonoured any other people .


A legislature , which had a just sense of honour , instead of authorising , would use every possible means to prevent such infamous marriages .
Marriages , which defeat the very intention of marriage , by providing a reward for that breach of faith , which it was instituted to prevent .


The law , too evidently necessary , is to brand public vice , with public infamy   and prevent a repetition of the breach of matrimonial fidelity , by prohibiting the offender from ever marrying again .
Indeed , so sacred should the honour of the female sex be held , that a woman , who could so far forget her own dignity , as to suffer seduction even in a state of freedom , and without the additional guilt of conjugal infidelity , should not be admitted to marry even with her seducer .
As the crime is indelible , the punishment should be inevitable .


Such was the sense of that people , whose superior virtue over-turned the dissolute city of Carthage , and forced our ancestors to fly from their native country  a fate , which evidently threatens their degenerate offspring , and this more dissolute city of Byrsa . '
- Saying which I turned away in disdain , waving my hand to him to depart .


 The horror , with which I was struck by the conversation of these men , is not to be expressed .
I held it as impossible , that a state , in which the only firm bond of human connection , moral virtue , is universally broken , should not separate , and fall to ruin  as I know it to be , for any other than religious principles to support man , through the evils inevitably incident to his nature  a truth , confirmed by too many melancholy instances among the Byrsans , who ignorant of the illimitable extent of divine mercy , or not daring to look up to it , sunk into despair , on the lightest disappointment  and rashly threw away lives , which a better sense might have rendered happy to themselves , and useful to their country .


Discouraged as I was by these reflections , I knew it to be my duty not to despair of the public welfare , or relax my endeavours to promote it  and therefore  resolved to go without farther delay to the king , and lay my sentiments of the war before him .


As I was departing from my own habitation for this purpose , I was stopped by a stranger , who said , with a mysterious look , that he had an affair of importance to impart to me .


On my retiring with him , into an inner chamber , he told me , he was sorry to trouble me , on a disagreeable occasion  but that his friendship for the person who had just left me , would not permit his refusing to come from him , to demand satisfaction for my treatment of him , in our last conversation .


Such a demand struck me with the strongest astonishment .
I answered , that his friend must certainly be mistaken , as I could not charge myself with having  treated him , or any other man ill , in my life .


I suppose he thought I was terrified , and therefore that he might the more safely press upon me .
He replied with an haughty air , that his friend had too high a sense of honour to be satisfied with so poor an evasion , and that I must either instantly meet him , or take the consequence of my cowardice .


But he overacted his part .
Such a menace , instead of fear or resentment , raised only my contempt .
I answered him with the coldest indifference , that I was surprized to hear honour attributed to a man , who by his own confession had forfeited every claim to it  and that if he thought himself aggrieved by my treatment of him , he must correct the conduct , which had given occasion  for it  and then he need not fear meeting the like from me again .


Such a repulse shewed him his error .
Lowering the tone of his voice , he said , ` he hoped I would consider that it was a delicate point  and wished some method could be found to adjust it , without coming to extremities . '


But this moderation was affected too late .
I replied , that I knew no method , but that which I had proposed of his changing his conduct in life , upon which I would certainly change mine to him  and not till then  and that as for the consequences , which he had thought proper to threaten , I gave myself no concern about them , as I had too just a respect for true honour to pay any to the shadow , which he affected to worship , or submit my own principles to public opinion , by descending to put  myself on a level with a man , who had given up every thing really respectable , in the human character .


This was an answer , he seemed not to have been prepared for .
He paused for some minutes , as if considering what to reply  and then withdrew without even attempting to speak another word .


4.15 .
SECTION XV .


 AS soon as the agitation , naturally raised by such a scene , had subsided , I went to the king  and in the humility of loyal duty examined before him the cause , and looked forward to the consequences of the war  and having shewn that these were as dangerous , as that was unjust , besought him to interpose his authority to prevent it .


He heard me with attention  and even seemed struck with what I said  but without attempting to refute it , answered in general terms , that the war was already resolved upon  and the minds of the people so intent upon it , that it was impossible to resist them .


Severely as I was affected by this repulse , it was not the only thing which gave me pain , on the occasion .
No  sooner was my disapprobation of the war known , than I was appointed to a principal command in the army prepared to carry it on .


To a person , unacquainted with the principles , which prevailed among the Byrsans , at that time , this must appear a designed insult .
But no such thing was thought of  it was intended as a mark of respect  as a gratification of the purpose of my opposition .
This must be explained .


There is no human institution , however wise , and salutary in its natural effects , which the depravity of man can not pervert to the most pernicious purposes .


The great council , which Narbal had appointed to assist the sovereign , in the difficulties of government , with their advice  and watch over the interests of  the people , with which they , as a part , must necessarily be better acquainted than he could be , often acted directly contrary to that intention , losing all consequence under a spirited and politic prince  and on the other hand , when one of a different character offered opportunity , rising upon his weakness , and usurping the power , while he had only the name of sovereignty .


In the former instance , honorary distinctions , and the emoluments of government always afforded a prince , who had abilities to apply them properly , the means of influencing the members of the council , and making them subservient to his purpose  but those , which they employed against him , may not be so obvious to you , though they were equally ready .


As the council had a right to deliberate upon the measures of government ,  it was easy for a designing member to carp at such , as though necessary , and strictly just , might appear exceptionable to a superficial view  in which he was sure of being followed by the unthinking populace , as the tutelary assertor and guardian of their rights  till they raised him to such a consequence , as enabled him to enhance the price of his acquiescence with the will of the prince , or perhaps wrest his authority out of his hands .


Nothing could be a stronger proof of the wisdom of Narbal , than that even so gross an abuse of his institution was not sufficient to counterbalance the advantages , arising from this council , and make the abolition of it necessary  the very means , by which this abuse was perpetrated , preventing the obvious and worst consequences of it  and preserving the great principles of the government from being lost .


 For in order to acquire this popularity , it was necessary to explain those principles to the people , who soon saw their interest , and ability to preserve them  and though they joined in their abuse , would never have submitted to their being fundamentally overturned .


On this system therefore the visier judging of me , by all those , who had on other occasions opposed public measures , concluded that the readiest way of gaining me to his interest , was to give me this command , the inconsistency of my accepting which , with my opposition to the war , was sufficiently countenanced by the general practice .


But such an example had no weight with me  and I refused his offer with indignation , till my sovereign himself condescending to request my compliance , personal respect to him , and a sense of the sacred duty of subjection , obliged  me to accept it , however contrary to my inclination .


` How blind , ' interrupted Temugin , ` will attachment to a favourite system make the best informed mind ?
This man , who wanted not wisdom in other matters , could see no imperfection , in the principles of a government , which teemed with the cause of its own dissolution , from the first hour it was instituted .
A state , in which the power of the sovereign can be counterbalanced by that of his subjects , is like a body without an head , and must necessarily fall to ruin . '


' I will hear the conclusion of his story at some other time . '


End of the FIRST VOLUME .
Notes * .
Probably , DO , AS YOU WOULD BE DONE BY .


VOLUME II .


1 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE FIRST .


 1.1 .
SECTION I .


` THE lure of private advantage , ' ( resumed the captive , the next evening , in the words of Himilco ) ` which had been held up to the Byrsans , to draw them into the war , had fired them with such an universal phrenzy , that their army might almost have been said to contain the whole nation .
People of both sexes , of every age , and rank ,  crowded as to a festival , in all the pomp and parade of affluence and luxury , to gratify curiosity and share in the spoil  for so confident were they of success , that they even carried chains to bind their enemies , whom they already considered as captives . '


It was impossible to make the impatience of such a multitude submit to the necessary delays of discipline , or observe military order , in their march against a foe , whom they despised .
They broke , like a deluge , into the country of the Coptes , who , having lived in the security of innocence and peace , were unprepared to resist such an attack , and ravaged it with all the wanton insolence and cruelties of conquest .


But though the Coptes were unable to face such numbers in the field , they lost not that courage with which honest indignation always fires a virtuous breast .
 They removed their families into places of present safety , among the inaccessible fastnesses of the mountains  and then dividing themselves into separate bodies , kept out of the sight of their enemies , till they should find an opportunity for attacking them with that advantage which their manner of proceeding promised .


This conduct , which should have put the Byrsans on their guard , only made them more confident and secure .
They attributed it to fear  and spreading themselves over the country , as if they had no enemy to apprehend , soon gave the Coptes that opportunity for which they watched  who falling upon them , from every quarter , at the same time , with the irresistible fury of men animated by the justice of their cause , and fighting for all they held dear , overthrew them with such a slaughter , that scarcely  enough escaped to bear home the melancholy tidings of their defeat .


It is impossible to describe the effects of this misfortune upon the minds of the Byrsans .
Their dejection now exceeded their late confidence , and shewed , in the strongest light , the difference between true fortitude , inspired by virtue , and the vain presumption of arrogance  as their fate , soon after , did that between power , founded on the solid basis of internal strength , and the false semblance of it , which is reflected by wealth and present prosperity .


Fostered in the lap of luxury , the wordy warriours , whose valour had been so loud in the council , whose boasting had inflamed the multitude to madness , now shuddered at the apprehension of having those evils , which they had wantonly caused to be inflicted on their unoffending neighbours , retorted on  themselves  and basely fled behind their sovereign for shelter , leaving him to struggle with the storm , which they had raised against his principles and opinion .


True nobleness of soul always shines brightest in adversity .
The voice of danger awoke the virtues of Amilcar , who then sat upon the throne of Narbal , and proved the blood of his illustrious race .
He summoned the poor remains of his people , and without descending to fruitless accusations , ordered to arms every one able to take the field , proposing to lead them directly against the enemy , if happily he might surprize them in the security of their late victory  and by one brave effort , wipe off the dishonour they had suffered .


1.2 .
SECTION II .


PASSION , when broken loose from the rule of reason , is ever in extreams .
Fear had now taken such absolute possession  of the Byrsans , that they trembled at the very thought of a war , with those whom they so lately had despised  and shutting their ears to the name of honour , by their infatuated cowardice , disabled their sovereign from attempting to deliver them from the distress into which they had been plunged by their own rashness .
Deaf to his exhortations , and in despite of his authority , they sent an embassy to beg for peace , in the most abject terms  but they were now made to feel , in their turn , the insolence of power .


The leaders of the Coptick nation , no longer thinking themselves under the necessity of preserving any measures with them , in order to confirm the confidence and sharpen the animosity of their own people , gave audience to the ambassadors , in the presence of the whole army  and having received their humiliations with contempt , replied to their supplications  for peace , by aggravating every insult and oppression which they had ever received from them  and enumerating , for they admitted not of aggravation , all the cruelties and outrages which they had committed in their late invasion  concluding with declaring their resolution to pursue to the last extremity a people , whose pride and injustice had made them the general enemies of human-kind .


Instead of their being rouzed by this menace , to that manly desperation which often produces safety , it only sunk them deeper in the most despicable weakness of fear .
Each looked to the other for that counsel , which he himself had neither presence of mind to give , nor spirit to pursue .


They were utterly at a loss .
Their own people were dispersed at too great a distance , in their colonies , to be collected  in time for affording them relief  and consciousness of their former conduct towards those , whom necessity had obliged to live in alliance with them , would not permit their placing any confidence in their assistance .


However , as they had lost every other hope , they sent to all the neighbouring nations to implore aid in their distress  but in vain .


They were answered with demands of redress for injuries offered in the day of their prosperity  and which would never have been mentioned , had the power , which committed , remained to support them  and saw the very people , to whom they had applied for assistance , prepare to join their enemies , in hope of sharing in the spoil of that wealth , which they had unhappily mistaken for strength  but now found to be only a lure to tempt ruin .


 This aggravated their fears to distraction , and made them still an easier conquest to their enemies , who had now advanced into the bosom of their country , where they returned all the outrages which had been exercised upon themselves before .


The wretched Byrsans , unconnected by the ties of social virtue , uninspired with the sacred love of their country , and unsupported by the principles of religion , thought only of shifting every one for himself , and flying with his darling wealth , ( though he knew not whither to direct his flight , nor had time to provide the proper means for it ) regardless of the commands , the entreaties of their sovereign , who , glowing with the virtues of his race , conjured them by every motive , justly dear to man , to imitate his example , and die with honour  if they could not live with happiness .


 Animated by this divine principle , he put himself at the head of his own houshold , and disdaining to be attacked in a city , which he had not force to defend , met the enemy in the field , where he sealed his love to his country with his blood , as became the descendant of Narbal .


Here let me drop the veil , nor put humanity to pain , by striving to represent scenes , in which the unavoidable horrors of war were rendered still more horrible by personal animosity and revenge .


Suffice it to say , that such of the wretched people as fell in the way of the conquerors in the first heat of their fury , were put to the sword without respect to age or sex  the city razed to the ground , and the name of Byrsa no longer numbered among nations .


 At these words grief choaked his utterance .
He covered his face , for a few moments  and having paid the tribute of a pious tear to the memory of his country , thus continued his narrative .


1.3 .
SECTION III .


IT was my peculiar fate to be spared the pain of beholding these scenes of devastation and cruelty .


As I was riding one day , at some distance from the Byrsan army , soon after our entering the country of the Coptes , I saw a town delightfully situated , at the entrance of a beautiful valley , wrapped in flames .


Too many sights , of the same kind , making me at no loss for the cause of such a calamity , I hasted directly to the place , to put a stop to the outrages of the soldiers , and administer  what relief I could to the unhappy sufferers , who were only such as age and infirmity had prevented from retiring with the rest  and would have bespoken compassion for , from every heart , not hardened against the feelings of humanity .


I flew from place to place , wherever the cries of distress call'd for my assistance .
I commanded !
I entreated !
and where every other method failed , had recourse to force to make the ravagers remember they were men .


As I was labouring thus , I met a party of the Byrsans , dragging , by his grey hairs , an aged priest , while others goaded him on , with their spears , toward a magnificent temple , which they had set on fire , and designed to throw him into the flames .


 Struck with horror at the sight , I rushed among the worse than brutal wretches , and smiting with my sword one of them , who refused to obey my command , rescued the trembling victim from their cruelty .


As soon as he had recovered a little from the stupefaction of affright , he threw himself at my feet , and regarding me with a look of ineffable expression , the emotions of his heart depriving him of utterance , raised his hands and eyes to heaven , to implore its blessings on his deliverer .


Melting in sympathy to his distress , I raised him from the ground  and was going to speak words of comfort to his grief , when a sudden shout drew my attention to other objects .


I turned hastily  and saw the Byrsans flying on every side , before a body of the  Coptes , who had poured from the neighbouring mountain , with the impetuosity of a torrent , and bore down every thing they met : I flew to oppose them  and strove by my voice and actions to animate the Byrsans , to a resistance , which alone could procure their safety .


But all my efforts were in vain .
Incumbered with spoil , and enfeebled by their own excesses , they fell just and easy victims to the vengeance of their foes , who were exasperated to such rage by their inhuman ravages , and cruelty , of which every object around presented them with the most horrid instances , that they slew every Byrsan they met , many of them in the very act of imploring that mercy , which they had so lately refused to others .


Those , who had immediately followed me , were too few to oppose such numbers  with success : for in the false security into which the retreat of the Coptes had betrayed us , I had wandered that morning to take a view of the country , attended only by some of my own domestics .


Attached by personal regard , no danger could make them desert me .
But valour wastes itself it vain against unequal force .
They all fell fighting faithfully around me , leaving me alone , and covered with wounds , in the midst of an host of enemies , enraged to madness , and breathing nothing but death .


But still , the natural impulse of self-preservation , prompted me to avert the stroke of fate , as long as I could  and I was animated by the desire of dying with honour , after I had lost every hope of safety .


 With this view , I collected all my strength , and advanced to smite one of the foremost of the Coptes , who pressed upon me , as I stood with my back to a pillar , to prevent my being surrounded  but weakened by the loss of blood , which streamed from every part of my body , my sword flew out of my hand , and I fell at my length upon the ground , destitute of every power of further resistance , or defence .


This thought doubled the horrors of a situation , from which there appeared no possibility of escape .
I saw the sword lifted to strike , when in the moment which divides life from death , the Coptic priest , whom I had just before saved from the cruelty of the Byrsans , burst through the croud , and fearless of the swords , which hung over my head , threw himself upon me , and covered my body with his own .


 Respect to his sacred character and virtues instantly restrained their rage  and procured me a safety , of which I was long insensible , having swooned away , quite exhausted by my loss of blood , just as the good man had enfolded me in his arms .


1.4 .
SECTION IV .


AT the return of reason , I found myself in a place to which I was a stranger .
My wounds and weakness soon recalled to my memory , the situation in which I had lately been  but how I had escaped , or where I now was , I could not form any conception .


While I was striving to recollect my scattered thoughts , the good priest entered the chamber , and approaching softly to the bed where I lay , leaned over me , for a few moments , when  perceiving that I breathed , he kneeled at my side , and prayed to heaven , in the fervency of true piety , for my recovery .


At the first sight of him , I remembered the manner , in which he had stept between me and death  as his actions now sufficiently explained my my situation .
My soul was struck with reverential awe , at such sublime virtue  and joined in his prayers , without presuming to interrupt him .


When he had ended , I made an effort to speak , which drew all his attention  but my weakness made my words unintelligible .
A flash of joyful surprize enlightened all his face .
He raised his eyes to heaven , with a rapturous ejaculation of gratitude and praise  then leaning over me again , exhorted me tenderly to compose my self to rest  and not hazard a recovery , of which  heaven had thus given unexpected hope , by endeavouring to exert a strength above my condition .


I felt the justice of what he said  and testified by my looks , an assent , which I was not able to utter .


I continued in this weak estate for many days , every hour of which was distinguished by some new instance of the tenderness of my friend , ( the name by which he always called me ) who never entrusted me for a moment to the care of any other person , except one , in whom he knew he could confide .


Nor was his care confined to the recovery of my health .
He poured the balm of comfort into my soul  and fortified it against the evils incident to humanity , by inculcating the duty and benefit of submission to the will of heaven , whose ways he proved to be always  right , however contrary to the wishes , and inscrutable to the wisdom of man .


In the course of these delightful conferences , which he lengthened as my strength encreased , I sometimes distantly hinted a desire to be informed of the progress of the war  but he always eluded my curiosity , changing his discourse directly to some of the most important and affecting points of moral virtue and religion , which he discussed in a manner , that took off my attention from every other subject .


Painful remembrance made me attribute this reserve , which I soon perceived , to a delicacy of distressing me , with a recital of the ravages of the Byrsans  for infatuated confidence in their numbers , prevented every apprehension of disaster to them .
I therefore desisted from my enquiries  and resolved to wait with patience for a discovery , which  I dreaded , though for a reason most contrary to the truth .


Full of this thought , the employment of my mind , in every moment of his absence , was to find out some method of healing the unhappy breach between the two nations , to which I flattered myself with an hope , that the humanity , and tenderness which I had experienced , would in a great measure prepare the way .


The first glimpse of this hope was too pleasing to be resisted .
I communicated it immediately , in the fulness of my heart , to the good priest  urging it as a reason for desiring that the ransom of my liberty should be fixed  and permission given me to send to my own country , where I owned that my rank was not inconsiderable .


 This made it impossible to conceal the fate of my country from me any longer  nor indeed was it necessary , as my recovery was now compleated  and my mind restored to its native strength .


The good man , however , opened the black detail gradually , and with all the delicacy , which the nature of it would admit , keeping hope alive to the last moment .


I shall not attempt to describe what I felt , on finding all my forebodings so unhappily fulfilled .
A just sense of the duty of resignation alone could have saved me from despair  as the duty I owed my country determined me to try whether it might not still be possible for me to retrieve its affairs  and restore it once more to a state of rational prosperity .
I owed the attempt , at least , to the blood of Narbal , which flowed in  my veins  and whose example I had before my eyes .


I departed , therefore , secretly from the house of my kind preserver , disguised in the habit of a faquir  and went with an heavy heart to learn the truth , of what I scarce dared to doubt .


1.5 .
SECTION V .


THE appearance of ingratitude , which my departing in this manner bore , was most painful to me .
But it was not to be avoided .


From some expressions dropped at different times , by my benevolent host , I had reason to think that an assurance of acquiescing in the present state of my country , would be expected from me , before I should be set at liberty , which would obviate my dearest hopes  besides , that a regular valediction would  have been attended with circumstances of tenderness , of a particular nature , which I doubted my own ability to support .


The scenes , which every where presented themselves to me , on my entering the country of Byrsa , exceeded my worst apprehensions .
Desolation is too soft a name , for a country , which but a few moons before , had flourished in all the riches of nature , all the embellishments of art  while the few wretched natives , who had escaped the slaughter , were driven into the most inhospitable parts of the Coptic mountains , where they were condemned to every servile labour , and interdicted even the sight of their own country , on pain of instant death .


Grief gave place to indignation .
My soul disdained to think of aught but vengeance .
Nor was I at a loss , by what means to seek it .
I turned my  face directly to our colonies , where I doubted not but a just description of the fate of their mother country , would arouse an effectual resentment , as I knew their force was amply sufficient to overpower every resistance , which the enemy could oppose to them .


But what was my astonishment !
How was the object of my indignation changed , when I found all my entreaties rejected , all my remonstrances treated with contempt !
They told me that they owned no country , but that which gave them bread .
They enumerated the hardships , which had driven them from their native home .
They blazoned the luxury , the insolence , and oppression of the Byrsans , in the strongest colours  and then asked me , whether I thought such a people deserved , that they should hazard their own happiness to endeavour to recover for them a country , which they had been so basely afraid to defend  as they  said , they well knew , that should their endeavours prove successful , the Byrsans would instantly croud home , from the places whither they had ignominiously fled with their wealth , and resume their former tyranny .


I acknowledged the hand of heaven in the fate of the Byrsans  and submitting to its sacred will , looked among the nations round for a place of refuge , where I might fulfil the number of my days unknown  for I resolved never more to mix with the world , or concern myself in its ways .


After thinking of many places , without being able to determine my choice , it at length occurred to me , that my friend and fellow-sufferer in the shipwreck , might probably be able to direct me , as he had travelled over the greatest part of the earth , in his profession of a merchant .
I disposed , therefore , of all  the property which belonged to me , among those unnatural people  and bidding an eternal adieu to every thing , which had any way been connected with Byrsa , repaired to Cairo .


1.6 .
SECTION VI .


ON my arrival at the house of my friend , I found him just preparing to go in search of me , the fate of my country , of which he had received the melancholy tidings , having alarmed his regard for my safety .


It is impossible to express his joy , when he saw me .
He hung upon my neck for some minutes unable to speak , while we mingled the tears of melancholy remembrance and affection .


As soon as I had explained to him the immediate occasion of my coming , ` My friend , ' said he , ` it is true , that  I know many such places as you seek  but I would , by no means , advise you to bury yourself thus alive . '


Your heart is at present soured by the misfortunes of your country , and sickens at the thought of every thing , which may remind you of them  but believe me , it is not in retirement that you must expect relief .
The sameness of the scene will soon pall upon you .
Destitute of other objects , your mind will continually look back to your misfortunes  so that instead of flying from melancholy , you will only give yourself up an helpless prey to it .


Continue therefore here , with me , for a season .
The multitudes which croud to this city , from all parts of the world , will afford you ample matter for rational speculation  and divert your thoughts from dwelling on the objects , which at present give you so  much pain .
The retreat which you want , is from yourself  and that can be had only in the bustle of the world .


I was struck with the justice of what he said , though it unhinged the dearest purpose of my heart .
I knew not what to determine .


While I fluctuated in this state of uncertainty , I dreamed a dream one night in my bed  and thought I saw the spirit of my father standing before me .
After regarding me for some minutes with a look of reprehension , `` Is it thus , '' methought he said , ` that the descendant of Narbal should be employed , while his fellow-citizens are groaning under the yoke of slavery ?
If his country is lost , are there not others to be found ?
A brave man can make his home any where .
The sun not finding  a place of rest , returns to that from which he begun his course . '


On communicating my dream to my friend , he was no less struck with it than myself .
` You see , ' said he , ` that heaven interdicts your retiring from the world .
Idleness is the vice of a weak mind .
Man was designed for action  and you are expressly directed what you are to do .
All that remains is to concert measures properly .
Heaven hath given us reason to direct us , and we are made answerable , in the success of our undertakings , for the use we make of it . '


We then entered into consultation upon the manner in which I should proceed .
The explication of my dream was obvious .
I resolved to repair immediately to Byrsa , and collect as many of my wretched countrymen , as I could find willing to share my fortunes .


 But the difficulty was how to procure an establishment for them , in the place to which I was directed .
My friend informed me , from his own s [ ... ] d experience , that the very ruins of Carthage , that once proud queen of Africa , were scarcely to be traced .


Nor was the face of the country , he said , more changed , than the manners of the inhabitants , who , ignorant of every civil art , every social and moral virtue , lived in a state of war with humanity itself  plundering ind [ ... ] scriminately all , who had the misfortune to fall into their hands , and treating them with the most savage cruelty , only because in their power .


Discouraging as this representation was , I was not to be deterred by it , from that which I held my duty .
I resolved to make the attempt , and submit the event to heaven , which could  never want means to effect its own designs .


My friend , who had no other view but my advantage , did not oppose a resolution , the motive of which he could not controvert . '
I have fulfilled one part of the duty of a friend , ' said he , ` by shewing the difficulty of what you are about to undertake .
I will now fulfil the other , by assisting you in your undertaking .
The wealth , which I saved by your means , I will devote to your service .
Though advanced in age , I feel none of its infirmities .
My spirit is good , and my health vigorous . '


` While you , therefore , go to collect your people , I will make the necessary preparations for conveying them in an happy hour , to the place of their destination .
Direct them to come hither separately , to avoid giving any alarm  and leave the rest to my care . '


1.7 .
SECTION VII .


 I ONCE more assumed the habit of a faquir , under the disguise of which I eluded the jealous vigilance of the Coptes , while I traversed the country of Byrsa , and all the neighbouring mountains , whither the wretched natives had been banished by them .


But what was my astonishment !
How did my heart swell with indignant grief , when I found all my endeavours to awake them to a sense of virtue , and pious confidence in heaven , of no effect .
Their spirit was utterly broken .
They sunk under their misfortunes  and preferred an indolent life , in the most abject state of slavery , to any prospect the attainment of which was to be attended with difficulty and danger .


 Such a degeneracy weaned my soul from them .
I left them to the fate they deserved  and directing the few survivors of my own domestics and dependants , in whom the example of my father had preserved some remains of virtue , to meet me at the habitation of my friend in Cairo , I yielded to the impulse of a tenderness , but badly suited to my situation , while I went to pay the debt of gratitude to the Coptic priest , who had in so generous a manner preserved my life .


I have said , that he had never entrusted the care of my recovery to any , but himself and one person more .
O , my son !
that person was his only daughter  the most beautiful of her sex  but beauty was her lowest praise .
She it was , who watched over me , in the absence of her father , and sweetened the tenderest offices of humanity , by the manner in which she performed them .


 It was impossible not to have a sense of gratitude for such obligation  and gratitude between the sexes always leads to love .


Nor did I attempt to check the advances of this tender passion .
I was in every respect disengaged  and my rank in my own country , I thought , would make my alliance an advantage to any of the Coptes  for , alas !
I knew not then that I had no country .


As this pleasing hope accelerated my recovery , it may naturally be judged , what I felt on finding the foundation of it overturned by the ruin of the Byrsan state .
I strove to repress it , but in vain .
It had taken too deep root in my heart , to be ever expelled .


I had before concealed my passion from motives of delicacy  and I now continued my reserve from pride .
I had  flattered myself , that after the establishment of peace , the proposal would be received with pleasure  but as that event was become impossible , I thought it would only look like adding to a debt , which I was unable to pay  and this was the chief reason of my departing secretly from the house of her father .
I could not trust my heart in such a conflict .


When I arrived near the mansion of my benefactor , I waited in a grove , whither I knew he repaired every morning to perform his devotions .


I must not attempt to describe our meeting .
After some moments of extatic silence , I answered the enquiries of his regard , with a candid account of every thing which had befallen me , since my departure from him .
Nor did I conceal the reasons of my having departed in so secret a manner .


 He listened to me with the most anxious attention  and as soon as I had ended , `` My son , '' said he , ' I approve of your conduct in every instance  and admire a virtue , which acquires additional lustre , from every addition of distress . '


` The will of heaven must be obeyed .
You must lead back your few faithful followers , to the seat of their ancestors .
Nor shall you lead them only .
I will accompany your pious steps : and my daughter also will be easily prevailed upon to go with us .
She wisheth not a fate separate from yours  and my soul so deeply detests the atrocious manner , in which this infatuated people have abused their success , that I will remain no longer among them . '


He then led me to his habitation , where he , the same evening , raised me secretly to the summit of human happiness ,  by giving me his daughter in marriage  who blushingly owned that love had had an equal share with the duties of humanity , in all the tender offices which she had performed for me .


I should have held it a crime to have suffered any indulgence to myself , however virtuous , to delay my obedience to the divine command , by which I thought myself directed in my intended expedition .
Nor was the zeal of my father less ardent !
We left his habitation in the disguise , which had so often proved favourable to me  and committing ourselves to the guidance of heaven , arrived at Cairo in safety .


1.8 .
SECTION VIII .


 THE hopes which my success thus far had raised , were considerably lowered by the accounts which I received from my friend on our arrival  who had learned , that the inhabitants of the ancient territories of Carthage were engaged in the most furious civil wars , which they waged with such animosity , that no person dared to approach their coasts  an absolute stranger being the common prey of all  and a connection with any one people exposing to the outrages of all the rest .


While we were deliberating what course to pursue , amid such difficulties , my father one day asked the merchant , if the inhabitants , in the interior parts of the country , were equally barbarous with those on the sea-coasts  and if not , whether it might not be possible  for us to travel thither by land , so as to avoid the dangers which prevented our going directly to Carthage , and fulfil the intent of my vision at the same time , by settling in some convenient part of the Carthaginian territories , as no particular place had been expressly pointed out in it .


The merchant was struck at this remark  and pausing for some time , answered , that he had formerly been acquainted with many who had traversed those immense regions , in the caravans which went in pilgrimage to Mecca  one of whom had informed him , that he had seen the ruins of several magnificent cities in different parts of them , particularly near the confines of Biledulgerid , a country which wanted nothing but cultivation to make it equal to any other under heaven  there not being the least trace of human habitation within the distance of many days journey   adding , that he had been so struck by the description , that he had enquired particularly where those ruins lay , and was confident he could find his way to them , though the journey was long , and would be attended both with difficulty and danger .


But these obstacles were of no force .
The description of the country , and its situation , evidently within the territories of Carthage , determined us to direct our steps thither , hoping that if it was not immediately the place appointed for us , we might wait there in safety till we could find some more happy time for proceeding to Carthage .


In consequence of this resolution , we set out from Cairo , in number about three hundred persons , carrying every thing necessary for the establishment of a colony , which the care of my friend had provided in the most ample measure .


 I shall not describe a journey , distinguished only by the inconveniencies naturally incident to the countries thro ' which we passed , and in which I bore no farther share , than what regarded myself and the wife of my bosom  the conduct of every thing being resigned to my friend , whose experience was our best guide and safeguard through those inhospitable regions .


After a pilgrimage of more than twenty moons , in which we suffered every hardship which humanity could surmount , we arrived at this place .
The appearance confessedly was far from encouraging  but it was in the country we wished to come to  it was a place where we could hope for rest .


Our first care was to guard against the attacks of violence from any of the rovers of those desarts , who might happen  to discover our retreat  which the nature of the place enabled us soon to effect .


This building being amply capable of containing our whole number , we repaired the injuries it had suffered from time or force , and then proceeded to work with spirit abroad , as we were certain that we slept in safety at home .


But alas !
this gleam of happiness was too bright to last .
My faithful friend , the merchant , had so far overstrained his strength , in our journey , that nature failed , and he died soon after our arrival .
Our tears bore the truest testimony of honour to his merits  but his death was only a presage of greater misfortunes .


We had scarcely begun to taste the first fruits of our husbandry , when a pestilential wind struck the labourers in  the field , who bringing the contagion into our common habitation , it soon ran through our whole colony , with such malignancy , that in the space of little more than a moon , there remained alive only my father , my wife , and myself .


What we must have felt , in such a situation , need not be told .
The wisdom of my father , and the consolations of my wife , were scarcely sufficient to keep my heart from rebelling against heaven , by repining at its will  as I looked upon myself to be the cause of their misfortunes .


The lenient hand of time had but just begun to heal my soul , when our father sunk gently into the sweet sleep of timely death , leaving his disconsolate daughter , and her more unhappy husband , to mourn a loss , deplorable in itself , but ten thousand fold more to be deplored  from the peculiar circumstances of our situation .


Heaven always proportions our strength to the trials which it lays before us .
Resigned to its good pleasure , my wife and I found inexhausted comfort in each other for near two hundred moons  when the bite of an adder , as we walked , one unhappy day , on the bank of yonder river , deprived me of the better half of my heart .


This was a stroke which I could never have supported , had not an infant daughter , the sole pledge of our loves , called forth every virtue to our mutual aid .
I remembered the reciprocal duties of nature , and submitted to suffer the misery of life for her sake  nor have I ever known another care since , but for her happiness , without once daring to look forward to the dreadful hour of our separation .


 From that time my life hath been a perfect blank .
I have not even dared to indulge hope , because I have had no rational expectation upon which I can found it .
I walk blindfold in the guidance of heaven , without presuming to consider whither it may lead me .


Whether the disappointment of the design , which led me to this place , arose from my shewing a diffidence in the power of heaven , by letting any human obstacle divert me from going directly to Carthage  or whether my vision was not merely an illusion of my own imagination , I pretend not to say .
I acted for the best  and I submit with reverence to the will of heaven .


This , O my son !
is the story of my misfortunes  from which you may , at least , receive this melancholy consolation , that you are not the most unhappy of mankind .


1.9 .
SECTION IX .


 WHEN the venerable Himilco had thus concluded his narrative , he left me for some time , as if to regulate his little oeconomy with his daughter , though I believe his first purpose was to give vent to the griefs which naturally attended the remembrance of his misfortunes .


My mind , in the mean while , was too strongly impressed with events of such singularity to attend to any thing else .
I ran over the various occurrences of his life , and from a comparison of it with my own , drew this consolation , that I must certainly have been directed by heaven to his habitation for our mutual happiness .


I waited some days , however , before I would mention this thought to Himilco , in order to contemplate more closely the  disposition of his daughter , before I attached my fate to her 's  if I should not rather say , that I was prevented by fear of a refusal , as my heart became every hour more and more enamoured of her .


Himilco at length relieved me from this embarrassment , by asking me , one day as we walked among the ruins , in what manner I meant to proceed , in order to accomplish the purpose of heaven , which had been so strikingly communicated to me .


It was impossible for me to avoid explaining myself any longer .
I therefore opened all my heart to him , as well as the confusion , inevitable on such an occasion , would permit  and waited with the strongest anxiety for his answer , as the decision of my fate .


Regarding me , for some moments , with a look of inexpressible tenderness , ' I am  no stranger , ' said he , ' O my son !
to your sentiments in respect to my daughter .
I have beheld them labouring in your heart from the first day of your arrival here  nor was the discovery displeasing : on the contrary , I will own , that I have found pleasure in drawing the same conclusion with you , from the wonderful manner in which you have been led , as it were by the hand , to this place , where I had never hoped to see the face of man . '


But , O my son !
you have much to do before you can think of fixing your rest in any place .
The decrees of heaven must be fulfilled  and you must seek the fate it hath appointed for you , which certainly can not be here , at least as yet .


The clouds , which have obscured the morning of your life , have evidently arisen from your violation of filial duty , in leaving your father without his consent  or benediction .
You must therefore return to him , and receive his forgiveness , before you can expect to be happy .


If after that , your sentiments shall remain the same as at present , and meet his approbation , you will find no opposition to your wishes , either from my daughter or from me  and heaven will preserve you for each other , if it approves your union .


Nor is the journey so difficult as you may apprehend .
The season approaches when the caravan passes through these regions , in pilgrimage to Mecca .
To the track of that I will direct you , and with them you will travel in safety .


Severely as I felt this delay of my hopes , it was not in my power to make any reply to the reasons which he gave for it .
From that day I lived with him and his  daughter in a state of happiness , resembling that which the just enjoy as they draw near to heaven .


When the day of my departure arrived , his daughter presented me with a scrip , filled with dried fruits of various kinds , as a provision for my journey , till I should meet the caravan , the way of which Himilco pointed out to me , by such certain signs , which he had learned from his friend , that there could be but little danger of my missing it .


I shall not attempt to describe my parting with his daughter .
In compassion to us both , Himilco hurried me away from this distressful scene  and leading me to the extremity of the ruins , dismissed me with a kiss of peace .


He had before provided me with a faquir 's habit , the disguise which had so often been favourable to himself , in which  he concealed some gold , and jewels of great price  as also a sabre and a shield , for my defence , should it be my misfortune to be met by any of the men or beasts of prey , which ranged those boundless desarts .


1.10 .
SECTION X .


MY mind was so oppressed by the recollection of what I had already undergone , so terrified by the prospect before me , that I forgot to attend to the signs by which Himilco had directed me to find the track of the caravan  insomuch , that after travelling for several days longer than he had prescribed for my gaining it , I found , to my inexpressible unhappiness , that I had been only involving myself deeper in those inexplicable wilds .


This discovery struck me with the deepest dismay .
My heart died in me for some moments .
Recollecting myself , however ,  and asking forgiveness of heaven for this involuntary distrust of its protection , I ascended the nearest high tree , to try if I could see any of the signs by which Himilco had marked my way .


Having made the best observations I could , I resolved , as the evening began to close apace , to remain where I was for that night , in hope of continuing my journey in an happier hour the next morning .


As I was soothing my melancholy in contemplating the struggles between light and darkness for the possession of the sky , and comparing them with the vicissitudes of human life , my ear was suddenly struck by the sound of several voices , which appeared not to be far distant from me  when , turning my eye to the side from whence they came , I was surprised to see a number of children , as I thought , running about in sport , near the tree which I had climbed .


 My first surprize though , soon gave place to a greater , when I considered the appearance of the creatures I beheld : their bodies , which were totally uncovered , were white as marble , without any suffusion of that redness by which the blood distinguishes animal life .
Their height did not exceed two cubits at the most , at the same time that their agility was utterly irreconcileable with the strength of children of that age .


While I was gazing in astonishment at beings , whom I immediately concluded to be some of those inhabitants of the air of whom ancient tradition relates so many wonders , one of them happening to approach my station , his sense of smelling gave him the alarm , which he instantly communicated to the rest , who crouding around the tree , soon discovered me among the branches , when giving a yell of affright , they all ran into a cavern at the foot of a hill close to where I was .


 This appearance of fear was so inconsistent with the notion I had formed of them , that I was utterly at a loss to what motive I should attribute it .
I thought it could not be a stratagem to decoy me down , as beings who were lords of the elements , such as I supposed them to be , could enforce their commands by means impossible for me to resist .
I therefore concluded that my better angel must have interposed , though imperceptibly to me , and resolved to continue where I was , under his protection , till the return of the sun ( whose light suspends the power of those inferior spirits ) should enable me to proceed without fear of molestation from them .


But a few moments solved the difficulty in a more natural manner .
I had scarce formed this resolution , when I saw an animal of the most hideous aspect , which had ever struck my sight , advance toward the place where they had been .


 His stature was higher than that of the tallest man , but in every proportion unnaturally slender for his height .
His tawny skin was thinly shaded with hair of the same colour .
His ears hung down , like those of the animal abominated by all nations , while his flat visage came so near the human , as to strike me with shame and horror at the resemblance .


Though I had never seen a creature of his kind before , I directly knew him , from description , to be one of those animals which make the middle link between the brute and human natures in the chain of life  such herds of which , Himilco had informed me , inhabited several parts of those desarts , as would long since have over-run the whole , were it not for the numbers daily destroyed in their furious broils with each other .
Happening to raise his eyes as he drew near the tree , he espied me  when chattering his teeth , and  grinning a smile of horrible delight , he instantly prepared to ascend to me .


As I knew what kind of enemy I had to deal with , I was not under the same apprehension as before  but determined to stand upon my defence .
I therefore unsheathed my sabre , and placing myself where the boughs could not impede my arm , the moment he came within my reach , dealt him such a blow , as felled him to the ground , where he lay , roaring and struggling in vain to rise .


This instantly shewed me the necessity of changing my resolution , and descending from the tree to slay him outright , lest his cries should draw more of his fellows about me than I might be able to resist .
Accordingly I sprung down , and with one stroke severed his ghastly head from his body .


1.11 .
SECTION XI .


 WHILE I was considering whether I had better reascend the tree , or proceed to seek some place of greater safety for the night , I was surprised to find myself surrounded , on a sudden , by the swarm of little beings , who had just before fled away as affrighted at the sight of me .


Though I thought them impassive to human force , I naturally put myself in a posture of defence , calling to them at the same time , in a menacing tone , to keep at a distance from me .


But I soon found that my apprehensions were groundless , and that they were really as much afraid of me as I could possibly be of them .


On hearing my voice , they started back , and huddling close together , stood evidently  fluctuating between fear and joy  their eyes sparkling with exultation when they looked at the dead savage , but sinking again with diffidence and affright , when turned toward me .


This instantly suggested it to me , that the creature I had slain was their enemy  and that their fear of me proceeded from my resemblance of him .
To remove this fear therefore , I went to the dead body , and giving it a stroke or two with my sabre , spurned the head from me with a look and gesture of the strongest detestation .


Such a proof of my enmity to their foe , was received as an express treaty of friendship and alliance with them .
They directly shook off all fear , and running with shouts of joy and triumph to the dead body , treated it with every insult of hatred and revenge , till their rage was glutted  when seeming to recollect to whom they were indebted for his death ,  they turned their attention to me , and one of them , whose features , on his nearer approach , I could perceive bore the marks of old age , advanced alone to me , and put himself , without apprehension , into my power  while the rest , giving a shout of joy , made signs to me to go with them into their cavern .


Though by this time I was convinced , that far from being what I had at first supposed , they were in reality only one of those varieties in which nature delights to disport herself ( a diminutive species of the human kind ) from whose force I had as little reason to apprehend danger , as from their present intentions  yet such was the power of prepossession , so difficult to divest the mind of the apprehensions of ignorance , that I felt a kind of horror in complying with that invitation , which stronger curiosity would not permit me to refuse .


 This momentary hesitation , however , escaped their notice  and they shewed the highest pleasure at my compliance .
They shouted , they danced , and frisked around me all the way to the cavern  where the same one , who had advanced to me before , and whom I saw the rest treated with respect , beckoned to me to stop , while they removed a number of gins and sharpened stones , with which the entrance was beset in such a manner , as made their retreat inaccessible to any creature bigger than themselves , and which was not acquainted also with the several windings between them .


When the passage was thus cleared , my guide again made signs to me to follow him , stooping , though unnecessarily for himself , as he entered , to shew me that I must stoop .


It is impossible for words to express my astonishment when I entered this subterraneous  city , for such I immediately perceived it to be  the inside of the hill being entirely scooped out , whether by nature or art I could not distinguish , so as to make a cavity capable of containing many times the number of the little community which then inhabited it , and divided into regular compartments proper for the few purposes of their simple life .


As the shades of night had by this time covered the earth , I expected to have found the cavern either involved in darkness , or artificially illuminated by fire  but no sooner had I entered , than I imagined I saw another sky , which emitted a light , pallid indeed and feeble , but sufficient to discover every present object to the eye .


In the first impulse of surprise , I raised my hand to what I thought the sky , when I found that the light was only reflected from a viscid substance , which distilled  through the roof and sides of the cavern , and retained so much of the rays of the sun , admitted through different crevices in the day , as reflected thus served to supply his place during his absence .


Having replaced their defences , and settled all things in a state of safety , the whole people , to the number of about forty , of both sexes and every age , gathered around me as I sat upon the ground , after the example of my leader  where , having satisfied their curiosity by looking at me for some time , the greater part withdrew to their domestic concerns .


In a little time some of them returned , laden with fruits and the flesh of various birds and other little animals , some of which appeared to have been dried , or rather sodden , in the sun , but the greater part was raw  and setting them before me , my host , as I may call him , eat himself , to encourage me to eat .


 As I had taken no food from the rising of the sun , I followed his example , and eat of the fruits sufficiently for the support of nature  but I loathed to taste the flesh , though he strove to tempt me , by eating with a voracity which shewed that he thought it most delicious .


Having finished our repast , he took me to a spring , which issued from the side of the cave , where I slacked my thirst , and washed my feet in a pool filled with the overflowing of the water  after which , observing that I was over-powered with sleep , he led me through various windings to a kind of niche , large enough to serve me for an apartment , where he made signs to me to lay me down to rest .


Resolved to comply with every thing which should be proposed to me , for that night , I directly obeyed him , letting him see me , however , lay my sword under  my head , in such a manner , that it could not be removed without awaking me  a care of which I afterwards found I had no occasion .


1.12 .
SECTION XII .


MY mind had been so over-laboured in the observation of these strange events , that I soon sunk into a profound sleep , in which all my cares were buried , till the next morning was far advanced , as I could judge by the light transmitted through a crevice in the roof of the cave , near the place where I lay .


Having looked around me , and found every thing in the same state as when I went to sleep , I lay still for some time , in expectation of my host 's coming to me  till my patience being quite exhausted , I arose , intending to depart without farther delay , in hope of disentangling myself  from that part of the wilderness before the night should come on .


But I soon found my intention defeated .
The cavern was cut into such an inexplicable labyrinth , that I wandered through it for a considerable time without being able to find the entrance , or even to return to the place where I had slept  never , to my utter astonishment , seeing , or even hearing one of the inhabitants .


Losing , at length , all hope of extricating myself , without their assistance , I called aloud several times  upon which I immediately heard the buzzing of their voices all around me .


After some minutes , my host , as I have called him , came toward me  but with an appearance of distrust and apprehension .
To remove an impression , therefore , which I saw might be disadvantageous  to me , I sat down upon the ground , and reaching out my hand with a smile , the honest creature , suspecting no deceit , as he designed none , resumed his former confidence , and sat down near me with evident pleasure  whereupon the whole community , who had waited the event of his approach , instantly came round me , with the same freedom as before .


The light , which now entered through various apertures in the roof of the cavern , enabled me to see every thing distinctly .
I have already described their size , and the peculiar colour of their bodies  in other respects they differed not from the ordinary race of men , a singularity in one feature excepted , which at first view was not so pleasing .
This was a prominence in their eyes , from whence probably proceeded their seeing so much better in a feeble , than a strong light  and may have been the cause of their chusing such a gloomy habitation .


 Our amity being thus restored , on my making signs of a desire to go out of the cavern , my host instantly led me to the entrance , where he stopped , being unable to bear the light of the sun  but gave me to understand , that he would wait my return , by seating himself upon the ground .


Our desire for any thing is always in proportion to the difficulty which attends the attainment of it .
Though I was so anxious to continue my journey but a few minutes before , I now no sooner found myself so perfectly at my liberty , than that anxiety ceased  and I resolved to indulge my curiosity , by staying a few days among this extraordinary people , to observe their customs and manners , and , if possible , acquire some knowledge of their language .


Accordingly , as soon as I had looked around me for a few minutes , to mark  the way I came , I went back to the mouth of the cave , where I found my host , who expressed the strongest satisfaction at my return .


The little community , who now regarded me as one of themselves , pursued their usual occupations as if I was not present  by which means I soon had an opportunity of making all the observations I desired .


I have taken notice before , that their bodies were entirely naked  nor was that custom , however strange to me , in the least to be wondered at , when their situation was properly considered .


Natural necessity for cloathing they had none , as their place of habitation defended them from every inclemency of weather  and to the artificial necessity of shame , they were strangers , both from their  seclusion from the rest of the world  and that it had never entered into their thoughts , that nature had made any parts of their bodies objects of shame  and for the same reason , they performed all the natural functions wherever she suggested the performance of them .


Their desires were as limited , as their powers of gratification .
They eat fruits , with which the happiness of the climate supplied them , at every season  and the flesh of birds , and those smaller animals which we denominate vermin , taken in gins , in the construction of which all the powers of their ingenuity seemed to terminate .


Implements of domestic oeconomy , they knew not the use of .
They eat their food without any preparation .
They stooped to the fountain to drink , and when their appetites were satisfied , they laid themselves down to sleep , without  farther care , for the whole day  the strong light of the sun suspending their occupations , as much as darkness doth those of other men .


I found no great difficulty in acquiring a sufficient knowledge of their language , which was far from being copious , their situation , and simplicity of life suggesting but very few ideas : They had names for the things they knew , and expressions for the uses they made of them  and that was nearly its whole extent  for they never combined their ideas , nor employed the faculties of the mind on its own operations .


Of all the passions which agitate the heart , and equally constitute the happiness and misery of man , they seemed to have a sense only of fear and love  if I should not add hatred and joy !
though no more than consequences of the former , in the only instance , I ever could  discover of them , their behaviour when I slew the savage !
nor were the effects even of these powerful or lasting .


When the entrance of their cavern was defended , in the manner I have described , they appeared to have no farther fear  and of love , I could never perceive the least resemblance , except in parental affection for their offspring  such as nature hath imprinted on every animal , for the purpose of preserving the species : the attachments of friendship , or seclusive connections between the sexes , appearing to be utterly unknown to them .


I have observed , that they seemed to pay respect , to the one , who first approached , and afterwards attended particularly to me !
but I could never perceive that he had any authority or influence over them .


 They had given place to his superior intrepidity , and followed his example in that instance  and that was all : for of an established authority or government , there did not appear the faintest shadow among them , any more than of religion  of the very first principles of which , supposed to be universally written in the human heart , they were utterly ignorant  nor when I was able , in some manner , to converse with them , could I ever make them form the least conception of either .


Till their offspring were able to procure their own food , they followed their parents , who fed them  but with this necessity the attachment on both sides ended so absolutely , that I could never trace even the remembrance of it .
Every one did just what they pleased , without respect being paid to , or offence taken by any other .


 I have said , that they took me , at first , for one of those savages , with which they live in a continual state of war .
But when they were undeceived by my killing their enemy , and they had entered into amity with me , they expressed no curiosity to know who I was , or whence I came , my words seeming to make impression upon them no longer than upon the air , through which the sound of them passed to their ears .


Nor must it be supposed , that this inattention proceeded from pride .
Their ignorance of themselves was equally great .
When I asked if they were originally of that country , they could not comprehend what I meant  nor did they know whether there was any more of their own species in the world .


My curiosity soon took in the whole of such a narrow sphere .
I left them at the end of seven days , convinced of  the contemptible ignorance of those torpid visionaries , who affect to place happiness in the absence of passion , and being content merely with the support of nature .


A comparison of such a people with myself , gave me a consequence , in my own eyes , which restored the vigor of my mind , and supported me through my journey .
I soon recovered the way-marks pointed out to me by Himilco , from which I had not strayed so far , as the dejection of my spirits had made me apprehend  and on the sixth day from my leaving the little people , joined the caravan .


End of the FIRST BOOK .
2 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE SECOND .


 2.1 .
SECTION I .


AS the express intent of their journey , continued the captive , was to perform a religious duty , I expected to have met with nothing , but acts of virtue , and sentiments of piety , among the pilgrims : But a very little time shewed me , that the professed intention doth not always govern the actions of man , even in those sacred matters .


 I had not been long with the caravan , when my attention was struck by one of the pilgrims , whose demeanour shewed a degree of sanctity superior to all the rest .


Not content with performing all the rites ordained by his religion , he doubled them in every instance .
Nature seemed unequal to the rigor of his abstinence .
The hours allotted to rest , he spent in prayer : and his exhortations were numbered by the steps of his journey .


Such a sight was balm to my heart .
I thought the merits of this one man overbalanced the failings of all the rest .
` Virtue can not be a shadow , ' I reasoned with myself . '
I have now met the substance , upon which I may safely form my judgment . '


But a moment 's reflection damped the pleasure of this thought . '
I have been  deceived before , ' I continued , ` and how can I be certain , that I am not so now !
That I do not see this man also in a mirrour !
I will observe him better before I presume to judge . '


For this purpose I attached myself more closely to him , than I had done before  when the event was far from confirming the opinion I had conceived in his favour .
I soon thought I saw pride supply the place of piety , in his most exemplary acts of devotion  and virtue made use of as a veil to cover vice .


This discovery almost drove me to despair .
` To what purpose , ' I exclaimed , in the anguish of my soul , ` do I see life , when I am not able to judge of what I see ?
This man 's actions are all good .
Why then should I presume to deduce them from a bad motive ?
They surely are the best index of the  heart .
I have formed a wrong judgment of him , in one instance , or the other  and at any rate the former error was the more pardonable .
Where there is any uncertainty , a good heart will always judge favourably .
Let me therefore hope , that I have deceived myself by a false sagacity  and that my first opinion of him was right . '
But this hope was of short duration .


The Santone , for by that venerable appellation was he distinguished from the other pilgrims in the caravan , was encouraged by the admiration he had raised , to form still higher hopes .


Addressing himself to me one evening , after prayer , ' I have observed , ' said he , ` my son , with what piety you perform the rites of religion  and how attentively you listen to the exhortation of my words .
Come to my tent , at  the third hour of the night , when my private devotions will be finished , that we may confer together upon the ways of heaven . '


Such an invitation was far from being unpleasing to me , as it must give me an opportunity of clearing up the doubts with which my mind was perplexed .
I therefore punctually attended the appointment of the Santone , whom I found expecting my arrival .


Placing me beside him , on his carpet , ' I have observed , ' said he , ' O my son , the regularity of your deportment  and rejoice to have found in so young a man , one who is worthy of my friendship .
I read your heart in your looks  and will open myself to you , without fear or reserve  a confidence , which will not only shew you things in their proper colours , but also convince you of the  advantage of attaching yourself to me , and entering into all my views . '


It is impossible for me to express , how much I was surprized at this address .
The manner was as unexpected , as the matter was incomprehensible  such a familiar style of discourse being totally different from the abstracted broken sentences , in which he was accustomed to deliver his sentiments .
However , I was sufficiently master of myself to conceal my astonishment  and the Santone taking my habitual silence for assent , continued his discourse in these words .


2.2 .
SECTION II .


 YOU are doubtlessly surprized at the austerities , which you daily see me practise upon myself  and think that enthusiasm alone can support me through them .
But that opinion is superficially drawn .
I act from the universal principle of human nature , which proposes the gratification of the ruling passion , in every act  however repugnant that act may be to it in appearance .


The object of my wishes , the end of all my labours , is power  and that in the most extensive sense .
Let warriors ravage nations , and lead the wretched inhabitants in chains , my empire is of a more exalted nature .
I scorn to hold the body in subjection , while the mind is free .
Of this empire you are yourself a witness , and a subject .
How I have established it , and to what further  purposes I mean to improve its influence , are the things which I intend to reveal in confidence to you .


I could contain myself no longer .
` Gracious heaven ! '
I exclaimed , ` Is it possible that the religious exercises , which strike the world with such reverence , can proceed from any other motive than true piety ? '


` Moderate your zeal , my son , ' he returned , with a contemptuous smile , ` and all these matters shall be explained to you .
True piety never strikes the world with reverence , because it is never seen by the world .
It is an immediate intercourse between the soul and heaven , carried on in acts merely spiritual , and which can not be represented to sense .
Whenever you see a man perform religious exercises in public  and especially if he affects to exceed in them , you may safely conclude  either that his reason is disordered , or that he acts from motives most different from those which he professes . '


What service can the Deity receive from the works of man ?
Is it not derogating from the idea we have of his wisdom , to think that he can approve acts of folly or madness ?
Is it not offering an affront to his goodness , to suppose that he can take pleasure in the sufferings of his creatures ?
and yet to such absurd , such impious opinions , do all those austerities , those religious exercises , which impose upon the greater part of the world , owe their credit .


The wiser few , indeed , turn this folly to their own advantage  and upon this apparent self-denial , these voluntary sufferings , found the firmest power of enjoying all the real pleasures of which life is capable .


 The love of pleasure , and the fear of pain , are the ruling principles of the human heart , in which they maintain an uninterrupted struggle for superiority .


Now the whole art of governing mankind consists in the management of these two principles  which by some means has become the peculiar province of priesthood , and is the scepter with which they rule the world  for as the ignorance of mankind hath been brought to believe the pleasures of nature to be crimes against its author , and that the same authority , which has arbitrarily made them such , has given power to a particular set of people , to prescribe means of avoiding the punishment of them hereafter , by sufferings here , ( for the imposition would have refuted itself if the punishment had not been postponed to another state , from which we can have no intelligence , though , at the  same time , to counterbalance that delay of commencement , there hath been given to it , an eternity of duration ) nothing is easier , than for those , who are supposed to be entrusted with this power , to turn the commutation of that punishment to their own advantage , in what manner they please .


In order to exert this power most effectually , it is necessary to strike the senses of its objects , with an appearance of superior sanctity , which may be considered in the double light , of a consequence of the sacred character , and a confirmation of its efficacy  and this can not be done any way so well as by abstaining , in the extreme degree , from those pleasures , which are represented to be crimes  because it appears to be a conviction that they really are such  and that indulgence in them is as dangerous , as it is represented .


 Nor is this the only advantage derived from this abstinence .
It is thought to be so meritorious , from the supposed difficulty of it , as to give such an interest with the power , in obedience to whom it is pretended to be practised , that nothing can be refused to the intercession of him who practises it  and this is the completion of his work .


As to the difficulty of this abstinence , it is all imaginary .
In respect to food , the simplest is that which supports nature best  and the less which is taken , even of that , the better she performs her functions .
Were the pleasure of temperance , both in the quantity and quality of aliment , known , luxury and excess would soon be banished from the world : and as to other appetites , their force is derived merely from their indulgence .
Every day they are restrained , the restraint becomes less  troublesome  till , in the end , it ceases to be a trouble .


Of the progress which I have already made , in the execution of my design , you are yourself a witness .
The greater part of the difficulty , and all doubt of success are conquered .
Nothing remains now , but to pursue the path , which lieth plain and easy before me  and it will soon lead me to the summit of my wishes .


In the mean time I have need of an assistant in my labours , an associate in my power , who will consult his own interest by his fidelity to me  and for this purpose I have selected you from among the numbers , who would be proud of such an honour .


My intention is to persist in my present manner , till I shall have performed this pilgrimage to Mecca  on the additional  credit of which , I propose , at my return to my native country of Biledulgerid , to promulgate a new religion , which I have already planned on the principles most likely to strike those people  and as soon as it shall have taken possession of their minds , I will then unite the civil to the religious power , and establish a sovereignty which no force can subvert , as it will be founded in the minds of my subjects .


I have thus , my son , opened my whole purpose to you  and have no doubt of your assistance in bringing it to perfection , as you will share the benefit , while I live  and enjoy the whole after my decease .


The first instance , in which I shall require your co-operation , is this .


To-morrow , after the evening prayer , I will feign to fall into a trance  which  I can do without danger of detection , by means of a composition , which hath the power of suspending every animal function , for a length of time , proportioned to the quantity in which it is taken , so as to effect an appearance of death , not possible to be distinguished from the reality .


While I lie , in all appearance , inanimate , you must , on a sudden , fix your eyes upon the air , just over me  and then falling on your knees , pray aloud with fervency .


The croud will naturally gather around you , to know the meaning of this conduct  when you must point toward the place , where I lie , and ask them , with looks and exclamations of astonishment , if they do not see a celestial spirit hanging upon the wing over me ?


 This will fix their attention , and fire their already heated imaginations to such a degree , that many of them will think they really see what you describe  while all the rest will assent to it , to avoid the imputation of infidelity , and for fear of the consequences of contradicting the spirit of enthusiastic superstition .


When this spirit is thus raised , I know how to direct it to the best advantage .
I will feign a revelation of those things which I would have them believe , to the truth of which I will thus make themselves bear witness .


When this first step is happily taken , we will consult how we are to proceed farther .


2.3 .
SECTION III .


 IT is impossible to express the horror , with which I was struck by this proposal .
I thought myself contaminated by the bare communication of it  and held his confidence as the greatest dishonour which had ever befallen me  concluding that he must have seen an appearance of guilt in my looks , to make him select me for his accomplice .


At first I determined to open the mystery of his iniquity  but when I considered the consequence of contradicting enthusiastic superstition , as he had said  I did not think myself justifiable in throwing away my own life , where I had no prospect of defeating his impious designs .


 But happily an opportunity soon offered , of extricating me from this difficulty .


Along with the caravan , in which I travelled , there journied a company of merchants , who were going to Bagdat and Bassora , to barter the commodities of Africa , for those of the Asiatic regions .


We had passed the Isthmus of Suez , the very day before the Santone had opened his intentions to me .
As I returned from his tent to my own , my way led me by the quarter of those merchants , whom I found preparing to separate from the caravan , the next morning .


It instantly struck me , that I might escape the danger of refusing to enter into his iniquitous schemes , by departing along with these merchants .
I accordingly  went directly to my tent  and taking my scrip upon my back , and my staff in my hand , joined them , just before they began their march .


It was some time before my soul could free itself from the horror with which the profligacy of the Santone had struck me .
At length , after weighing deliberately every thing , which he had said , I found consolation in reflecting , that the abuse of the best things produces the worst effects  and that the excellence of true piety was only proved more signally , by its being able to stand the test of such prostitution .


We pursued our journey to Bagdat , without meeting any occurrence worth relating .


High as my curiosity had been raised , by the accounts which I had heard of this imperial city , my impatience to embrace  the knees of my father was so strong , that I should not have delayed an hour in it , had it been in my power to proceed : but all the neighbouring nations were involved in such furious wars , that it was necessary for me to wait for a favourable opportunity , before I could expect to perform my journey in safety .


The scene I was now in , was so utterly new to me , that I could only gaze in silent admiration , without being able to form any judgment of what I saw .
The infinite variety of the objects which attracted my attention , prevented my attending to any of them .
I had not time to observe one , when another presented itself to my observation , so that I literally was lost in the wilderness of my own thoughts .


While I was in this state of perplexity , I happened one day , as I performed my devotions in the principal mosque , to  kneel close to an aged man , who instantly fixed his eyes upon me in the most earnest manner .


As I could not recollect that I had ever seen him before , I concluded he must have mistaken me for some other person  and soon as the prayers were ended , departed without taking any further notice of him : but I had not gone far , before I was accosted abruptly by a slave , who bade me , with an air of authority , to follow him .


Though I was naturally surprized at such an address , I judged , from the manner in which he spoke , that it would be in vain for me to refuse  and therefore , to make a merit of my compliance , obeyed without asking him any questions , or even observing whither he led me , till I found myself in one of the courts of the Khaliff 's palace .


 I had not waited long , when I was introduced into the presence of the grand visier , whom I directly knew to be the person , who had regarded me so attentively , some minutes before , at the mosque .


As soon as I approached him , ' I would know , ' said he , ' O young man , who thou art , and what thine occupation is in this city ? '


The manner in which he spoke was far from giving me any alarm .
As I was conscious of no crime , I was free from fear  and resolved , while I adhered strictly to truth , not to enter into the particulars of my life , farther than was necessary to satisfy his curiosity .


` May the substitute of him , whose power rules the world , I answered , live for ever !
Your slave cometh from the remotest parts of Arabia the Happy .
My motive  for leaving my native country , was to see the manners of different people , and prove the precepts of education by experience . '


` Hast thou not been among the Bedouins ? '
he interrupted me sternly  ` and hast thou not even led those troops of ravagers , in their attacks upon the caravans of the true believers ? '


Unexpected as this question was , it did not disconcert me .
I answered him in the boldness of innocence and truth  and in few words gave him an account of the manner in which I had been taken captive by the Bedouins , and the reason of their dismissing me from among them .


The force of truth is irresistible .
He heard me with attention  and as soon as I had ended : ` Thy virtue hath been proved by many trials , ' said he , rising from the sopha upon which he sat , and embracing  me tenderly  ' I have been myself a grateful witness of it .
I was in the number of the captives , whom you so generously saved from the cruelty of those barbarians , and dismissed in peace .
Nor did my unexpected deliverance , on that day , fill my heart with sincerer joy , than I feel now , at this happy opportunity of shewing my sense of it . '


I need not attempt to describe the effect which these words had on me .
I returned his embrace with equal warmth , and forgot that I had ever been unhappy .


My friend , for he would never permit me to address him by any other appellation , was not satisfied with heaping all the benefits in his own power upon me .
He introduced me to the Khaliff , to whom he represented me in such an advantageous light , that he soon distinguished me , by many marks of his favour .


 My first advances to this envied station drew upon me the frowns and malevolence of all , who had already gained , or aspired to it : but an event soon happened , which totally changed their conduct .


2.4 .
SECTION IV .


MY friend , the visier , who had descended far into the vale of years , fixed his eye upon me as a proper successor in those cares , to the weight of which he began to feel himself unequal .
He recommended me therefore in such strong terms to the Khaliff , that he made no difficulty of permitting him to resign the reins of government , and entrusting them to me .


The clouds which had attended every step of my ascent to this height of power , vanished the moment I had attained it : and in their place I met nothing but smiles  of congratulation , and professions of attachment and respect .


Unpractised in the ways of men , I readily gave credit to appearances , which I was not conscious of having given any reason to doubt , and formed the most pleasing schemes for turning the influential power I now enjoyed to the general advantage  the splendor of the present scene dazzling my eyes , and making me over-look the essential resemblance between it and the former , in which I had met so mortifying a disappointment , in my designs of the same kind , among the Bedouins .


In this delusion I eagerly resumed my favourite scheme of reformation , confiding in the obvious rectitude and advantage of it , and the integrity of my own heart , to secure my interest with the Khaliff  and in his power to protect me from  the attempts of any , who should be so lost to every sense of virtue and public spirit , as to oppose me in the execution .


Nor was I deceived in this confidence .
The discernment and justice of the Khaliff viewed my intentions in a just light , and they confirmed me still more strongly in his esteem .


But there were many obstacles in the way to my wishes , which I foresaw not at the first  or rather looked upon in the opposite light .


The greatest of these arose from the power of appointing to places of profit or honour under the government , which was apparently vested in the office I bore  and not only overwhelmed me with vexation , but also counteracted my designs , though I had built upon it as one of the surest means of their success .


 Empty as the honour , and poor the profits of many of those places were , the number and importunity of the candidates for them embarrassed me beyond expression .


Some pleaded their own merits , others those of their ancestors  this one his youth and ability to do service , that his age and the services he had done , though he was now incapable of repeating them : one urged his poverty , and the necessity he had for relief  another his riches , and the influence they gave him over his fellows .
In a word , every circumstance and distinction , which varies the motley view of life , was alledged to enforce their pretensions .


Nor was this solicitation only for such places as were actually vacant .
They vied with equal eagerness for those which were already filled  blackening the characters of the possessors , as well as of each other ,  with every calumny which envy or ambition could suggest .


In the mean time , though it was evident that I could not gratify such numbers as applied , even if I was so inclined , yet each affected to take offence  and the refusal of impossible requests made me irreconcileable enemies : the competitors dropping their mutual animosities to join in combinations against me , for a disappointment of expectations contradictory in themselves , and destructive of each other  and representing every word and action of my life in such malignant colours , as made me an object of general detestation to the misguided multitude , whose dearest interests and happiness I was at the very time labouring to promote .


Severely as I felt the sting of this ingratitude , I bore it , while it affected myself only  but when their virulence presumed to rise from me to the Khaliff , I  could support it no longer : but to prevent that worst misfortune which can befal a sovereign , the loss of his subjects ' love , threw myself at his feet , and implored his permission to leave a court , where my best intentions had unhappily produced so bad an effect .


Strong as the reasons were , with which I enforced this request , the Khaliff thought his honour , as well as his regard , concerned not to grant it .
He raised me from the ground , and bidding me fear nothing , while he approved my conduct , prepared to make those , who had thus presumed to oppose his pleasure , feel the weight of his resentment .


But the consequences which I foresaw might attend this firmness , however favourable to myself , and noble in its motive , struck me with horror .
I repeated my suit , therefore , in terms so pressing ,  that I , in a manner , extorted his compliance , against his inclination  and leaving my enemies to triumph in their success , joined a body of troops , which the Khaliff was sending to the assistance of Aladdin , king of Diarbee , who then waged a most unequal war with the Sultan of Khouaresm .


Though the motives of the opposition , to which I had thus fallen a sacrifice , and the means by which it had been carried on , were equally unjust , candour obliges me to confess , in this cool moment of deliberate reflection , that my own indiscretion assisted it , in too many instances .


Secure of the support of the Khaliff 's favour , I slighted public opinion , and thought it beneath me to pay regard to appearances , as my intentions were right  eager for the accomplishment of which , I never studied a proper season  but obtruding them abruptly , without attention  to circumstances , provoked opposition , by injudicious precipitancy , where modest delicacy and caution would have obviated every objection , and ensured success .


I wish I could say , that the Khaliff himself had not also given something too like reason for the clamours raised upon this occasion .


While he devoted all his thoughts to the cultivation of the finer arts , and moral reformation of his people , the most important affairs of the state either languished in neglect , or miscarried in the attempt of conducting them by the rules of private virtue .
From too lively a sense of the evils of war , he sacrificed the interests of his people and the honour of his crown to preserve peace  and mercy , indiscriminately dispensed , robbed the laws of respect , and encouraged crimes , by taking away the fear of punishment .


 One advantage , it is true , I received from this second disappointment , which was that of being convinced by the unerring proof of experience , that as power , in the first instance , does not always procure happiness , in the second it is always unhappy  for , if the pillow of a prince is sometimes uneasy , that of a favourite is ever filled with thorns  all the troubles of the former being aggravated to the latter , by anxiety at the uncertainty of his situation .


2.5 .
SECTION V .


THE pain I felt at leaving a court , where I had thought myself so happily established , was in some degree alleviated by resentment , and hope of acquiring such glory in the war as should dazzle my enemies at my return  and raise me above danger of suffering the like disgrace again , especially as I resolved never more to give  offence by attempting to serve people against their inclinations .


The Khaliff dismissed me with the warmest assurances of regard .
He had offered me the command of his troops  but a sense of my inexperience in the art of war made me decline so difficult a charge , till I should be more equal to it .


` And yet , ' interrupted Temugin , ` equal inexperience in the arts of government had not made you decline that charge .
Presumptuous folly !
To think it easier to govern a whole people in idleness , and in a manner free from restraint , and conduct the complicated affairs of peace  than to command a small part of them , who are prepared to obey  and direct them to a particular end , however difficult to attain , on which they are themselves all intent ! '


 I acknowledge , mighty lord , the justice of your reprehension , returned the captive  but such is the confidence of man in his own abilities , where it is not restrained by the obvious necessity of observing some particular method , of which practice only can make him master .


No one attempts the simplest works of mechanism , who has not practised the manner  but all think themselves born with abilities to govern .


` Proceed , ' replied Temugin  ' I reprehend not thee .
The fault is in human nature . '


As soon as I had joined the army of Aladdin , resumed the captive , I applied myself with the greatest assiduity to learn the military art , which I had an opportunity of seeing in all its various extent  the war , in which he was engaged , calling  forth all the resources of his genius and courage , to balance the superiority of the Sultan 's forces .


The manner in which I had parted from the Khaliff had made me flatter myself , that his regard for me was unalterably fixed  but I soon had reason to change my opinion .


He had ordered me to send him constant accounts of all the events of the war  but to these I never received the least return  and to remove all doubt of the reason of such a slight , I saw one of my most malignant enemies appointed to the command of the troops in which I served  though , on the death of the former general , I had solicited that trust , my abilities for which could not now be doubted .


This was an indignity I could not bear .
In the anguish of my soul , therefore , I threw myself at the feet of Aladdin , and  informing him of my situation , implored his protection , and leave to serve in his own troops .


That vigilant and discerning prince , who was not a stranger to the character of any soldier in his armies , readily granted my suit  and as , in such a scene of continued action , I could not long want an opportunity of proving my abilities , I soon arose to the highest rank in his forces .


I had justified the good opinion , which raised me to the command of a separate army , by several signal successes , when a tempest and hurricane burst upon me , one day , as I was on a march , and overwhelmed the greater part of my troops .


As this was an accident , which no human precaution could prevent , I did not apprehend that it could possibly be imputed to me as a fault  and therefore sent  directly to inform Aladdin of my misfortune , and desire a reinforcement .


But he viewed the matter in a different light  and sending another general to take the command from me , let me know that it was a maxim with him , never to employ again an officer who had once been unfortunate .


` Impious absurdity ! '
exclaimed Temugin  ` to set his own will in opposition to that of heaven , and pretend to make man accountable for its actions !
How could he expect that his soldiers should serve him , with the attachment and confidence necessary to success , when they were liable thus to lose the merit of their best endeavours , without being guilty of any fault ? '


And yet , mighty lord , returned the captive , it is in order to keep up that confidence , that he practises such severity .
 ` Such is the force of superstitious opinion ! '
I have heard him say , ` that the soldier who serves under a commander who has once been unfortunate , always fears misfortune  whereas , under one who has ever been successful , he rushes on his enemy , with an assurance of the same success , which is the most certain means of obtaining it . '


As to the particular injustice of such a conduct , that never enters into his consideration .
Where the mind is wholly taken up with one object , it measures the propriety of any means only by their aptitude to procure it .


Aladdin not only gives the strictest attention to the general welfare and interests of his subjects , but also relieves the distresses , and promotes the happiness of every individual with paternal tenderness and care .


 But this is , where this distress or happiness does not interfere with the operations of the war , the immediate and great object of all his thoughts .
Where they do , the tenderness and justice of the king , and father of his people , are drowned in the political views and severity of the soldier and statesman .


Thus , while his subjects at home live in happiness and safety under the protection of his care , his soldiers are obliged to divest themselves of every natural principle of action , and execute his orders , like mere machines , without regard to circumstances  or any sense , but that of obedience to his will : a state of subjection , which nothing but the hope of accelerating by victory their return to the blessings of peace , so profusely enjoyed under him , can make supportable to beings , whom reason invariably directs to act with a regard to their own happiness .


 ` Cease your reflections , ' replied Temugin , ` and proceed with your story .
Aladdin is a wise prince . '


2.6 .
SECTION VI .


WHEN I had recovered from my first astonishment , continued the captive , I humbled my heart before heaven  and seeking in myself for the cause of so many misfortunes , was not at a loss to attribute them to my having delayed to return to my father  and immediately resolved to turn my face homewards , nor stop till I should throw myself at his feet , and obtain his forgiveness .


This resolution banished every repining and resentful thought , and restored serenity to my mind .
I directly set out on my journey , accompanied only by one attendant , whose affectionate attachment I could not elude , so as to depart alone , as  I would have done  and through innumerable difficulties and dangers , at length reached the habitation of my father .


My joy arose so high , as I approached this seat of innocence and content , that I could scarce support its emotions .
It may be judged then what I felt , on finding his house deserted , and learning from his neighbours that he had disappeared , in a few days after my departure , nor had ever been heard of since .


I sunk into a swoon , from which I recovered only to suffer the tortures of a violent fever , into which the workings of my soul had inflamed my whole frame .


The care of my faithful attendant saved my life  but I languished many moons , in more than infantine weakness  nor was it even in the power of his friendship to heal the anguish of my heart .


 At length , when youth had triumphed over the effects of my disease , a ray of delusive hope dawned upon me , that I might yet find my father .
I recollected , that when I was learning my military exercises , he had shewn a most anxious alarm at my expressing a desire to seek experience in the art of war , and used every argument to check the military ardour with which I seemed to be fired .


This instantly suggested a thought , that he might have concluded I had gone to some of the armies engaged in war , and accordingly pursued me .


As I had already seen the armies of Bagdat and Diarbee , I thought it in vain to seek him among them  and therefore resolved to repair directly to the camp of the Sultan of Khouraesm , never reflecting on the improbability of finding an obscure old man among the innumerable multitudes collected in such a place , or of  his having continued there so long , even if he had gone thither at the first .


I accordingly measured back the weary steps of my late journey , accompanied by my faithful friend  and proceeded thro ' Persian Irac into the country of Transoxana , where I joined the army of Mohammed , whose evil genius had led him thither to oppose his force to your 's .


But a fruitless search at length shewed me the folly of such a vain undertaking  though I still knew not how to give it up , as it was the last resource of my hope of ever seeing my father more .


As I was wandering one day through the camp , buried in these painful reflections , the leader of a band of soldiers happening to take notice of me , enquired who I was  and turning the honest answer which I gave him into brutal ridicule ,  ordered me to be enrolled directly among the troops under his command .


It was in vain to expostulate .
I was dragged away , amid the cruelties and insults of those unfeeling wretches , who fallen beneath humanity themselves , take a malignant pleasure in aggravating the miseries of others  and thrown into a dungeon to prevent my attempting to escape , till they should go upon action .


Every new misfortune seems heavier than the past .
I thought of nothing now , but the horrors of my present situation , among the severest of which I reckoned the loss of my faithful companion , who had happened to be absent from me , when I was seized  nor had I any possibility of letting him know where I was .


When I had lain some days in a confinement , the loathsomeness and severity  of which were sufficient to break the strongest health and spirits , I went with the forces into the field , where hope of ending my sufferings , by an honourable death , prompted me to behave in a manner , that attracted the notice of the commander , and removed all suspicion of my desiring to quit the service .


On my return to the camp , I sought my companion , with the most anxious care , but with no better success than had attended my search for my father .


My spirit sunk under such accumulated disappointments .
I resolved to return to Himilco  and seclude myself from a world , whose ways I despaired of ever being able to reconcile to those principles , by which I had been taught to believe it governed .


While I was considering how to accomplish my escape , the day arrived , which  was to determine the sovereign of the world .


Detestation of every thing which had the remotest appearance of cowardice , would not permit me to leave the army at such a time .
I therefore engaged in a cause , in which even my wishes were not interested  and having been entrusted with a subordinate command , for I had carefully concealed my having served in the armies of Aladdin , I lost my liberty in the execution of my duty , and now expect my fate from the sovereign of mankind .


2.7 .
SECTION VII .


 THE circumstances of this story made so deep an impression on the mind of Temugin , that he remained wrapt in thought for some time , after the captive had concluded .


Recollecting himself at length , ` Though thy days have been but few , ' said he , ` the vicissitudes of thy life have been sufficient to give thee the experience of many years .
If thou art willing to follow me , I will charge myself with thy fortunes .
If not , depart in peace , and may thy paths be prosperous : thou art at liberty from this hour .
Compulsion and fidelity are incompatible . '


Such condescending goodness overpowered the grateful heart of Selim .
He prostrated himself at the feet of the emperor ,  and embracing his knees , assured him of his most faithful attachment .


Though Temugin 's late victory , had so totally broken the spirit of sultan Mohammed , that he never after dared to face him in the field , his son , Gelaleddin , made such noble efforts to retrieve his affairs , as seemed for some time to keep the event doubtful .


While the emperor , therefore , was taking he necessary measures for reduc [ ... ] n [ ... ] an enemy , whose activity and enterprize rendered him still more formidable , than the number of his forces , he received information of the revolt of one of his newly conquered kingdoms , in which a considerable body of his own troops had joined .


Such an event demanded instant attention .
The example might be followed by others  and the reduction attended with more difficulty than the first conquest  as  despair always strengthens the hand of rebellion .


The account had arrived just as Selim had finished the story of his life .
In a moment the whole camp was in motion  and the rising sun found Temugin in full march , at the head of a body of forces , equal to the occasion , which he held not of importance sufficient to require his whole army .


In such general commotions , private individuals are easily overlooked .
Selim had received no orders to attend the emperor  but he deemed it his duty  and resolved to keep as near to his person as possible , in hope of some happy opportunity of proving in his sight , that he was not unworthy of the favour which had been shewn him .


The army of Temugin had scarce entered the country of the rebels , when  they daringly advanced to meet him .
The battle was obstinate and bloody .
As Temugin was hasting to support one of the wings of his army , which was beginning to give way , he found himself unexpectedly surrounded by a band of the rebels , who knowing his person , had made a desperate effort to take him prisoner : but though he saw all his attendants cut to pieces , he disdained to submit to such indignity .
He stood resolutely on his defence  and like a lion fallen into a pit , sacrificed to his revenge , every one , who dared to come within his reach , till he was just sinking under fatigue , and loss of blood  when , in the important moment , which separates life from death , a single soldier broke through the croud , and throwing himself before him , with a loud shout , exerted efforts of such uncommon valour in his defence , as kept the enemy off , till a body of troops , whom he had apprized of the emperor 's danger , and who had  followed him , as close as they could , came to his relief .


This was the last struggle which the rebels made for victory .
As soon as the battle was ended , the first care of Temugin was to find his deliverer , whom he had known , amidst all the tumults of such a scene .


On the soldier 's advancing through the croud of princes and commanders , who had gathered round the emperor to express their joy at his safety , and congratulate him on the victory , which had crowned his arms , ` Take this , ' said he , reaching him his own sword , ` son of Abudah , as a pledge of my esteem  and ask any boon which your heart wisheth , in reward of your fidelity and valour . '


` Conqueror of the world , ' replied Selim , throwing himself at the emperor 's  feet , ` my heart 's first wish is to lay down with glory , in your service , that life which you have blessed with liberty .
The bare performance of duty merits not reward . '


The emperor then turning to one of his chieftains , ` Go , ' said he , ` put all the captives to the sword  let loose the rage of war upon the country  nor leave a soul alive to preserve the name of such a people upon the face of the earth !
The world shall see the consequence of rebelling against my power . '


2.8 .
SECTION VIII .


 THE chief was just departing to put these orders in execution , when Selim stepped forward , and prostrating himself again , at the emperor 's feet , ` Revoke the dreadful sentence , ' said he , ' O substitute of heaven !
and imitate his mercy who hath given you his power . '


All present were struck with astonishment and affright , at a presumption never attempted before  the word of the emperor being held as sacred as the will of heaven .


Temugin started  and looking furiously on Selim , as he lay trembling with eagerness and anxiety at his feet , ` How ! '
said he  ` darest thou to doubt the justice of my commands ?
To interpose thyself between rebellion and my vengeance ?
 Beware , rash youth  such a crime , even in thought , cancels all merit . '


` Never shall a thought of his slave , ' returned Selim , ` give offence to my lord .
I revere thy irresistible power  and shrink to nothing before thy wrath : but O , hearken to the words of thy slave .
Let the guilty , but the guilty only , suffer : infants are incapable of rebellion  and weakness sinks the woman and old age equally beneath vengeance .
Let the innocent live to witness the punishment of the guilty .
The dead obey no more !
nor does a desolated country yield laurels to adorn the victor 's brow . '


The words of Selim sunk into the emperor 's heart .
He stood , some moments , buried in thought  then , softening the rage which glowed in his looks , ` Arise , ' said he , ' I will shew you that my word is irrevocable .
I bade you ask a boon !
You have asked  and shall obtain it .
 Go !
take under your command the troops of Casbin  and execute my vengeance according to the rules of that justice , in favour of which you have ventured to plead so strongly . '


Such a charge exceeded even the hopes of Selim .
He bowed his head to the ground , in testimony of obedience  and rising , departed instantly to execute a command , which gratified the dearest passions of his heart .


Putting himself , therefore , at the head of the forces assigned to him , he flew directly to stop the carnage , always committed in the first heat of victory  and gathering all the captives into one body , he surrounded them with a guard , not more to prevent their escape , than to protect them from farther injury  having done which , he directed his march to the capital , taking them along with him .


 As the reason of the emperor 's conferring this command upon Selim , was as yet known but to few , it was thought he had thus saved the lives of the captives for the present , only to strike the greater terror , by putting them to death in the sight of their families and friends  for mercy to rebels was a thing unheard of .


But he suffered them not to remain long in an opinion so injurious to his intentions .
As soon as he arrived before the capital , he ordered all the prisoners to be led forth  and advancing toward them , as they stood trembling with suspense and horror , ` The first orders of the emperor 's just wrath , ' said he , ` were to exterminate a people , who had dared to rebel against him  but his mercy hath interposed  and his justice now ordains , that the guilty only shall suffer . '


` Let these therefore be pointed out !
Who were the first inciters to this rebellion ?
what pretext was feigned ?
what end proposed  to encourage it ?
He is unworthy to lead in any cause , who will not stand between his followers and destruction . '


He had scarce spoken these words , when a confused noise announced the arrival of the king of this unhappy people .
He appeared to have past the middle stage of man 's life  but to have suffered more from misfortune than from time .
A ray of native majesty shot through the gloom of grief , which overcast his looks .
He was arrayed in the garb of mourning  and the ensigns of royalty were borne reversed before him .


At his approach , all was still as death .
On being informed of what Selim had said , a gleam of joy flashed over his face .
He stepped forward , and with an air of dignity and resolution , ` Behold , O worthy substitute of the conqueror of the world , ' he said , ` the man , whom you seek !
I was the king of this unhappy people   and on my head must fall the punishment of their misdoings . '


` He was not the author of the revolt !
He led not the people to battle , ' exclaimed a youth , breaking through the croud of captives , who strove in vain to restrain him : ` That crime , since heaven hath declared it such by the event , was mine  and I alone deserve to die for it . '


` Away !
rash boy ! '
returned the venerable monarch  ` nor add thy disobedience to the number of my griefs .
Wouldst thou usurp the rights of thy king ?
for who , but their king , can be answerable for his people ? '


Then addressing himself to Selim , ` If I was not the immediate author of the revolt , ' he continued , ' I strove not to suppress it !
If he led the people to battle , it was in the authority of my name , and with my assent .
What was a crime  therefore in me , was only a duty in him  nor would it be consistent with the justice you propose , to let the son suffer for doing that which his sovereign and his father did not forbid him to do . '


2.9 .
SECTION IX .


SELIM listened with equal pleasure and surprize , to a contest which did honour to the human name .
But it was far from being so pleasing to all present .


The troops , at the head of which the emperor had placed him , were commanded , under him , by Cafor , the chieftain , against whom the rebellion had first been raised .


As Selim was proceeding to interpose between the father and the son , he was interrupted by Cafor , who just then joined him : ` Let the instant deaths of both , ' said he sternly , ` put  an end to their audacious contest .
It were treason to shew mercy to traitors . '


` And canst thou doom us to death , ' returned the youth , trembling with indignant rage , ` for that which thy injustice alone compelled us to do ?
For seeking redress of wrongs , too great for human nature to submit to ? '


` What can this mean ? '
interrupted Selim .
` What wrongs dost thou complain of ?
and whose injustice was the cause of thy rebellion ?
Speak in the boldness of truth , and expect justice . '


` Our wrongs , O gracious chieftain , ' replied the prince , melting into tears , at the tenderness which shone in the looks of Selim , ` are too many to be recited in a moment  and the perpetrator too mighty for me to contend with .
You see before you , two of the most miserable of men , made so by him , who  stands in the security of power , at your right hand .
The injustice of Cafor was the cause of our crime .
Against that only , not against the sovereignty of Temugin , did we revolt !
And if thou wilt but sweeten death , with an hope that our wrongs shall be avenged upon his head , this moment will I meet it with joy , in any form which his own cruelty can prescribe . '


` Shall the power of Temugin be thus insulted ? '
exclaimed Cafor , ` and his vengeance delayed by the vain words of a slave ?
Give them to death , the hoary traitor and his rebellious son !
Give them instantly to the death which their acknowledged guilt deserves  nor let the honour of our sovereign be longer trifled with in this manner . '


` Son of Ashur , ' returned Selim , ` the power of our mighty lord shall not be insulted  nor his vengeance delayed  longer , than is necessary for putting it under the direction of justice , by which alone the honour of a sovereign is supported . '


Then turning to the captive prince , ` Thy accusation , ' he continued , ` falls upon a respected head  and must be supported by the clearest proof , or it will recoil with tenfold force upon thyself !
But let not this discourage thee to speak the words of truth .
Justice knoweth no distinction of persons . '


Emboldened by this assurance , the prince paused for a few moments , then raising his eyes slowly from the ground , and fixing them with the modest confidence of innocence upon Selim , ' O shadow of him , who rules the world , ' he said , ' I obey thy command  and will unfold our griefs as far as nature is able to give them utterance , depending upon  thy compassion to pardon the incoherencies of distraction and despair . '


This unhappy land , now doomed to suffer all the miseries of war , has flourished , for a long succession of ages , under the government of my ancestors , who all placed their glory in the happiness of their people .


From the first hour of his reign , my father trod invariably in their sacred steps  and , in order to train me in the same , admitted me into his councils , and made room for me on his throne , as soon as reason had gained sufficient strength to imitate the example he set me .


How far I answered his hopes , is not for me to say .
He seemed to be pleased  and I was happy .


 In this manner my age had numbered two hundred moons , when the power of Temugin began to shake the world .


In the ardour of inexperienced youth , I would have opposed his victorious arms , and defended the throne of my ancestors  but the wisdom of my father restrained my rashness .


Wouldst thou stop the flowing of the sea ?
he said .
Can the breath of thy mouth repel the storm ?
It is a duty to yield , where resistance is without hope .


My people may be as happy under another sovereign , nor will I expose them to destruction to preserve upon my head a crown , which I have always considered to have been given to me , as much for their advantage , as my own .


 I will resign myself , therefore , to the will of heaven , without repining .
I will submit to the conqueror .
Ambition is often accompanied by generosity .
Perhaps he may require no more than an acknowledgment of his superior power  and leave me to govern my people in peace under him .
If not , I shall , at least , have this consolation , that they will have no reason to repent of their attachment to me .


2.10 .
SECTION X .


THE will of my father had ever been the rule of my actions .
I obeyed without reply .
The consequence was that which he had foreseen .
Temugin not only confirmed him on his throne  but also honoured him with his particular confidence and friendship .


 Impelled by gratitude , I offered him my service , in his wars , at the head of a body of our chosen youth .
My offer was accepted , and our service approved on many occasions .


But this happiness was of short duration .
The kings of the neighbouring nations , who , uninfluenced by the same principles of wisdom and virtue , as my father , had attempted to resist the conqueror , found not the same favour from him ?
When he turned his arms to distant conquests , therefore , he committed the government of their kingdoms to one of his commanders , leaving him an army to enforce that obedience , which , he was sensible , depended upon force alone .


Though my father 's kingdom could not have been included in this charge , as the emperor had , from the first , reinstated him in all the powers of royalty , and I was in his armies , as a pledge for  his faith , the avarice of this commander levelled all distinction .


No sooner had the tide of the emperor 's conquests led him afar off , than he entered our country , in an hostile manner , and under the pretext of disarming the inhabitants , who made no resistance , plundered them with the most insatiable rapacity , of the acquisitions of ages of industry and peace .


Surprized at such an outrage , my father attempted to expostulate with the invader  but instead of paying regard to his words , he affected to treat his very expostulation as rebellion  and marching directly to the capital of his kingdom , entered , as in conquest , gates which were opened to him in the confidence of peace , and deprived him of every shadow of power .


 Nor did he stop there .
The wealth of which he had spoiled the country , instead of satisfying , had only heightened his avarice .
He thought the Prince must be personally rich , in proportion to the riches of his people .
He therefore seized the treasures of the crown  and not finding them to answer his expectations , concluded that they had been secreted from his search : for my father looking upon his subjects as his most faithful stewards , had ever scorned the preposterous policy of amassing wealth which he did not immediately want , and knew would encrease in their possession against he should have occasion for it .


Enraged at this disappointment , he strove to intimidate my father , by threats , to a discovery which was not in his power to make  but finding them ineffectual , he - that man - whom , to my dishonour , I behold alive - that Cafor - accursed be his name - dared to carry  his threats into execution  and loading him with many stripes , shed his sacred blood by the ignominious hand of the executioner .


Obedience to my father had made his people submit to their own sufferings  but his they could not bear .
They arose like one man .
They delivered him from the hands of the tyrant , who basely saved himself by flight .


The army , in which I served , was not far distant .
I soon heard the dreadful tidings , and flew to my father , followed by my faithful friends .
I would have avenged his wrongs , but I was not able .
I could not even die in the just attempt .


Thus , mighty commander , have I shewn thee the cause of our revolt .
I confess my guilt .
I have fought against my sovereign , to save my father .
Let me alone suffer for my crime  but before  I do suffer , I claim thy promise of justice upon the author of that crime .


Prove the truth of my charge by every torture which he can invent  but let his punishment follow the proof , and I shall die happy .


2.11 .
SECTION XI .


IT was not without difficulty that Selim could prevent Cafor from frequently interrupting the captive prince in the course of his narrative .
As soon as it was ended , he turned to the accused , with a cool , but determined look , and demanded what defence he could make against so black a charge .


` This shall defend me , ' answered Cafor , in a rage , brandishing his sabre over his head  ' I disdain to submit to any other decision . '


 ` O , let the sword decide it ! '
exclaimed the prince eagerly .
` Strong though his arm , the justice of heaven is still stronger .
Let the sword decide it , this moment . '


` We need not refer to heaven , ' returned Selim , ` for the decision of that which human reason can decide .
When appeals to the sword are admitted , obedience to the laws is at an end .
Every man is then the sovereign arbiter of his own cause . '


Then turning to Cafor , ` Son of Ashur , ' he continued , ` since thou canst not refute the atrocious charge brought against thee , take the just punishment of thy guilt . '
- Saying which , he made a signal to his soldiers , who instantly smote off the head of Cafor , and laid it at his feet .


The tumult , occasioned by this unexpected event , had no sooner subsided , than  Selim , addressing himself to the king , who had stood all this time in the stupefaction of grief before him , ` To thee , O injured monarch , ' said he , ` the justice of Temugin hath rendered this redress  and now reinstates thee in all the rights of that sovereignty , of which thou hast been so unworthily deprived .
Restore tranquillity and order among your people  punish past crimes , to prevent the repetition of them  and compleat your own glory , by compleating the happiness of your subjects .
It is the intention of Temugin , that all who live under his power should be happy . '
-


Then raising the prince , who lay at his feet , panting in an extasy of gratitude and joy , ` As for your fate , ' he continued , ` it must be determined by the word of our sovereign .
He commanded me to punish the authors of this revolt .
How far you may be included in that command , is for himself to say .
Be not ,  however , dismayed .
He will weigh the cause against the crime , and pay just regard to the first of human duties . '


This signal instance of justice restored peace to the country .
Satisfied at seeing the wrongs of their sovereign redressed , the people forgot their own , and readily returned to their duty  while their happiness secured their continuance in it .


On Selim 's return , he threw himself at the feet of Temugin , to render an account of his charge .
The fate of Cafor had reached the camp before him , and the emperor had not disclosed his sentiments upon it .
All therefore waited with anxiety for the event .


The emperor having heard him with unmoved attention , as soon as he had ended , ` The heart of man , ' said he , looking around him with an air of majesty ,  which struck every beholder with awe , ` can be read only by the eye of heaven !
I knew the valour of Cafor , and doubted not his virtue  but he hath paid the just penalty of his crime , and my honour is vindicated . '


Then directing himself to the prince , who lay prostrate before him , ` Arise , ' he continued , ` and resume your command in my armies .
I war not against nature ! '


` And you , ' turning to Selim , ` to whose more powerful genius the fortune of Togrul was obliged to yield  assume the name  and stand near me , in the place of that brave and faithful warrior , whose wisdom in the council was equal to his valour in the field . '


End of the SECOND BOOK .
3 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE THIRD .


 3.1 .
SECTION I .


THE exalted station to which Togrul ( for by that name was he now known ) was thus raised , gave , for some time , such employment to his mind , that he scarce thought of his former misfortunes .


But this respite was not long .
No sooner had the first tumults of youthful  joy and ambition subsided , than all his grief returned with aggravated weight  and he upbraided himself for having suffered it to be suspended , even for a moment , by the smiles of a prosperity , which he considered as acquired at the loss of his father , and not to be enjoyed without the farther crime of violating his faith to the daughter of Himilco , now the sole object of his hopes and wishes  to whom he accordingly resolved to return .


But a principle of gratitude would not permit him to carry this purpose into execution , before he should , by some new services , repay the debt he owed to Temugin , and prove himself not unworthy of the rank to which he was raised .


In the mean time Temugin , who was no stranger to the leading passions of his heart , generously resolved to employ him in a service , which should afford him the amplest opportunity of indulging them .


 Calling for him therefore , one morning , ` Togrul , ' said he , ' I know not in what light I am to hold the Khaliff of Bagdat  whether as an enemy , or a friend .
The oppressions which he suffered , from the lawless ambition and pride of Mohammed , should have filled his heart with gratitude to his deliverer  but never hath he thought proper to take the least notice of his obligation , nor made any advances toward my friendship . '


` Take , therefore , the troops under your command , and proceed directly to Bagdat .
If you find him deserving of my favour , receive him to it on proper terms  if not , the sword is in your hand to vindicate my rights . '


No charge , in the power of Temugin to give , could have affected Togrul in so interesting a manner .
The favours , the  slights he had received from the Khaliff , the malignancy of his enemies , and the opportunity of revenge now in his power , flashed instantly upon him , and set every passion of his heart in conflict .


Prostrating himself at the feet of the emperor , ' I acknowledge , ' said he , ` mighty lord , the honour conferred upon me by this important trust , and will endeavour to acquit myself of it to your satisfaction .
But , O remember the trial to which your slave is exposed ! '
-


' I see , ' interrupted the emperor , ` the workings of your soul  but I doubt not your ability to surmount still greater trials .
It is by such alone that virtue can be proved . '


The armies of Temugin were always in readiness to carry his orders into instant execution .
Togrul decamped at the first  hour of the evening , animated with an ardour , from which his forces drew the happiest presages of success .


As he pursued his march through the country of Farsistan , his attention was one day struck by a pile of ruins , the magnificence of which tempted him to take a nearer view of them , while his troops halted for refreshment .


The reflections , naturally suggested by such scenes , were interrupted by the sight of an aged man , sitting in a melancholy posture , with his eyes intently fixed upon some fragments , which lay in an heap before him , while a flood of tears rolled in silence down his furrowed cheeks .


Such a sight was equally affecting to curiosity and compassion .
Advancing therefore toward him , ` Pardon , ' said Togrul , ' O venerable father !
the intrusion  of a stranger , who wishes to know the cause of your distress , in hope it may be in his power to offer you relief . '


The mourner raised his eyes , and looking eagerly around , ` Is the voice of benevolence heard again in this place ? '
he exclaimed .
` Sweet is the sound , tho ' its purpose is impossible . '


Then fixing his eyes most attentively upon Togrul for some moments , ` Your words , O illustrious young man , ' he continued , ` speak a feeling heart  and I see that you have already tasted of adversity .
I will therefore satisfy your enquiry , though hopeless of its motive  for , alas !
my woes admit not of relief . '


Having said this , he turned his face to the East , and prostrating himself before the heap of fragments , ' O life of the universe ! '
he said , ` thou glorious Sun !
 protect these sacred relicks from pollution  nor give the ashes of Zelis to the winds , before mine shall be mingled with them . '


When he had offered up this prayer , he arose , and turning to Togrul , ' I have promised to unfold to you the cause of my unhappiness , ' he continued  ` but this place is improper .
The voice of prayer and adoration only should be heard here .
We will withdraw into the shade of yonder arch , and there I will relate the melancholy tale . '


As soon as Togrul and he were seated , ` These ruins , ' said the mourner , with a sigh , which seemed to burst his heart , ` are all which remains of the sacred Temple of the Sun  and in that spot , now covered with those fragments , once stood the altar , on which my ancestors , for ages without number , fed the everliving  fire , the hallowed emblem of his purity and power  till the divine wrath , kindled against the sins of mankind , gave up the world to the ravages of the Arabians , who not content with temporal dominion , dared to attack the sovereignty of heaven . '


They polluted our temples  they over-turned our altars  and impiously attempted to extinguish the sacred fire , emblem of him whose light had illuminated the world from its first creation .
An impiety never presumed before by any who had obtained dominion over us .


But heaven had not so far abandoned the human race .
Forewarned in a dream , one of our lineage had built an altar , in the mountains of Irac Agem  and secretly removed thither a spark of the true fire , before the sacrilegious ravagers reached this temple .


 The horrors of that day are not to be described .
In vain did the priests hold up their hands , never defiled with blood , never profaned with any instrument of destruction , to avert the rage of war from these holy walls .
The tears of the mother , and the cries of her infants , pleaded in vain .
The barbarians were equally deaf to innocence and virtue .


Then did the piety of our race shine forth in all its glory .
They gathered themselves around the altar , and covering it with their bodies , saved the sacred fire from profanation by extinguishing it with their blood , which was shed without respect to age or sex , and the temple reduced to this heap of ruins .


It is impossible to express the consternation of the people at this fatal outrage .
Thinking the sacred fire utterly extinguished , they abandoned themselves  to despair , and every where courted the swords of their destroyers .


At length , the spark , which had been preserved in Irac Agem , being discovered , the poor remains of the true Persees , repaired to it  and preferring those inhospitable mountains to the fertile plains of Farsistan , without this object of their worship , built themselves a little city , where their posterity hath lived in peace to this day .


Of all our lineage , there had escaped the general massacre , only the one who attended the altar he had built in Irac Agem  and an infant daughter , borne to him by his sister , at the loss of her own life , soon after her arrival there .


The danger of losing a race , so long endeared to their love , so necessary to their religion , filled the Persees with the  strongest fear  but heaven heard their prayers , and from these two sprung a progeny which hath subsisted ever since  for never was our blood contaminated by mixture with any other , all our alliances being among ourselves , and in the nearest relations of nature  a custom by which we double the happiness of life , in the union of all its endearments .


But though driven thus by irresistible necessity from our native land , once in our lives we never fail to visit these revered ruins , to implore from the Sun a restoration of their glory  and sprinkle upon the remains of his altar the ashes of our deceased kindred , which we religiously preserve for that purpose  and this was the melancholy cause of my coming hither at this time .


A flood of tears here choaked his utterance .
He hung down his head , and sobbed aloud for some moments , while  Togrul humanely wept in silence with him .


3.2 .
SECTION II .


AS soon as he had recovered the power of speech , ` Were I not convinced of the benevolence of your heart , ' he resumed , ' O virtuous youth !
I should make an excuse for paying a tribute to nature , which affected heroism has dishonoured with the name of weakness  but I see you are superior to such false refinement . '


This melancholy duty having fallen upon me this year , I yielded in an unhappy hour to the sollicitations of my wife , to let her accompany me hither .


On the third day of our journey , we were met by a troop of Tartars , who had separated from the armies of Temugin ,  and ranged the country in search of plunder .


The innocence of our lives , and our known poverty in those things which are called the riches of the world , had ever preserved us in peace with all the nations round .
I advanced therefore without fear to the leader of the troop , and informing him who we were , expected to have been permitted to pursue our journey without interruption .


But alas !
I flattered myself with vain expectation .
He had looked at the beauty of my wife with eyes of desire , and resolved to tear her from my bosom .


Unwilling however to have recourse to open violence , for fear of opposition from his followers , who , he knew , held our people in the highest reverence , he  pressed us to take shelter in his tent from the heat of noon  a courtesy feigned , that he might have time to form some scheme for accomplishing his base design .


There are some offers , which , however unacceptable , can not be refused .


The Persees have ever been famed for hospitality , above all the nations upon earth .
We could not refuse entering his tent , without an appearance of unsocial ingratitude , though our laws would not permit us to taste a drop of water with him .


We had not been long there , when he withdrew , under a pretence of giving some orders to his men  nor returned till it was too late for us to reach the caravansera , in which we had proposed to rest that night : for it would have been  reckoned an infringement upon the laws of hospitality in us , to have departed without waiting for him .


Our uneasiness , in such a situation , may be well conceived  but he gave reasons of such plausibility for his absence , and offered so courteously to remain where he was for that night , for our convenience , that we could not avoid complying to stay with him .


His joy , at seeing us run so readily , as he thought , into his snares , put him off his guard .


I caught a glance of his eye , as he gazed at my wife , in which I read the nefarious purpose of his heart .
I arose , therefore , instantly , and claiming the sacred privilege of hospitality , proceeded that moment on my journey , along with my wife .


 The shades of night falling upon us , as we travelled by the side of a wood , my wife was so terrified by the roaring of the wild beasts , issuing from their dens in quest of prey , that I was obliged to give way to her fears , and assist her to climb a lofty tree , where I placed her in safety among the boughs , seating myself beside her .


The fears of my wife seemed to have been impressed by heaven , to save us from dangers still more terrible than those she was afraid of .


We were scarcely settled in the tree , when we heard the tread of horses  and in a little time could distinguish the voice of the Tartar , exultingly anticipating to his followers the pleasure he promised himself in the possession of my wife , as he passed by our place of refuge .


 The appearance of the morning at length giving us hope that our danger was over , we descended from the tree  and having offered up our adorations to the rising sun , were preparing to proceed in our journey , when we perceived our enemy approaching toward us on his return .


It is impossible to express the horrors with which this sight struck us .
My wife , in the vain impulse of despair , ran toward the wood , whither the Tartar pursued her , while his companions seized me .


Her flight was soon stopped .
The ravisher overtook her , and mad with desire , attempted to gratify his brutal appetites upon the spot .
What were the sensations of my soul in that dreadful moment !
But heaven saw my distress , and heard the cries of her innocence .


3.3 .
SECTION III .


 JUST as he had overpowered her resistance , a lion , rouzed by her shrieks , issued from a brake , near to which heaven had directed her flight , and rushing upon the ruffian , tore him piecemeal in an instant .


Soon as my wife found herself freed from his violence , she started from the ground , and ran with out-stretched arms towards me for protection , incapable of considering my inability to afford it , nor even sensible of the means of her deliverance .


But the power , which had so signally saved her , continued his care of us both .
The Tartars , who had seized me , struck with so evident an interposition of heaven , no sooner saw their leader slain , than  fearing a like fate for themselves , as accomplices in his guilt , they loosed their hold , and springing upon their horses , fled out of sight in a moment .


These events had succeeded each other so rapidly , that reason was unable to keep pace with them .
I stood stupified with astonishment , nor had power to advance to meet my wife , till she fell motionless at my feet .


This sight restored me to myself .
I raised her head , and laying it in my bosom , attempted to soothe her distress with words of comfort , which I wanted little less myself .


The generous lion , in the mean time , stood over the victim of his justice , growling with savage delight , and lashing his sides with his tail , without advancing a single step towards us , though so near him  till satisfied with his  triumph , he returned slowly back to his den .


It was a considerable time before I could bring my wife to her senses .
The conflict had been too violent for her tender frame .
Her spirits and strength equally sunk under it : sunk , alas !
never to recover .
Several times she opened her eyes , and fixed them wildly on me  then starting in the impression of her fright , gave a feeble shriek , and swooned away again .


At length , she became more composed  but still she was unable to walk  and every moment we delayed there , encreased my fears of the return of the Tartars , to revenge their leader 's death .


In this distress , I happened to cast my eye upon the horse of the ravisher , which his followers had , in their affright , left  behind them , tied to a tree  and placing her with difficulty upon him , walked by her side to encourage and support her , till we arrived at the caravansera .


This was the last effort of her strength .
The delicacy of her soul was wounded by the base attempt of violation , and the affright had over-shadowed her reason .


For three days she pined in my bosom , then drooping her head , like a lily torne from the root , expired without a struggle .


My situation can be conceived only by a feeling heart .
O my Zelis !
thou wert the delight of my eyes , the hope and comfort of my life .
She was the first fruits of my love , by my own mother , whom , according to our holy laws , I had wedded in my early youth , on the immature death of my father .


 I would gladly have accompanied her to the mansions of the blessed  but piety , and my very love for her , equally restrained me .


Reason had had time to resume her rule during the approaches of her death .
The laws of our religion forbid us to shed human blood , even in self-defence .
How then could I dare to stain my hands with my own ?
Beside , who should perform the last rites to her dear remains , and sprinkle her ashes on this altar ?
Who should perform the same pious office for me , that I may be reunited to her , and to the rest of our holy race ?


I was convinced of my duty , and prepared to fulfil it .
I washed her pure body with my tears .
I wrapped it in precious spices , which I received in exchange for the horse of the Tartar , from certain merchants in the caravansera , and building a lofty pile of aromatic woods ,  reduced it to ashes , which I have this day spread upon yonder sacred ruins of our altar .


This , O courteous stranger !
is the sermon of my woes , which , you see , will admit of no relief .
I now turn my face to our place of refuge in the mountains , there to devote the residue of my unhappy days to the contemplation of that Being , by whose power , and in whose presence only , I can be restored to happiness .


3.4 .
SECTION IV .


THOUGH the heart of Togrul sympathized with the unhappy sufferer , there were some circumstances in his story which affected him in a very different manner .


As his reason was convinced of the incomprehensible essence of the Deity , he considered every assimilation of him to objects  of sense , as the most impious absurdity  and the very thought of paying to his creatures , the adoration due only to himself , struck him with sacred horror .


Nor were his moral sentiments less hurt , by customs which he held to be contrary to the most inviolable laws of nature .


Well aware as he was of the inefficacy of argument in matters of religious prejudice , he would have thought silence a crime on such an occasion , as implying an assent which his soul disclaimed .


As soon , therefore , as the Persee had ended his melancholy narrative , ' I condole with you for your loss , ' said he , ' O man of affliction !
but I dare not offer consolation before you have reconciled yourself to heaven , by a renunciation of those errors ( should I not rather say crimes ? )
which have drawn its wrath upon your head . '


 ` You blindly mistake the creature for the Creator , and rob him of that worship which is his sole and incommunicable right : and your marriages break down the fences , which nature hath established to guard moral chastity , forcing her back upon herself , in connections , against which she revolts with horror . '


Heavy as this charge was , the Persee was not abashed .
Fixing his eyes upon Togrul , with a modest firmness , ` Most unworthy of consolation should I certainly be , ' he replied , ' O severe judge !
if I were guilty of the crimes which you impute to me .
But I exult in the assurance , that on a moment 's reflection , you will yourself acquit me of them . '


If our marriages are contrary to nature , how could mankind have been propagated from one stock ?
And  where did the sons of the first pair find wives , if they wedded not their sisters ?
The prejudice instilled against them in infancy , by other nations , from motives unnecessary to us , whose virtue requires not such a guard , to prevent the intercourse of consanguinity from being abused to gratify impure desire , is mistaken for the voice of nature , whom we force not back upon herself , but free from restraints , submitted to by man alone , of all her various race .


More groundless still is the accusation of our worshipping any other object than the Deity himself , the Author and Life of the universe , and all it contains .


We worship not his creatures  we worship him in them .
We worship him in the sun , as the most glorious of his works , the fountain of that heat by which he animates all nature !
We worship him in fire , as the substitute of the  sun , the vehicle in which heat is intrusted to our own management for the uses of life  and we keep that fire always alive , in testimony of our gratitude for his supporting our lives by it  and as a memorial to him to continue that support .


Never has man fallen into so gross error , as to direct his worship ultimately to the works of his own hands , though the presumption of ignorance hath often accused him of it .


Adieu , O young man !
Learn to judge less precipitately  and may the Deity , whom all the world unites in adoring , though under different symbols , guide your steps in safety .


It was some time before Togrul recovered from the surprise with which this defence of the Persee struck him .
He examined it with candid attention , and  though he was far from thinking it satisfactory , it determined him never more to condemn any man for differing in opinion with him .


3.5 .
SECTION V .


THE sensations of his heart , as he approached Bagdat , are not to be described .
On his arrival , he was met by an ambassador from the Khaliff , to enquire the cause of his coming in that hostile manner .


Though age , together with the change of his name , prevented Togrul from being known , he directly knew the ambassador to have been one of his most malignant enemies , and could not avoid feeling some natural emotions of resentment  but he suppressed them instantly , having covenanted with his heart to keep the characters of Selim and Togrul perfectly distinct  nor to shew the least recollection of the  former , till he should have executed his present commission .


He replied , therefore , that as hitherto no act of his had shewn any intention of hostility , so should his future conduct be directed by that of the Khaliff , to whom alone he would communicate the motive of his coming .


This reply was by no means satisfactory to the ambassador .
He would fain have himself entered into treaty with Togrul , alledging that the Khaliff 's health was unequal to such an interview at present  though were it even otherwise , it would be inconsistent with the character of a sovereign to enter into the necessary altercations of business with a subject .


But these evasions had no weight with Togrul .
He answered peremptorily , that his commission was to the Khaliff himself  in person , to whom if he had not admission the next morning , he should look upon the denial as a denunciation of war , and take his measures accordingly , without farther delay  adding , with a smile of contempt , that attention to the interests of his people could never be beneath the character of a prince , with whomsoever it might bring him into intercourse  and that when the sovereign could be present , the intervention of a servant was merely nugatory : saying which , he left the ambassador , without waiting for a reply .


Though it was evident , that a war with Temugin must in the end prove fatal to the Khaliff , his visier , who after the departure of Selim , had wrested the whole power out of his hands , leaving him only the empty name of sovereign , resolved to bury himself under the ruins of his country , rather than admit an interview , the first consequence of which he was conscious would be his own deposal .


 For this purpose , he formed the desperate resolution of making an assault upon the camp of Togrul that very night , flattering himself with hope of surprising him in the false security of peace  to confirm which , he sent another embassy to inform him , that the Khaliff would see him the next morning .


But Togrul was too well experienced in the art of war to relax his care for a moment on any appearances .
He answered the ambassadors , that he should be ready to attend the Khaliff at the time appointed  and as soon as they were gone , proceeded to station his guards , and put his camp in a proper state of defence .


When the shades of night had covered the earth , Togrul retired to his tent  and falling upon his face , poured out his soul in grateful praise and adoration to him , who had protected him through the past  day , and implored a continuance of the same protection for that night .


Just as he had performed this sacred duty , he was alarmed at a sudden noise  when starting up , he saw a strange man , with a poniard in his hand , fallen on the floor of his tent .


Such a sight required no explanation .
Togrul instantly seized him , before he could rise to execute his intent  and wresting his poniard out of his hand , demanded who he was  and by what injury he had been provoked to attempt so nefarious a crime .


The assassin , in the natural impulse of self-preservation , lifting up his hands and eyes , begged for mercy , which he did not even expect , offering to purchase his pardon by a discovery of the most immediate importance .


 Togrul , whose resentment never lasted longer than the cause , bade the trembling wretch merit the mercy he implored , by a candid confession of the motives to his guilt .


These words giving him a ray of hope , the assassin , without hesitation , owned that he had been prompted to assassinate him by promises of large reward made to him by the visier  and for that purpose had lingered behind the ambassadors , in whose train he came , till he found an opportunity of hiding himself in his tent , where , seeing him enter soon after , and prostrate himself to pay his devotions , he had stepped forth from the place where he was concealed , and was advancing to perpetrate the deed , when his foot entangling in the fringe of the carpet , he fell at his length upon the floor  and then , as a farther plea for pardon , discovered the visier 's design of assaulting the camp that very night .


 This account was too strongly confirmed , by the circumstances in which the relator stood , to admit of doubt .
Having offered a mental tribute of thanksgiving to heaven for so signal a preservation , Togrul called to his attendants , and ordering them to guard the assassin , prepared instantly to avail himself of the information he had received .


For this purpose he summoned the several leaders of his troops , and unfolding the discovery which had been made to him , directed one of them to take a body of forces , and marching silently out of the camp , on the side farthest from the city , to fetch a circuit , so as to fall upon the enemy in the rear , as soon as they should begin their attack upon the camp , where he should be ready to give them a proper reception .


The soldiers of Temugin , who were always accustomed to the strictest discipline ,  obeyed his orders without noise or confusion  and the camp continuing as silent , as if buried in the profoundest sleep , the enemy advanced to the attack with that security in which they had expected to have surprized him .


The event was soon determined .
The assailants repulsed with vigour , and themselves assailed at the same time , gave up the unequal contest , and endeavoured to save themselves by a retreat into the city  but in vain .
The greatest part of them was cut off  and the victors entering with the few who escaped , made themselves masters of the place without resistance .


3.6 .
SECTION VI .


 THE fears of the inhabitants , in such a situation , are not to be expressed .
They expected nothing less than to be given up to all the outrages of war  but they were saved by the military skill , as much as by the mercy of their conqueror , who , knowing their numbers , would not drive them to despair .
Having stopped the fury of his soldiers , he possessed himself of the gates , and all the places of strength in the city  and placing guards to prevent any new attempts , restored all things to a state of order and tranquillity .


As soon as the morning sun arose , Togrul advanced with a body of his troops to the palace of the Khaliff .
A recollection of former scenes swelled his heart for a moment  but he soon shook off such softness .
Calling for the commander of the guard , he ordered him to go to the  Khaliff , and demand an interview , if he would avoid the consequences of an immediate assault .


The grand visier returned along with the officer , and after attempting to palliate the treachery he had been guilty of the night before , by laying the attack of the camp to the charge of the ungovernable populace , desired that Togrul would accompany him to the Khaliff , who , he said , expected him in the divan  but Togrul , instead of making him any reply , gave a signal to his guards , who instantly seized him , before he could attempt to escape .


An act of such seeming violence naturally threw all the citizens into the greatest consternation  but Togrul soon eased them of their fears .
Waving his hand to demand silence , he declared aloud that none but the guilty should suffer  nor even they , before the fullest proof of their  guilt , and by the authority of their sovereign  ordering the visier to be strictly guarded , till he could be brought before him .


The tumult being thus appeased , Togrul sent once more to request the interview with the Khaliff , who immediately came to the gate of the palace to meet him .


The first sight of his altered state affected Togrul in so tender a manner , that it required all his presence of mind to conceal it .
Broken in spirit , and stooping under infirmities , he scarcely seemed the shadow of himself .


As soon as he approached , Togrul advancing in a respectful manner , informed him of the motive of his coming .


The Khaliff heard him with attention  and as soon as he had ended , ` Thou  speakest of peace , ' he answered , ` but actest all the outrages of war .
Hast thou not taken our city by surprize , while we depended on the faith of thy words ?
And hast thou not now seized our visier , who came to conduct thee to us , according to thy desire ?
Wherefore shouldst thou continue the illusion farther ?
Or , why mention a choice of peace , or war , to one who is already thy prisoner , and obliged to obey thy will ? '


This pathetic expostulation opened to Togrul the state of the Khaliff , whom he knew to be incapable of dissimulation .
He saw that he had been the slave of his visier , who gave the sanction of his sovereign 's name to his own iniquities .


Instead , therefore , of retorting the charge of violated faith , he informed the Khaliff , in terms of respect , of the conduct of his visier , producing the assassin to prove his guilt , and referring the judgment to him .


 The discovery struck all present with horror .
` Holy Prophet ! '
exclaimed the Khaliff , raising his hands and eyes to heaven , ` to what misfortunes is the monarch subject , who seeth not with his own eyes , who trusts the reins of government out of his own hands for a moment ? '


Then turning to the visier , who stood trembling in the silence of self-conviction , ` Thy conqueror , ' he continued , ` hath left thy fate to my disposal  receive that , which I doubt not but thou hast often merited before  for man sinks not to such consummate guilt at once . '
- Saying which , he made a signal to his guards , who instantly smote off the miscreant 's head .


Togrul , in the natural impulse of resentment , could not help feeling a momentary inclination to have made himself known to his enemy before his death  but  he instantly suppressed it , blushing at a thought so unworthy of him .


This sacrifice being offered to justice , the Khaliff , addressing himself again to Togrul , ' I have thus , perhaps for the last time , ' he resumed , ` performed the duty of a sovereign in punishing guilt .
It is now thine to dispose of me , according to the commands of thy master .
I here resign my sceptre into thine hands for him , and submit to the will of heaven without repining . '


Togrul received the sceptre , with an air of dignity suited to the character he represented , and holding it in his hand for a few moments , while the hearts of all present were bursting with suspense , ` Know , O supreme of all the followers of Mahomet ! '
he said , ` that the justice of Temugin is equal to his power .
He desires to conquer only for the benefit of mankind  nor doth he ever dethrone  the sovereign , whom he finds worthy to rule .
The errors which incurred his displeasure proceeded from him to whom thou hadst incautiously entrusted thy power , and are atoned by his death  receive therefore thy sceptre again from his hands , and hold it more steadily in thine own for the future !
Thou art from this hour the friend of Temugin . '


It is impossible to express the effect of this sublime moderation upon all who were present .
The name of Temugin was borne to heaven in acclamations of gratitude and joy  nor was that of his substitute forgotten .


The feelings of the Khaliff were too big for utterance .
He sunk under the weight of his own gratitude .
Prostrating himself upon his face , he adored the sovereign ruler of the universe for this instance of his divine favour  and then arising , payed  to Togrul the thanks due to that benevolent grace , by which he had even endeared the generosity of his lord .


The terms of their accord were soon adjusted .
Temugin had required no advantages for himself .
Togrul therefore only stipulated , that all under the power of the Khaliff should be suffered to enjoy , unmolested , the common rights of humanity .
That they should worship the Deity in the manner seeming best to themselves , and be safe from punishment and injury while they should be free from guilt  and that the traveller , and the stranger who sojourned in the land , should meet equal justice and protection with the natives .


3.7 .
SECTION VII .


 THE treaty being ratified with the proper solemnities , Togrul held it not necessary to maintain longer a reserve , which nature had the greatest difficulty to support .


Advancing to the Khaliff , and regarding him with a tender aspect , ` Can it be possible , ' said he , ` that any change of character should so soon have effaced from the mind of Nasser the memory of his most faithful - ? '


` Holy Prophet ! '
exclaimed the Khaliff , starting at the well-known voice , now uttered in its native sweetness , ` whom do I hear ? '
- Then fixing his eyes eagerly upon him , ` It is he ! '
he continued , rushing into his arms , ` it is Selim himself !
my long-lamented , faithful Selim ! '


 All , who heard not the words of the Khaliff , were struck with surprise at such a conduct .
But when the cause of it was explained , when the citizens of Bagdat heard , that in their generous conqueror Togrul , they beheld their beloved visier Selim , their gratitude and joy know no bounds .
They flocked around him in raptures impossible to be repressed , blessing the happy day which had restored him once more to their sight .


As soon as the first transports of their joy had subsided , Togrul departed for a few moments to lead his troops back to their camp , whither the Khaliff sent them all manner of accommodations , in such plenty as made them entirely forget the fatigues of their march , and mix with his subjects as one people .


Having settled every thing in proper order , Togrul returned to the Khaliff ,  who expected him with the most ardent impatience .


The tenderness of their meeting , now freed from the restraint of observation , may be well conceived .
Togrul gratified the curiosity of the Khaliff , by a recital of the incidents of his life , since his departure from Bagdat .
On his explaining the reason of his having entered into the service of Aladdin , the Khaliff could not suppress his resentment .
` Holy Prophet ! '
he exclaimed , ` to what impositions are princes subject ? '


` From the day you left me , never did a letter from you come to my sight !
Never did I even hear that you were living , till I was informed of your having quitted my service for that of Aladdin , from motives of personal disregard to me !
But the traitors shall meet their due reward .
The principal is already  punished , though for another crime  but the rest shall have their deaths embittered by your triumph over them . '


` O , vicar of Mahomet ! '
returned Togrul , ` let not loose your rage against those who are so far beneath it .
However base their intentions , the event was directed by the hand of heaven .
Had I not been driven from your service , by that appearance of your disregard , I could not have been the fortunate instrument of this day 's happiness .
Let them no more have influence in your councils  but let that , and the consciousness of their guilt , be their only punishment for this crime .
For me , I never will triumph over a fallen foe . '


Togrul devoted the remainder of that day to the re-establishment of the Khaliff 's government , in such a manner as should promise a continuance of his present happiness .
He was delivered from the most  severe of all tyrannies , that of his own servants .
All who had abused his power were given up to justice , and their wealth divided among those , who had suffered under their iniquitous oppression .


3.8 .
SECTION VIII .


THE spirits of the Khaliff being unequal to such long-continued exertion , Togrul left him to his rest  and was returning to his camp , when he was surprised to find himself stopped by a Faquir , who , falling at his feet , embraced his knees , in an agony of joy , which deprived him of the power of utterance .


But Togrul was not long at a loss to account for his emotions .
At the first cast of his eye , his heart acknowledged his faithful attendant Achmet , whose loss , when he was seized in the camp of Mohammed , had given him so much grief .


 No change of condition can alter the sentiments of a generous heart .
Togrul raising him from the ground , and embracing him tenderly , bade him dry his tears , and come to his camp , where all his troubles should find an end .


` Lord of my soul 's attachment , ' answered Achmet , ` my troubles ended when I heard your name .
But think not of me  one , much more worthy of your care requires your instant attendance .
A friend , once justly dear to your heart , lives , but in hope of embracing you again  to conclude in that happiness , a life worn out in all the miseries of oppression .
If the name of Obeidah still lives in your memory  if he yet holds a place in your esteem , O haste to calm the emotions with which his heart is bursting , till he enfolds you in his arms ! '


 Starting at the name  ` And doth he live !
My most-respected , best-loved friend and benefactor ! '
returned Togrul . '
I will go to him this instant  nor should have waited to be called , but that I thought his virtues had long since received their reward  that he was numbered with the happy , in the life which never ends .
Lead me to his palace , this instant ! '


` Alas , my lord ! '
replied Achmet , ` the palace of Obeidah hath long been exchanged for a prison .
You must summon all your fortitude to support the sight of his present fallen estate .
But let us hasten to him .
He numbers every moment of our delay by a pang of misery . '


It is impossible to express what Togrul felt at this representation .
He bade Achmet proceed  and following him , in  silence , mourned in his soul for the sufferings of his friend .


Apprehension , which usually doubles every evil of life , here fell short of the reality .
On entering the prison , he started back in horror , to see his friend and benefactor , the good visier , who had first made him known to the Khaliff , lying on the bare floor , loaded with chains .


Achmet had cautioned him not to make himself too suddenly known to Obeidah , for fear of the effects of surprise , upon an heart already stretched to bursting  but nature could not be restrained .
The moment he saw him , he rushed forward , and throwing himself on the floor beside him , raised up his aged head , and laying it in his bosom , exclaimed , ' O my friend !
O Obeidah !
My friend !
My friend ! '
-


Obeidah did not require to be told , by whose arms he was embraced . '
O Selim ! '
 he replied , ' O son of Abudah !
Though my eyes can no longer be blessed with thy sight , my heart tells me it is my friend . '


Achmet , in the mean time , summoned the keeper of the prison to take off Obeidah 's chains  but the loyal old man would not permit him .
` These chains , ' said he , ` were put on me in the name of Nasser  and by his orders only will I suffer them to be taken off .
Never yet have I violated his authority  nor will I begin now . '


Togrul would not contradict a loyalty which he revered , and whose observance could add but a few minutes to the sufferings of his friend .
He therefore instantly sent one of his attendants to the Khaliff , to acquaint him with all these circumstances , and request his order for the discharge of Obeidah .


 While they waited for the return of the messenger , Togrul could not forbear expressing his astonishment at the Khaliff 's treating his most faithful servant in so cruel a manner  adding , with a tone of severity , that if he had known he was capable of such a gross abuse of his power , he should not have been so hasty in reinstating him in it .


The loyal heart of Obeidah could not bear to hear his sovereign loaded with so injurious a charge .
` Take care , O my son ! '
said he , ` nor let thy tongue take liberty with the chosen of the Lord .
Though my sufferings were inflicted in his name , they proceeded not from him .
Too well I know that he suffered himself , under the tyranny by which I was oppressed . '


On Togrul 's expressing astonishment , almost to doubt , at what he heard , Obeidah informed him , that immediately after  his departure from Bagdat , to join the armies of Aladdin , his enemies presuming upon the easy temper of Nasser , who , neglecting the cares of government , had given himself up entirely to the cultivation of those amusements of an idle mind , which the vanity of their professors have dignified with the pompous title of the finer arts , had , by insensible degrees , wrested the royal power out of his hands , and covered their own nefarious crimes under the sanction of his name  in which they at length proceeded to such an height , that on his own constantly opposing them in the divan , and labouring to open the Khaliff 's eyes , they threw him into this prison , where , without respect to his age , his innocence , or the exalted office , which he had so long filled with honour , they had detained him ever since , loaded with chains , in the manner he then was .


Before Togrul had time to reply , a noise at the door of the prison announced  the arrival of the Khaliff , who running wildly up to the place , where Obeidah lay in the bosom of Togrul , ` Holy Prophet ! '
he exclaimed , ` is it possible that such iniquity could be perpetrated by man ?
O Obeidah !
my faithful Obeidah !
think not that thy sovereign ever knew of thy sufferings  ever could make so ungrateful a return for the services of thy life .
But thy wrongs and mine are avenged .
Our better angel , our Selim hath set us both free  and we will live together henceforward to bless his name . '


This condescension , this goodness of his sovereign was too much for the full heart of Obeidah to support .
He seized the hand of the Khaliff , and pressing it to his breast , expired without a struggle , in the excess of his honest joy .


The scene was too moving for humanity to bear .
Togrul , raising the Khaliff from the dead body , upon which he had  fallen , led him to the door of the prison , where they parted , unable either to speak a word .


3.9 .
SECTION IX .


THE agitation of Togrul 's mind was too violent to admit of sleep .
Having paid the pious tribute of a flood of tears to the memory of his friend , he called for Achmet , and desired to be informed by what strange fortune he had been led to Bagdat .


` The fortune of the poor , ' replied Achmet , ` is seldom distinguished by any incidents worthy of recital .
My distress , at your separating yourself from me , in the camp of Mohammed , need not be described .
I sought you for several days with the most anxious diligence , till I could no longer hope to find you there . '


 It then occurred to me , that yielding to the melancholy with which your soul was so heavily oppressed for the loss of your father , you had taken this method of avoiding my too officious zeal , of which you often complained , and retired to give yourself up to the uninterrupted indulgence of your grief .


But my attachment could not bear the thoughts of deserting you in such a situation .
I resolved to find you out , if possible , and save you from yourself  from a despair unworthy of you .
Where to seek you , was the difficulty .


At length , I recollected the pleasure with which I had often heard you mention the friendship of Obeidah  and thought you might possibly have returned to him : at least , it was the only place where I could see any hope of succeeding in my search .


 I directly therefore left the camp , and came to this city , where on my enquiring for Obeidah , gracious heaven !
what was my astonishment !
my grief !
to find the good old man just sinking into his grave , under all the miseries of imprisonment and want , without even the allegation of a crime .


On my mentioning your name , he seemed to forget himself for a few moments to enquire after you  rejoicing in your success , and weeping for your misfortunes .


My soul could not forsake virtue in such distress .
I devoted myself entirely to attending on one so dear to you , since I could not have the happiness of finding yourself .


Assuming therefore this habit of a Faquir , I shared with him the sustenance which I daily received from the hand of  charity , and enabled him to struggle with his fate , till he sunk under the happiness , too suddenly accumulated upon him , by your arrival .


As soon as the first blush of morning had began to gild the firmament , Togrul returned to the Khaliff  and recommending to him once more to hold with steadiness the sceptre , which he had restored to his hand , began his march to rejoin Temugin , covered with the unfading laurels of a victory , which had made the vanquished happy .


On his arrival at the camp , he presented himself before the emperor , and gave him an account of his success  when instead of the approbation , with the hope of which he had pleased himself , Temugin demanded sternly , why he had given peace to the Khaliff , on such easy terms , when he had had it in his power to have made him accede to whatever he thought proper .


 Much as Togrul was affected , at so unexpected a reproof , he was not absent from himself .
Falling at the emperor 's feet , ' I gave him a good peace , ' he answered , ' O sovereign of the world , because I wished to have it long , and faithfully preserved .
They , who push their advantages to extremity , deceive themselves .
A bad peace never lasts longer , than the necessity which made it be accepted . '


Temugin paused some moments , without making any reply  then softening his look and accent , ` Go , ' said he , ` and take order for the refreshment of your troops .
I will consider these matters , at some other time . '


3.10 .
SECTION X .


 THE conduct of Togrul , on this delicate occasion , fixed him so firmly in the esteem and confidence of Temugin , that he admitted him into his most secret councils  and delighted to do him honour .


Such favour was not beheld without envy  but the humility with which he bore his greatness , and the disinterested benevolence , that ruled his conduct , soon disarmed its rage  and if it was not possible for the favourite of a prince to have a true friend , he had the happiness , at least , of having no enemies .


But this happiness soon palled upon him  and he sickened in that sunshine , for which all around him sighed .
` If I must not hope to find my father ! '
would he often say to Achmet , in the  overflowing of his heart , ` must I desert my friends ?
Must I violate my faith to Himilco , who by this time expects my promised return ?
Must I leave his daughter a prey to the terrors , which hourly anticipate the misery of that forlorn estate , in which the death of her father must leave her ?
- Forbid it heaven !
But may he not be already dead ?
May not she be , this moment , looking out with anxious impatience for my return  and justly accusing me of the cruelest neglect ?
I can not bear the dreadful thought .
If it is not in my power to avoid being unhappy  I will not aggravate my unhappiness by conscious baseness .
I will have the approbation of my own mind , at least , to support me . '


He would have thrown himself at the feet of Temugin , and besought his permission to depart  but the circumstances of the time made the very thought a dishonour ,  honour , Gelaleddin having collected all his force , for one last struggle with his fate : He resolved therefore to exert every effort in order to accelerate an event , which alone delayed the accomplishment of his only hope .


3.11 .
SECTION XI .


WHILE he was paying this painful tribute to honour , he happened , one day , to fall in with a body of Gelaleddin 's troops , who were conducting that prince 's houshold to a place of safety , farther from the seat of the war .


Flushed with continued victory , and following a leader whom they loved , his soldiers soon overcame a servile and disheartened band , who unattached to the charge they were to guard , thought only of securing their own safety by flight .


 As the wars of Temugin were conducted on the principles of humanity and honour , Togrul gave orders , immediately after the victory , for sending back the wives of Gelaleddin , without his even seeing them  when a rumour , that that prince was concealed among them , obliged him to deviate from his intended delicacy .


The alarm of the women on his entering the tent , in which they were , may well be conceived  but he soon pacified their fears , by assurances of respect and safety  and then informing them of the cause of his coming , requested that they would submit to a search , so indispensible , by lifting up their veils .


Their compliance having shewn that the rumour was without foundation , Togrul was about to withdraw , when his eye was caught by a female slave , whose surpassing beauty , neither the meanness of her habit , nor the grief with which she  appeared to be overwhelmed , beyond all the rest , could hide .
He gazed at her , for some minutes , in rapturous astonishment  till Achmet perceiving his situation , reminded him to retire , which he did in such confusion , that he forgot to give any orders for their departure .


Achmet beheld with joy the impression , which the beauty of the slave had made upon Togrul  and resolved to heighten it by every means in his power .
He was truly attached to him  but as his own soul was fired with the strongest ambition , he considered his design of retiring to Himilco , as a weakness unworthy of him  which this incident , if rightly improved , might happily enable him to prevent .


As soon as Togrul had disposed his men properly for the night , he retired to his tent , where he gave himself up to the contemplation of the beauteous slave .


 While he was thus indulging himself in a pleasure , of the tendency of which he was not aware , Achmet entered  and after some occasional discourse , asked him slightly if he had observed a beautiful slave , who attended upon the wives of Gelaleddin .


The question , even from one , with whom he lived in the most unreserved familiarity , threw Togrul into evident confusion .
He hesitated some moments , before he could speak , and then blushing , though unconscious for what cause , answered , that it was impossible for any one , who was not blind , to have passed such beauty unobserved .


The manner in which he said this , confirming Achmet 's conjecture , he directly proceeded to feed the flame , which he saw kindled in the breast of Togrul , with the warmest descriptions of her beauty , and  allusions to the pleasure , which the possession of it must bestow .


Togrul , for the first time , listened to such conversation , without dislike .
His virtue was forced to yield to an attack , in which nature herself took so strong a part against it  and he sunk insensibly into a soft intoxication , which drowned all remembrance of himself , and every purpose of his heart .


When Achmet had thus prepared him for his design , he asked whether he had given orders for the departure of the wives of Gelaleddin ?
All the pleasing hopes , with which Togrul had been so fondly feeding his passion , faded at these words .
He turned pale  and fixing his eyes for some time upon the ground , at length , with an heavy sigh , desired Achmet to take upon him a care , which he found himself unable to execute .


 Achmet , who knew that the success of his design depended on its being conducted with address , resolved to seem rather to follow , than lead him to the point he desired  affecting therefore not to understand what he meant , he asked , with a look of anxiety , if he had received any wound in the late battle , to which he had neglected applying proper remedies .


Deeply as Togrul was distressed , he could scarcely forbear smiling , at such a mistake .
` No , my friend , ' he answered , ' I have received no wound  but that which the beauteous slave hath inflicted on my heart  to which , I fear , it never will be in my power to apply any remedy . '


` And wherefore should you fear that ? '
replied Achmet .
` The wounds of love are , of all others , the most easy to be healed , where the object is in our possession . '


 ` But how is she in my possession ? '
returned Togrul .
` Doth she not belong to the houshold of Gelaleddin ?
and must I not restore her to him ?
I dare not , I can not violate the orders of Temugin : Orders founded on the most sacred principles of virtue  and which my own soul holdeth in the highest honour . '


` How industrious , ' said Achmet , with a smile , ` are we to torture , to deceive ourselves ?
The orders of Temugin respect only the sacred property of the marriage bed .
Slaves are , by the universal laws of war , the captor 's prize , the reward of valour , which Temugin never meant to deprive him of .
Dismiss the wives of Gelaleddin with due respect  and he will never think your detaining a slave an invasion of his right . '


 Though a proposal , so favourable to his wishes , readily satisfied the scruples of Togrul , he had a respect to the appearance of virtue , a modesty in his nature , which would not permit him to carry it openly into execution .


But Achmet was not at a loss to surmount this difficulty .
He counselled Togrul to send away the women directly , with every mark of honour , under the conduct of a person in whom he could confide  and said he would himself follow at the first dawn of the morning , as if he was going on some secret occasion of the war , and bring the fair slave without any alarm , or its being even known for whom , to a neighbouring fortress , where Togrul might meet her in the evening  and indulge himself in her company for some days , as if he was only attending to the motions of the enemy  a purpose for which it was a proper place .


 Had not Togrul been blinded by his passion , he would have rejected with disdain , a proposal , founded on a neglect of his duty , though but for a moment : but such was his infatuation , that he equally forgot what he owed to his own honour , and to the confidence of Temugin .


3.12 .
SECTION XII .


THE conflict in his mind , when Achmet departed , is not to be described .
Though his passion had silenced the voice of reason , it had another antagonist to struggle with , which was not so easily to be subdued .
In spite of all his efforts to elude it , the remembrance of Himilco , and his daughter , would ever and anon force itself upon him  and damp his highest ardours .
Every moment produced a new resolution , which the next overturned , leaving him in the same fluctuation .


 Attachments of mere desire lose their force , when the object is no longer present .
Every time he thought of the daughter of Himilco , his passion for the fair slave grew weaker  till , in the end , it entirely subsided , leaving no more trace behind than ruffles the bosom of a stream , into which some fragment of the rock hath newly fallen from the impending cliff .


He awoke , as from a troubled dream  and wondering at his own weakness , resolved to wipe off the stain of it , by sending back the fair slave the moment he should arrive at the place , where he had appointed to meet Achmet .
Nor would he even have gone thither , had he not thought that countermanding , without any visible reason , the orders he had so lately given to his troops , would betray an unsteadiness , that must lower him in their eyes .


 Exulting in this victory , he arrived at the fortress , where he no sooner saw Achmet , than he commanded him to send back the slave that very night  declaring that he would not even see her .


Achmet , who read in his looks the struggle in his heart , was more surprized than discouraged at this change of his resolution  which he did not doubt but the sight of the fair slave would soon alter , could he prevail upon him to see her .


Without seeming therefore to hesitate at paying obedience to his orders , he asked him , with a discontented look , what reason he should give her , for such a disappointment of those hopes , with which he had taken so much pains to inspire her .


Togrul , whose conquest over his passion was far from being so complete as he thought , could not forbear enquiring [ ... ] gerly , what hopes he meant  to which  Achmet answered , in a tone of indifference , the hopes of his love , which he had so confidently assured her of , that he was utterly ashamed to inform her of a change in his sentiments , as unaccountable as it was sudden .


Incapable of artifice himself , Togrul suspected none in Achmet .
He told him , with a sigh , the reason of his sending her back , acknowledging , at the same time , the pain which that resolution had cost him .


Achmet , who wanted not virtue , though his sense of it was neither so extensive nor so sublime as that of Togrul , looked upon this as no more than a false refinement , to which it was his duty to open the eyes of his friend .


But as he was sensible , that it would be in vain to attempt reasoning on such a subject , he affected to approve the resolution  Togrul had taken , and only desired that he would himself acquaint the fair slave with the motive of it  a mark of attention which , he said , would change her resentment into respect of his constancy , the virtue dearest to the sex  adding , when Togrul seemed to hesitate , that surely he could not doubt his own resolution so far , as to apprehend danger from so short an interview  or aggravate the pain of her disappointment , by such an ungenerous instance of contempt , as to send her away without condescending even to see her .


This was an attack which Togrul could not resist .
His heart harboured not a sentiment that was not truly generous  nor would he admit the appearance of a weakness of which he was not conscious .
He consented therefore to see her , as soon as he should have taken order for the disposal of his troops , directing Achmet to prepare , in the mean time , for her departure .


3.13 .
SECTION XIII .


 EVERY step , as he approached her tent , encreased the emotions which the thought of this interview raised in his breast .
He entered , trembling and irresolute , where he found her sitting on the ground , dissolved in tears , and wailing herself in sobs of woe .


The power of beauty , when aided by compassion , is irresistible .
He stopped short , and gazing at her for some moments , turned to Achmet to learn the cause of her tears .


Achmet , who saw that the success of his design depended on the improvement of the present moment , and scrupled not any means to accomplish an end which he thought just , breathed a soft whisper in his ear , that all her grief arose from his having informed her of Togrul 's late resolution  to send her back  and therefore advised him not to mention any thing of it , till she should be a little more composed .


Togrul 's resolution , which had begun to waver the minute he saw her , was totally overturned by these words .
Every motive of honour and virtue , which had so lately swayed him , now gave place to his passion .
He rushed forward , and throwing himself at her feet , attempted to sooth her grief with professions of love and vows of constancy .


But what was his disappointment to find , that instead of appeasing , this only encreased her distress .
He paused for some minutes , utterly at a loss what to conclude  then fixing his eyes passionately upon her , conjured her , in the tenderest terms , to declare the cause of her affliction , and depend upon every relief in his power to procure .


 Moved by the manner in which he spoke , she raised her head , and looking earnestly at him , asked how he , who had so lately torn her away from an husband , whom she dearly loved , could affect to be a stranger to the cause of her affliction .


Equally shocked and surprised at what she said , Togrul enquired hastily who was her husband ?
And upon her answering , Gelaleddin , demanded again , how she came then to be clad in the habit of a slave ?
Whereupon she informed him , that the wives of that prince not expecting such generous treatment as they had experienced , she , his most beloved , had assumed that disguise , in order to save the honour of his name at least , should any violence be offered to her .


Togrul stood aghast !
He saw the precipice over the verge of which he hung !
He saw also the only way of escaping .
It was painful  but it was indispensible .


 The occasion called forth all his virtue .
He hesitated not a moment  but explaining the error , into which he had been led by her own precaution , removed all her apprehensions , and dried her tears , by assuring her that she should be directly sent back to her husband safe , and unsolicited farther by an unhappy passion , which was not now more disagreeable to her , than disapproved by himself  and giving , in her presence , the necessary orders to Achmet ( who , terrified at the danger into which his too sanguine zeal had unwillingly betrayed his friend , prepared to carry them into instant execution ) hurried away from a scene , more distressful than he could support .


Not that his distress was lighter , when he retired to his tent , and reflected on his late conduct .
He looked back with horror to the manifold ruin which he had so narrowly escaped  nor did remorse make the prospect before him much less painful .


 Though error might seem to extenuate the crime of his attempt upon the wife of Gelaleddin , his intended infidelity to the daughter of Himilco , his intended neglect of duty to Temugin , admitted of no extenuation .
He judged himself with severity  but he sunk not under that judgment .


Superior to that weakness , which instead of nobly endeavouring to repair a fault , gives itself up to fruitless wailing and self-reproach , he resolved to retrieve the day he had lost to Temugin by some eminent service  and then to expiate his crime against the daughter of Himilco , by a sacrifice of every other hope to his love .


3.14 .
SECTION XIV .


 THIS resolution restored to his mind that virtuous serenity , which had been so dangerously interrupted by his late passion  if the remembrance of which would sometimes return , its only effect was to stimulate his efforts to make atonement for it .


Nor were these efforts unsuccessful .
Among the chieftains of Temugin , famed as they justly were in war , Togrul soon distinguished himself , by abilities which proved him to be the proper antagonist of Gelaleddin .
Equals in activity and enterprize , they exhausted , against each other , every resource of the military art  while experience viewed their emulation with wonder and delight .


But the superior power of Temugin at length decided a contest , which virtue would have supported  and Gelaleddin  found himself pent in between armies , which it was in vain for him to attempt resisting , and the mighty river of Indus .


He instantly saw all the severity of his fate  that nothing remained for him , but to yield himself captive , or die in the defence of his liberty .
The choice , with him , admitted not a moment 's pause .
Animating his faithful followers by his example , he bravely continued the fight , marking every step of his retreat with the dead bodies of his boldest foes , till he was forced to the very brink of the river , where , looking round him for a moment , and seeing almost all his people slain , he formed the noble resolution of attempting to save himself for an happier day , when heaven might be more propitious to him  and instantly plunged into the river , which rolled in such a torrent , that the greatness of the danger prevented his being pursued .


 While he was gloriously struggling thus with fate , Togrul , whose efforts had principally driven him to this extremity , was rushing forward to plunge in after him , when he was stopped by Temugin , who honoured such virtue , even in a foe .
` Remember , ' said he , ` the day in which you escaped from the rovers in the desarts of Africa  and imitate that generosity , which you have yourself experienced .
Leave this gallant prince to his fortune .
This is a son worthy of his father .
Happy is he who hath such children ! '


Togrul was affected in the strongest manner by these words .
Though in the headlong fury of the battle he would have pursued Gelaleddin  to have defeated so noble an effort for the preservation of his liberty , when he could resist no longer , would have stung his generous heart with incurable remorse .
The very thought overwhelmed him with shame  as his being  so happily prevented filled him with joy .


The total defeat of Gelaleddin having put an end to the war , Togrul thought himself now at liberty to fulfil his resolution , by retiring to Himilco in the desart .


For this purpose , he threw himself at the feet of Temugin the next morning , and pouring out the gratitude of his heart for all the favours he had received from him , humbly besought his permission to depart , and accomplish the fate ordained for him by heaven .


Temugin , to whom the virtues of Togrul had endeared him , no less than his valour , heard , with concern , a request , with which his regard would not permit him to comply .
Though he thought the subject of too tender a nature for him to interfere with directly , he was not at a loss to discover his motive for desiring to depart ,  nor whither he intended to bend his way , as he remembered the love which he had expressed for the daughter of Himilco , and his promise that he would return to her  a promise which he meant not obliging him to violate , but only to defer its performance to a fitter season .


Expostulating with him , therefore , in terms of esteem , on his want of attachment , which alone , he alledged , could prompt him to seek elsewhere a fortune , that in his service prevented his pursuit , he told him , that he could not consent to his departure , till he should have accomplished certain matters which he had in contemplation  after which , if he persisted in his present purpose , he would not only give him his consent , but also the assistance necessary for executing it with happy effect .


This promise , by which Togrul saw , that the emperor was no stranger to his  intention , over-paid the delay on which it was founded , by hopes he had never ventured to indulge before .
He embraced the knees of his generous benefactor , in a transport of grateful joy , which the fulness of his heart left him not the power of uttering .


End of the THIRD BOOK .
4 .
THE HISTORY OF ARSACES , PRINCE OF BETLIS .
BOOK THE FOURTH .


 4.1 .
SECTION I .


TEMUGIN , having thus compleated the conquest of Khouaresm , issued a mandate to all the princes , who governed the several kingdoms of his boundless empire , to meet him with all their households , in the plains of Karakathai , where he intended to relax from the fatigues of war ,  and devote one whole year to the pleasures of the chace , while he married his sons , and regulated the various forms of government in his dominions  before he proceeded to farther conquests , which he had in contemplation .


The preparations which he ordered to be made for this solemnity , at which the greater part of human kind were to assist , were suited to the magnificence of his spirit , and the greatness of his power .
Nothing , which nature could supply , or art devise , was wanting to make the entertainment equal to the occasion .


The morning before Temugin proposed repairing to the plains of Karakathai , he sent for Togrul into his tent , and regarding him with a look of favour , ` Togrul , ' said he , ' I am now going to give you a mark of my confidence , which will put your abilities to the strictest proof . '


 There is a country in the mountains of Curdistan , called Betlis , the people of which boast of having repelled all attempts made to subdue them  and do , at this day , live in defiance of every foreign power .
It is necessary to my honour to put an end to this boast .
While I march towards Karakathai , take you the troops under your command .
Reduce this people to obedience  and bring their king to receive his fate from my word .
No sovereign shall rule , but by my permission .


I know your valour  but that , tho ' the first , is not the only virtue required in the leader of an army .
Activity , vigilance , and circumspection will be no less necessary to you on this occasion .


Astyages , who reigns in Betlis , is an experienced warrior  and his people are an hardy race , who , strangers to the wants of luxury , as having no commerce  with other nations , are satisfied with the scanty subsistence which their labour extorts from a sterile soil  and will fight with advantage , in a country full of fastnesses , known only to themselves .


Though Togrul was far from approving the motive of this war , his heart was not insensible to the glory which it opened him an opportunity of acquiring .
Bowing himself , therefore , in grateful assent , he proceeded directly to execute a charge which did him so much honour .


As soon as he drew near to the country , which he was sent to conquer , he called together the several leaders of his troops , and laid them under the strictest injunctions to restrain the soldiers from every act of rapine , cruelty , and oppression , which in the nature of their duty could possibly be avoided .
` Though they are our enemies , ' he said , ` let us not forget that they are men , as well as we !
Let us  spare the country , which is to belong to our sovereign . '


This restraint , at the same time that it saved the country from devastation , saved also the forces under his command from all those dangers which await an army broken loose from discipline , and scattered over an enemy 's country in search of plunder .


He penetrated into the heart of the land , without meeting any misfortune , though the king watched his steps , with a powerful army , ready to take any opportunity of attacking him to advantage  as he was unwilling to risque the fate of his country , on a battle , upon equal terms .


Finding , however , all his schemes defeated by the vigilance and circumspection of Togrul , and apprehensive that his own soldiers might be dispirited at seeing him so cautious , Astyages , at length , resolved  to trust all to the valour of his people , and the justice of his cause  and drawing all his forces together , waited for the enemy in a place which defended the approach to his capital .


This was directly the point to which Togrul had all along wished to lead him .
He instantly disposed his troops in order of battle , and led them to the charge in person .


The conflict was such as might be expected from men animated by the strongest motives .
The soldiers of Temugin were so accustomed to conquer , that they looked upon themselves as invincible  while the men of Betlis , who knew that they fought for the dearest blessings of life , exerted themselves , every one , as if the event depended upon his single arm .


4.2 .
SECTION II .


 WHILE the battle raged thus , with equal fury , the adverse leaders , who flew from place to place to enforce the execution of their orders , by their own example chanced to meet .


Knowing each other by the number of their attendants , and animated by an equal passion for glory , they advanced , as by consent , to decide the contest , making a signal to their men to draw back  who readily obeyed , willing to commit the fortune of the day to their respective valour .


Nor was their confidence deceived on this important occasion .
Every effort , which art and courage could suggest to strength , was exerted so equally by each combatant , that it was impossible to form any judgment of the event .


 While every heart panted thus in anxious expectation and suspense , the king of Betlis , provoked at a resistance which he had never met before , smote Togrul such a blow , as cleft his helmet in twain  which , falling to the ground , left his head unarmed  at the same time , that his own sword , unequal to the force , broke short in his hand .


Togrul recovering from the stroke , which had stunned him for a moment , was preparing to return it on his defenceless enemy , when his ear was struck by the voice of a man , who throwing himself between the combatants , exclaimed , ` Hold , O Selim !
nor stain thy soul with the blood of thy father . '


Starting at the well-known voice , Togrul dropped his sword , which hung over the head of his adversary , and looking eagerly at the person who spoke , instantly knew the face of Abudah , who , by this  time , had thrown off his helmet , and fallen on his knees before him .


The piety of Togrul could not bear such a sight .
He ran , and raising him from the ground , threw himself at his feet , and embraced his knees in transports of pious joy .


Tenderly as the heart of Abudah felt this endearment , the time was too important for him to indulge it .
Turning hastily from Togrul , ` There pay thy duty ! '
said he , pointing to the king , who stood lost in wonder at what he saw .
` That , O Selim !
is thy father .
- O king of Betlis , behold thy son ! '


The king no sooner heard these words , than yielding to the impulse of nature , he rushed forward , and throwing himself upon the neck of Togrul , bedewed his bosom with tears , sobbing , ' O my son !
have I  at length found thee ?
O Arsaces !
My son !
My son ! '


Though Togrul felt the tenderness of this embrace , he was unable to return it with equal warmth .
He knew no father but Abudah  at the same time , he knew that Abudah was incapable of asserting any thing but truth .
He was utterly at a loss .
- In the mean while , the chieftains of both armies , struck with astonishment , gathered promiscuously around them , to learn the cause of this affecting scene .


Abudah saw the importance of the moment . '
O soldiers of Temugin ! '
said he , mounting upon a rock , which happened to be near , and spreading abroad his arms , ` and you men of Betlis , behold and revere the mysterious ways of that power which rules the world !
The leader of the armies of Temugin is son to the king of Betlis .
Heaven , which permitted them to prove their valour , in  your sight , this day , hath discovered them to each other , in time to prevent the crime of parricide , and put an end to this groundless war .
Let us not therefore presume to oppose its sacred will . '


The manner in which he uttered these words ensured their effect .
His eyes , his voice , his gestures , seemed to speak immediate inspiration .
All heard him with reverential awe , and waited but the word of their leaders to pay obedience to what they thought a divine command .


The king and Togrul had , by this time , recovered themselves sufficiently to attend to their situation .
Advancing therefore to their respective armies , they unfolded this extraordinary event  and declared their intentions of obeying the will of heaven , so plainly signified  and extending to their people that peace , which nature had established between themselves .


 Nor was this difficult to be effected .
The manner in which the war had been conducted , had prevented any personal animosity , by preventing private injuries .
It had rather been a contest for glory , than a war .


4.3 .
SECTION III .


AS soon as they had drawn off their forces , and taken proper care to prevent any accidental disagreement between them , they repaired to a tent , which Abudah had caused to be pitched in the midst between the two armies , equally anxious to concert such measures for confirming the peace , thus happily commenced , as should meet the approbation of Temugin , without derogating from the honour of Astyages , or injuring the interests of his people .


As such an interview must necessarily open all the tenderness of nature , it was  ordered that no person should be present beside Abudah , who waited to receive Togrul  and before the arrival of his father , relieve his heart from the suspense with which it must be tortured , by an event equally interesting and strange .


As soon as Togrul entered the tent , he ran to Abudah , and clasping him in his arms , ' O father of my heart ! '
said he , unfold the mystery of my fate  nor keep me longer in a suspense , which my soul is unable to support .
Who am I ?
- How can I be other than thy son ?
- And yet , I blush to own , that my heart feels a divided love  a respect , which it never felt before . '


` Son of my soul ! '
answered Abudah , as he kissed away the tear which rolled down the cheek of Togrul , ` restrain thine impatience to a more proper moment .
Thou owest thy being to Astyages .
He is thy father .
How the precious charge  of thine education came to be entrusted to me , must be reserved to an hour of more leisure  as well as a recital of the occurrences , through which heaven hath led thee to this happy period .
At present , other matters demand our attention . '


Astyages entering as he spoke these words , Togrul yielding to the impulse of nature , ran to him , and crying , ' O my father !
my father ! '
threw himself at his feet , and embraced his knees , unable to say more  while Astyages wept upon his head in extasy , too big for utterance .


When they had indulged nature thus , for a few blissful minutes , Abudah , who was more present to himself , though his feelings were scarcely less lively , reminded them of the more immediate cause of their meeting .


When Togrul had repeated the charge , given to him by Temugin , Astyages  mused for some moments  then with a look serenely resolute , ` My son ! '
said he , ' I trace the hand of heaven in all these events , and will not presume to set myself in opposition to it . '


The emperor hath commanded thee to reduce this country to obedience , and bring me to receive my fate from his word .
His command shall be fulfilled .
You shall appoint Abudah to govern our country , in his name , while I will go with you to him , and trust my fate to heaven .


I had flattered myself with the hope of expelling the invaders of my country by force , or dying honourably in its defence  but these hopes are now changed .


As such a proposal could admit of no difficulty , peace was directly announced to both armies , who embraced it with equal pleasure  having made too strong a proof  of each other 's valour , to desire a continuance of the war .


When Togrul had adjusted every thing for beginning his march the next morning to Karakathai , where he was to join Temugin , he returned to the tent , where he found his father expecting him , in company with Abudah .


After some time given up to mutual endearments , ' I will leave you for a few moments , my son ! '
said Astyages , ` while I go to make some preparations for my journey .
The father of so large a family , hath many things to settle , before he can leave it .
Abudah will , in the mean time , inform you of matters , which you must naturally be desirous to know . '


4.4 .
SECTION IV .


 THE anxiety , evident in the looks of Togrul , made it not necessary for him to claim the performance of this promise .


' O son of my affection !
thou beloved of my soul ! '
said Abudah , as soon as Astyages withdrew , ' I am now to resign an honour , of which I am unworthy , and exchange the name of father for that of friend  a secret , my having concealed which from you so long , hath cost my heart many a painful hour . '


You must remember my having often told you , that the birth of a son deprived me of a wife , whom I had wedded in a foreign land .
That you were that son , it was natural for you to suppose , from the care which I bestowed upon  your education  but alas !
I lost both wife and son together .


The reason why I never informed you in what country I had met with this misfortune , was my fear of your conceiving a desire to see it , before the time appointed by your father should be fulfilled .


My wife was the sister of Astyages , whose friendship prompted him to bestow her upon me  as it afterwards did , upon her death , to entrust me with the precious charge of you , his only son , then an infant .


`` How various are the griefs , '' he said to me once , when he came to console me in the days of my affliction , ` which prey upon the wretched heart of man !
Thou mournest the death of a son , while my anxiety for the fate of one , who is yet alive , maketh me equally unhappy . '


 Hitherto hath this people defended their liberty against the ravagers of the earth  and while I live , I trust that heaven will enable me to preserve the inestimable blessing to them .
But I tremble to look forward .
The very peace which we now enjoy , which I have earned by so many difficulties and dangers , alarms my fears .


Trained in the school of adversity , I am prepared to struggle with it , whenever I may be assailed .
But will my son have the same ability , without having the same opportunity of acquiring it ?
Will not ease and idleness debilitate his body ?
Will not flattery corrupt his mind ?


I strove to remove his fears , by urging that it was in his own power to obviate those evils , by taking care that his son received a proper education .


 ` It is not possible , ' he replied , ` for me to attend to that care .
The cares of sovereignty are a sufficient weight , without the addition of another , scarcely less weighty .
Though even if I could devote myself to his education , I can not hope for the success you mention .
He would be told that he was born to reign  and that would defeat all my endeavours . '


` In a word , there is but one way to remove my fears  and that depends upon you .
I will not injure your friendship by a parade of asking that which I know you will perform .
You must take my son with you to your native country  and educate him there as if he were your own .
Thus will he become worthy to wear the crown of his ancestors  and be able to fulfil my hopes of defending the liberties of his people . '


 ` When you shall think him qualified to share the weight of a crown with me , bring him home .
Till then , let him remain with you  and even unto death , should he not prove worthy of me .
I will supply you with wealth sufficient to make provision for his support . '


How I executed this important charge , you want not to be told .
To conceal your lineage more effectually , I even changed your own illustrious name of Arsaces , for that which had been borne by my father .
Happy !
thrice happy am I to restore it to you now : To restore to your father a son worthy of him : worthy of the sacred race of Cyrus , from whom you derive your descent : a race , who through all the wars , which have shaken the earth , from the day , whereon Ascander overturned the throne of Darius , have to this hour preserved their royalty undiminished , in these mountains  whither Arsinoe , sister to that ill-fated  monarch , fled with her infant son Hystaspes , whose virtues humanized the fierce inhabitants , and influenced them to chuse him for their king .


4.5 .
SECTION V .


I UPBRAID you not with a desertion , to which I plainly see , you were directed by heaven .
As soon as I awoke that morning , my heart misgave me , when you answered not to my call .
I arose to seek you , but in vain .
The disappearance of your horse , and your sword , too well convinced me , that you were gone beyond my reach .


I must not attempt to describe to you , what I felt at that thought .
Though hopeless of your return , I waited for one miserable moon , if possibly your mind might change , and a sense of filial duty and affection lead you back to me .


 At the expiration of that time , I put my sandals on my feet , girt my loins , and with my staff in my hand , set out to bring the melancholy tidings to your father .
I would have attempted to seek for you  but you had turned the secresy , which I had so often inculcated to you , against myself .
You had never dropped a syllable , which could direct my search .


Your father felt the loss as a man  but supported it with the fortitude worthy of him .
He even condescended to offer me consolation  and acquitted me of all blame , by referring your conduct to the guidance of heaven .


This awoke an hope of that happiness which your return hath thus fulfilled .
All my cares , all my griefs , are now over payed  and I am ready to die contented , whenever the angel of death shall call upon me .


 But , O my son !
through what surprising scenes must heaven have led your steps ?
My heart pants - And behold , your father comes bursting with equal impatience , to hear the interesting tale .


Astyages entering as he spoke these words , ' I restore to thee , O king , ' continued Abudah , leading Arsaces to him , ` thy son , no longer Togrul , nor Selim , but Arsaces , a genuine scyon of the sacred stock of Cyrus .
O , Arsaces , behold a father worthy of thee ! '


' O my son !
My father ! '
they exclaimed with one voice , as they ran into each other 's arms , while Abudah , unable to speak , gave vent to his joy in a flood of tears .


When they had payed this tender tribute to nature , Astyages hinted to his son a desire to hear the incidents of his life , since his departure from Abudah .
Arsaces  instantly obeyed , and placing himself between them , related , in brief , the wonderous tale .


As soon as he had concluded , ` Could a particular instance be wanting in proof of that , which all the works of nature prove , ' said Abudah , ` thy life , O Arsaces , affords the strongest conviction , that the ways of heaven are always conducted with wisdom , goodness , and justice , however inscrutable to the feeble powers of human reason .
Let us therefore adore that Being , who ordereth every thing for the best  nor perplex ourselves with doubts , which only involve us in deeper darkness . '


4.6 .
SECTION VI .


 ARSACES began his march the next morning , accompanied by his father .
On his arrival at the camp of Temugin , he hasted to his presence , that he might himself deliver the first tidings of these wonderful events .


Prostrating himself before his throne , ` May the king of men , ' said he , ` live for ever .
Thy commands have been executed in their fullest extent .
The country of Betlis pays obedience to Temugin  and its king is come to receive his fate from thy word .
But in the king of Betlis , O behold the father of Togrul !
The father of him , who in thy service hath unknowingly lifted his sword against the author of his life . '


Temugin , who thought the enterprize  upon which he had sent Togrul , too difficult to have been accomplished in so short a space , was utterly at a loss to conceive the meaning of what he heard .
He demanded therefore an explanation of circumstances , which appeared so extraordinary to him .


As soon as Arsaces had recited the whole , the emperor pausing a few moments , as lost in thought , ' I adore the ways of heaven , ' said he  ` and war not with its will .
King of Betlis , ' he continued , ` on what terms art thou willing to receive the restitution of thy crown this day , from my hands ? '


` Conqueror of the world , ' answered Astyages , ` it ill befitteth me to make terms with him into whose power I have willingly surrendered myself .
If thou wilt permit me to study the happiness of my people  and preserve them in the  enjoyment of those laws , which their fathers have handed down to them , we will render thee , with fidelity , all the services which can be expected from men who are free .
If thou requirest more , my promise shall not deceive thee . '


` For know , O Temugin , that though I have the power to commit my own liberty to thy disposal , I have none over that of the meanest subject , whom I lately governed  every one of whom , while he pays obedience to the laws , is safe under their protection  and would with readiness sacrifice his life in their defence . '


` We will put their virtue to the trial  ' replied Temugin .
` My will shall be circumscribed by no laws .
In the mean time , return thou in safety to their assistance .
I scorn to take advantage of thy confidence . '


 ' O sovereign of the world , ' exclaimed Arsaces , throwing himself again at the feet of Temugin , and embracing his knees , ` what is to be the fate of the captive of thy power , the slave of thy goodness ?
Can I fight against the author of my being ?
Can I fight against him , whose beneficence hath made that being a blessing to me ?
O divide not duties , which heaven hath united !
nor set my soul at war against itself !
My father will teach his people to pay you the highest subjection , which man can pay to man , without derogating from the dignity of their common nature .
- O my father , submit yourself to the power of him who rules the world .
He will not deprive your subjects of liberty , who gave it to your son . '


The agony , in which Arsaces spoke these words , affected all who were present .
The generous heart of Temugin melted in compassion .
` Arise , ' said he , ' O son ,  worthy of thy father  and be happy !
And thou , O Astyages , return to thy kingdom in peace  and rule thy people according to the rectitude of thine heart .
Happy art thou in being worthy to have such a son . '


Every one was filled with joy , by these words .
Even envy and ambition forgot themselves , for some moments , and joined in the general acclamations , which raised the name of Temugin to heaven .


Astyages , who had hitherto supported his royal character , could not resist the tender impulse of his gratitude .
` Thou hast conquered , O Temugin , ' said he , ` thou hast conquered my soul . '


He would have thrown himself at the feet of the emperor , but he was prevented .
Temugin caught him in his arms  and embracing him warmly , ' I receive thee , as my friend , ' he said  ` and in no other  light will I admit thee to offer thyself to me .
Happy is the sovereign who hath such a friend . '


Astyages would have departed the next morning , but Temugin insisted on his remaining some time  during which he took delight to do him honour , above all his princely guests .


The magnificence of such a scene , never equalled upon earth , dazzled not the eyes of Astyages  nor could the offer of Temugin , to make him sovereign over many nations , shake his steady virtue .


` Think it not ingratitude , ' he answered , ' O first of human kind , in virtue as in power , that I decline favours , your holding me worthy of which covers me with the highest honour .
My soul feels the warmest sense of your generous confidence , and friendship  but its ambition never soared so high .
I am content  with the contracted sphere , in which heaven hath placed me  and find the government of one small kingdom sufficient for my abilities .
Rather would I reign in the hearts of a single village , made happy by my care , than rule over discontented millions , with a rod of iron  it not being the extent , but the good government of a kingdom , which in my humble sense constitutes the happiness and glory of a sovereign . '


Temugin was struck with sentiments , the justice of which his soul acknowledged  though they had never occurred to him before .
He paused for some minutes , then clasping Astyages to his breast , ` We must fulfil the destiny appointed for us , ' said he  ` were I not Temugin , it should be my wish to be Astyages . '


After some days spent in the closest intercourse of mutual esteem , Astyages departed for his own country , accompanied  by his son  who offered to remain , but Temugin waved such a sacrifice of every tender feeling .
` After so long a separation , ' said he , ` your souls must require some time to seal the connection of nature , by acquaintance .
When I want your service , I will call for it .
Till then be happy in each other . '


4.7 .
SECTION VII .


THE return of Astyages restored to his people , the only happiness which they had to wish for .
Under him they enjoyed every blessing of life  and the virtues of his son gave them an assured presage of its continuance .


Astyages , in the overflowing of paternal affection , would have shared his throne with his son  but he declined it .
` Let it be my honour , let it be my happiness , ' he said , ` to be the foremost of thy subjects , in humble obedience , as  in love !
Let me learn to reign , in the execution of thy commands . '


But in the midst of all this general joy , Astyages observed that a sigh would sometimes steal unawares from his son  that an absence of mind , in spite of all his care to conceal it , shewed he cherished some secret grief .
Alarmed at this discovery , he communicated it to Abudah , and desired him to try to explore the cause .


Abudah , in all his intercourse with Arsaces , had ever endeavoured to sink the authority of a father in the intimacy of a friend  an intimacy , which now knew no bounds  as the former character , which , notwithstanding all his endeavours , had kept Arsaces at a respectful distance , was at an end .


He found him walking , pensive and alone , by the side of a rivulet , which ran through the gardens of Astyages .
` Whence  cometh it , O my son ! '
said he , ` that you separate yourself thus from society ?
What means that smothered sigh , which this instant hath escaped you ?
Hath Arsaces any grief , which he is afraid to communicate to Abudah ?
Has he a thought , which he would hide from his friend ? '


Arsaces was abashed , at being so surprized , at meriting this tender rebuke .
He blushed , and hung down his head for a few moments , unable to make any answer .


Recovering himself at length , ' O guide of my youth ! '
he replied , ` the heart of Arsaces harboureth not a thought which he is afraid to entrust to you .
The state in which I left the virtuous Himilco - My father may possibly disapprove - '


 ` And the daughter of Himilco ! '
interrupted Abudah , clasping him in his arms .
` Blush not , my son !
To be insensible to love , argues a defect in nature  an incapacity for its most exquisite happiness .
Nor need you fear your father 's disapprobation .
He will assist you to obtain your wishes .
The choice of reason can not be unworthy of thee . '


This discovery gave the greatest joy to Astyages , who wished not for any thing so ardently , as to see the virtues of his son continued in his offspring .
It was agreed that Arsaces and Abudah should set out directly for the habitation of Himilco , attended by a train sufficient to protect them on the way .


The journey was long  but nothing is too much for love .
They performed it without meeting any misfortune .


 The surprize of Himilco , on seeing such a numerous company approach his habitation , may be well conceived  but that surprize was soon turned to joy , when he heard the well-known voice of Arsaces , who advanced before the rest .
He descended instantly , and falling upon his neck , bedewed it with tears of joy .


When they had recovered from the softness of this scene , Arsaces presenting Abudah to Himilco , ` Receive into thy friendship , ' said he , ` that Abudah , whose virtues thou hast so often admired .
Embrace , O Abudah !
the beneficent reliever of my distress . '


Congenial virtues attract each other .
Himilco and Abudah embraced with the esteem of long acquaintance .


Arsaces , having given order for the encampment of his train , ascended with Abudah , into the habitation of Himilco ,  where he was soon blessed with the sight of Arpasia , who joyfully obeyed the first call of her father to receive him .


After mutual congratulations on the happiness of their meeting , Arsaces gratified the anxiety of his hosts , with a recital of the events of his life , since he had departed from them  the vicissitudes of which frequently drew the sympathetic tear from the gentle Arpasia , though delicacy prevented his disclosing the circumstance most interesting to her .


But Abudah was not under the same restraint .
Arpasia withdrawing as soon as Arsaces had concluded his narrative , Abudah made a signal to him to follow her , and acquainted Himilco with Astyages 's approbation of his son 's passion .


Himilco , who was superior to the affectation of making a difficulty of that which gave him pleasure , acknowledged that his  daughter returned the love of Arsaces , and consented to end his days with them in Betlis .


' I acknowledge and adore , ' said he , ` the hand of heaven , which hath evidently led me through such wonderous ways to this happiness  which I will not ungratefully embitter , by repining that I was not thought worthy to effect the happiness of my country also .
I resign myself humbly to its will , which is always right . '


Nor did Arpasia receive the declaration of Arsaces 's love with less candour .
She referred him to her father for an answer  saying , with a blush , in which modesty added new graces to beauty , that her inclination would find no difficulty in accompanying her obedience to his commands .


 Himilco could not leave the asylum of his distress , without feeling the most tender emotions .
But the recollection of past misfortunes only brightened the happy prospect before him .
He payed the tribute of some pious tears to the dear memory of those whose remains he left behind him , and then departed with a grateful heart .


They arrived in safety at the court of Astyages , whose happiness was compleated in theirs  and in the assurance , which their virtues , continued in a numerous offspring , gave him of the happiness of his people : and Arsaces acknowledged , that true wisdom consisteth in humble obedience to the will of heaven , without arrogantly presuming to scan its ways .


FINIS .

