
To His ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCE of WALES .


 SIR ,


THOUGH Respect due to Princes is a Bar , to prevent the Subjects rude pressing to their Royal Persons  yet it can lay no Restraint on their Affections : Where we see the Graces and Virtues , in their most  amiable Union , we are forc'd , irrisistibly , into secret Attachment , and open Admiration .


'T is with this ungovernable Impulse , I approach Your ROYAL HIGHNESS , ( conscious that my Zeal is irregular , but satisfy'd that it is honest ) to give vent to the Overflowings of my Heart : Neither am I at all singular in this Presumption , tho ' by the Faculty of an Author , I make it more manifest .
The whole Nation has the same Sentiments , and what I write is but their just Acknowledgments .
I act but as a Herald to the Publick , and only proclaim the Style and Titles they have universally  voted due to your known Deserts .


What is spoke with Truth of Your ROYAL HIGHNESS , would be Flattery to any other : But , without offending Your Modesty , there is no doing Justice to Your other Virtues  and while I am condemn'd by the World for saying so little , I may incur Your Resentment for having said so much .


If none but an Apelles , or a Praxiteles , were properly authoriz'd to image an Alexander , yet Numbers had the Ambition to attempt it  and , tho ' the Effect shamed the Artist , there was , at  least , some Judgment in the Choice  it argued that they understood what was a fit Subject for Genius , tho ' they were not equal to the Task themselves .
Which is all the Merit and Excuse of ,


May it please Your ROYAL HIGHNESS , Your ROYAL HIGHNESS 's most obedient , most devoted , and most humble Servant ,


 THE VOYAGES , TRAVELS , AND MEMOIRS OF WILLIAM OWEN GWIN VAUGHAN , Esq


THE Day I was born , was the first of my Misfortunes  for the Moment that gave me Birth , robb'd my dear Mother of Life , and I came into the World an innocent Murderer , the last of five Sons .


Tho ' my Father had a considerable Estate , yet , as I was the youngest of all , there was  but little to expect for me  and ere I arriv'd to my fourth Year , a Mother-in-law was brought into the Family , that had one Son , and two Daughters  but she secur'd to my Father a considerable Estate while she liv'd , tho ' after her Death it was to devolve on her own Children  and I am pretty well inform'd , that was the chief Motive of my Father 's wishing her a long Life .


Sure Marriage must be an unfortunate State on such Conditions , especially on one Side  for every body agreed my Mother-in-law ( from her outward Behaviour ) was very fond of my Father  but she laid out her whole Portion of Good-Nature upon him , she having not one Grain left for any of his Children , and , between 'em both , good House-keeping was banish'd , that liv'd with us in my Mother 's Days .


My Father , give him his Due , was raking enough to provide for his Children  and his Wife was not an Ace behind him in taking Care for hers .


My Mother-in-law 's Son was much of my own Age , so to School we were sent together , which was the happiest Time of my Life  for my good Mother-in-law being over-fond of her only Son , allow'd him handsomly of  every thing  and my Father , that there should be no Difference between us , did the like by me  so we both far'd the better by their Emulation , and whatever Brother Jack had one Day , to be sure Billy ( meaning myself ) had the next : But , tho ' it favours of Vanity to praise myself , yet I will declare , I was a better Proficient in Learning than my School-fellow , for I took a great Pleasure in my Studying  but , on the contrary , my Brother was very idle , and I often receiv'd good part of his Money for the Week , to make his Exercise for him  so by this Method , our Parents imagin'd him a better Scholar than he was .


Our Master , tho ' a rigid one , was something deceiv'd in him  for I was very cautious of letting any one understand the Helps I gave him , well knowing , if it was once discover'd , I shou'd lose my Perquisites , as I call'd 'em .
But one Christmas it all came out .


The Parson of the Parish being at Dinner , and , as it prov'd , which does not always happen , a good Scholar , was desir'd to examine the Yonkers , as they call'd us , my Mother being gone out of the Room just before  Domine set upon me first , paying , as  he thought , a Compliment to my Father , and I went thro ' my Examination so readily , that my Father gave me a Crown-piece to encourage me  but , at the same time , whisper'd me to put it up before the good Woman , my Mother-in-law , came back again .


When the Parson had finish'd several elaborate Speeches on the Ripeness of my Genius , and what not , adding among the rest , He did not fear in time but he shou'd see me a great Statesman  he took my Schoolfellow John to Task , who came to Examination like a Thief to his Trial : I stood just behind him , and prompted him unheard by the rest of the Company  yet he made so many Blunders , that , like Sir Martin and his Man Warner , we were both discover'd  at which I was very much griev'd , for I soon apprehended such Care wou'd be taken of Mr. Dunce , that I shou'd finger no more of his Money , and all the Praises I receiv'd from the Company for the Aptness of my Parts , c. cou'd not extinguish the Thoughts o n't .
But , to mend the matter , my Mother-in-law , who happen'd to come in just as he was beginning his Firy Trial , big with Expectation of her Son Johnny proving a  Prodigy of Learning , and finding herself so much disappointed , cou'd not contain her Temper , but flew out in a manner little pleasing to the Company .
She did not doubt , she said , but there had been much Pains taken with that Jackanapes ( meaning my Worship ) but she wou'd take care for the future to choose a Master that was in her Interest , to instruct her Child  that it was much against her Inclination at first to let him go where all my Brothers had gone before , being the Teacher was in my Father 's Interest , and a thousand such Speeches , which struck my Father into Amazement  and tho ' the Parson with a great deal of Reason ( that perhaps you 'll say is a Wonder ) us'd many fine Speeches to qualify this Matter , yet they all prov'd like Words utter'd in a Desart  but when Brother Jack , in Tears , told her my Father had given me a Crown , she grew outragious , and with a great deal of Dexterity gave me a handsome Box on the Ear , less gentle , I believe , than the Boor gives the Duke of * Carinthia at his Installation .
 My Father , to be even with her , return'd my Brother John one as like it as a couple of Billiard-Balls .
My good Mother-in-law perceiving it , was resolv'd to be even with him , and gave it me handsomly on both sides my Ears , which was return'd smartly back upon the Chops of my Schoolfellow by my Father , till we got handsomly cuff'd between 'em .


My Father seeing his Wife 's Rage rather increas'd , than diminish'd , laid hold of both her Hands  she struggling to get loose , and  finding it impossible , spit in my Father 's Face , who was so much confounded , that he let her go , and she waddled out of the Room like a Goose upon a Common .


When she was gone , my Father sat him down in his Chair without speaking for some time  but at last broke out with an exalted Voice , This is the first time I ever wish'd myself unmarry'd , and I am very much in fear it will not be the last  for when once Man and Wife have broke thro ' the Respect they owe each other , continual Jarrs will succeed , and the first Quarrel will soon be follow'd by many others .
I have no Notion ( continu'd he ) after this Breach , we can ever be properly reconcil'd .


The good Parson said many things in order to excuse both Parties , but my Father gave him no manner of Answer .
He seeing things in so much Confusion , took his Leave .


When he was gone , my Father began to examine me about my Brother Jack , and the Reason why my Master did not acquaint him with his Indocibility  I well knowing he abhorr'd a Lye , declar'd to him the whole Truth  but begg'd his Pardon , telling him , my young Apprehension cou'd not conceive such Confusion wou'd follow .


 Well , return'd my Father , I have Reason to believe you will never be guilty of such Inadvertencies again , therefore I freely pardon you  but for the future you must go to School by yourself , at least , 'till this Matter is blown over , and my Wife and I are thoroughly reconcil'd , if there is a Possibility of it .
Upon saying this , he wav'd his Hand , that I might leave him to himself .


As soon as I got into the Courtyard before the House , my Brother Jack met me .
Ah !
said he , my Mother has given me a Crown , as well as my Father did you .
I am glad o n't , return'd I. I believe that 's a Lye , said my Mother , who was coming out of the Garden , and had staid to listen , as I suppose .
Madam , I have learnt , said I , to speak Truth , whatever may be the Consequence , and in most of the Books we are to learn , we are inform'd our Tongue and Heart shou'd always go together .
Ha !
said she , What , I suppose you are setting up for a young Philosopher !
But I believe you have got a few Sentences by rote , as Parrots have , that you sputter out unseasonably .
I told her , whatever I had learnt , I wou'd take care never to say any thing to offend her .
No , said she , you will always be an Offence to  me , silent , or speaking .
I told her I was very sorry for ` t , and went back again , with the Tears running down my Cheeks , intending to go up into the Room where I lay , but was met by my Father , who seeing the Tears trickling down my Face , ask'd me hastily the Reason of my Grief ?
I told him , Nothing .


Come , said he , you know I will have the Truth , therefore tell me without Delay .
I then , finding he wou'd be satisfy'd , told all that had pass'd between my Mother and me , tho ' in as tender Terms as I cou'd .
When my Father had heard me out , he seem'd very much concern'd , and making a long Pause , at last cry'd , Well , I will have a Remedy !
And to-morrow , continu'd he , you shall go to your Uncle 's , who desires to see you , where you shall remain till the Time of your Breaking-up is over .


The next Morning I had Orders to prepare for my Journey .
When I was ready to get on Horseback , I waited on my Father , who bid me go to my Mother and take my Leave of her .
I went , but I must confess very unwillingly .
When I came to her Dressing-Room , I kneel'd down as usual , upon which she said hastily , Bless you !
Bless you !
which I  understood , by her Manner of speaking , was Dammee !
Dammee !


I am come , Madam , said I , to take my Leave of you , by my Father 's Command .
Why , pray Sir , return'd my Mother , very scornfully , Where are you going ?
To my Uncle 's , Madam , said I. Go then , said she , and a good Riddance .
I made my Honours , and down Stairs I went again to my Father .


Well , Will , said he , what said your Mother to you ?
Did she give you any thing ?
No Sir , said I , she only gave me Leave to go about my Business .
Well , said my Father , you shall never trouble her again , in the Mind I am in .
Go , said he , get on Horseback , I 'll ride before , and conduct you some part of the Way .


When I went into the Stable , I heard my Brother Jack tell the Groom I must not have the Little Horse , for it was his , and he was to go abroad with his Mother : Brother , said I , I must have him , for my Father 's gone before , and will wait for me .
No matter for that , said he , you sha n't have him .
Many Words pass'd between us , and all the while he was endeavouring to get the Bridle out of my Hand , but finding he was not strong enough , he let go .
Just as I had got one  Foot in the Stirrup , with a Prong that he had got out of the Stable , he ran me into the Thigh with one of the Points , the other piercing the Horse in the Flank , who , feeling himself hurt , gave a Spring , and before I cou'd get upon his Back , he dragg'd me with one Foot in the Stirrup out into the Road , and wou'd have certainly beat me to pieces , if my Father coming back , wondering at my Delay , had not stop'd him .
The Servant told him I was certainly wounded , for there were Streams of Blood upon the Ground : Examining my Hurt , they found my Boot was full of Blood .
I was carry'd in again  tho ' with Loss of Blood , the Violence of the Fall , together with the Dragging of the Horse , I was deprived of my Senses for some time .


A Surgeon was immediately sent for  yet my Father was not presently inform'd how I came by the Hurt : But when he knew the Truth of it , he was so very much provok'd , that just that Instant meeting with my Brother Jack coming up Stairs , he kick'd him down again , and in the Fall he broke his Arm .
I mention these little Circumstances , only as they were the Occasion of [ ... ] - right Breach in the Family .


 When the Surgeon came , he inform'd us there was no Danger but Loss of Blood  and , with a great many hard Words , told 'em what a narrow Escape I had , for if it had been an Inch higher , and touch'd such and such a Thing , all the World cou'd not have sav'd my Life to be sure .


When he had made an end of dressing my Wound , he went to the Assistance of my Brother .
The Servants had taken him up , and brought him into the same Room where I was , for our Beds were together .
I must own the Sight of him , instead of moving my Pity , stirr'd my Indignation , and I was inwardly satisfy'd with my Father 's just Revenge .
But while they were setting his Arm , my Mother came among us ( alarm'd it seems with his Cries ) like one of the Furies , with her Hair about her Ears , out of her Dressing-Room , not having been acquainted with the Matter thro ' the Confusion of the Family .
She cast many furious Eyes towards me , and I believe , if she had not been prevented by my Father , had made me feel the Effects of her Indignation .
Madam , said he , I am sorry for the Accident that has happen'd to your Son , not but he deserves it for his young wicked Intention , tho ' I do n't  doubt but he was instigated by his Mother : By me , thou barbarous Wretch !
said she .
- You are sorry for the Accident !
What Accident ?
Did not you do it for the Purpose ?
with an Intention to break his Neck I suppose : But I 'll be reveng'd on your young Darling , with all his Learning !
Upon saying that she rush'd upon me in spite of 'em , and seiz'd violently upon me , endeavouring to tear me out of the Bed , notwithstanding my weak Condition .
But my Father laid hold of her , and with a Pull , swung her to the farther end of the Room .
Now , Madam , said he , since I see the Inveteracy of your Malice , and having broke the Bonds of Duty , Love , and Tenderness , I 'll make you feel the Power of a Husband  you shall be close confin'd to your Apartment , never once to converse with Me , or Mine .
You shall want nothing , but your Liberty , where you will have Time enough to reflect upon your Conduct , and what it is to injure a Husband by your violent Proceedings .
So saying , he seiz'd upon her , maugre her Strugglings , carry'd her to the Nursery , and lock'd her in : The Reason of his putting her there , was , as he said afterwards , to prevent her making any Attempts to get out of the Windows , being there were  Bars fix'd for fear of any Accident among us , when we were under the Nurse 's Care .


Notwithstanding her Violence of Temper , she had certainly ( at least in every Body 's Opinion ) a tender Regard for my Father  and if he did not return it , he gave her no Cause to complain .
He had too much Humanity to use any one ill , much less a Wife .
I have often heard him say , While my Wife continues her Good-humour to me , she shall never find me in the least to blame in my Conduct to her  but whenever that alters , I shall have so much Regard to myself , to be easy .


During my Illness , my Father was hardly ever from me .
I did not think it was proper for one of my Years to ask him any Questions concerning his Matrimonial Warfare  but as he was sitting upon my Bed , about the fifth Day of my Illness , my Mother 's Maid brought him a Letter , which my Father perus'd , then read it to me , as follows :


SIR ,


I AM sensible the Serenity of Temper you .
have often promis'd to yourself , if any Breach should happen between us , gives you very great  Satisfaction , whatever Uneasiness I feel : But , as I have Cause to believe the Burden will be weightier , if you will not allow me one Favour , which I am almost assur'd you will comply with , that is , to have the Company of my hurt Son in my Confinement , besides Maternal Affections , I believe there is another Motive which convinces me I shall not be deny'd , you will get rid of an Object which can not but be ungrateful to you , because it belongs to One who formerly thought it her chiefest Happiness to be call'd


Yours .


Confinement , I find , said my Father , is a good Mortifier  but I shall very willingly comply with her Request , upon your Account , for I ca n't suppose it is very pleasing to you , to have always before your Eyes the Cause of your Pain and Illness .
Sir , said I , there is no Motive more prevalent with me , than the Satisfaction of my Mother  besides , I hope I have it not in my Nature to bear Malice , therefore I have long since forgiven my Brother , imagining it to be only the Heat of Passion , and Want of Years .
My Child , said my Father , your Years are the  same , both in your Thirteenth  and yet I am convinc'd he has not the Consideration that thou hast , which I am pleas'd with , not for his Want of Understanding , but that thine seems to exceed thy Years : Pray Heaven continue it !
Sir , said I , 't is all I ask , the Blessing of Heaven and You  in having them , I shall want nothing  but , possess'd with all the Gifts of Fortune , wanting them , I shall be poor indeed !
My Boy ( said my Father , and kiss'd me ) once more Heaven bless thee !
Grant that I may be able to provide for thee according to my Inclination !


By this time the Maid , who had retir'd while my Father was perusing the Letter , came in to expect an Answer .
Tell your Mistress , said my Father , I shall comply with her Request , as I shall to all others that are reasonable .
Upon this Answer , the Maid went out , and my Father gave immediate Orders to remove the Boy : Then , with a gentle Press by the Hand , took his Leave of me .
I must own I was very much delighted at his Expressions of Kindness to me , being it was what I never receiv'd from him before : 'T is true , he never us'd me harshly , but he did not seem to me to have the least Regard , or playing and toying with Children ,  as I have known Parents do  his Manner of Behaviour to me before , begot Respect in me  it was enough if he did but look at me , to make me observe him  tho ' I ca n't fansy it is a proper Carriage from a Parent to a Child , neither the way to beget Obedience  there is a kind of Indulgence to the harmless Follies of Children , that insensibly wins the Affections of the Child .
I remember my own Brother , that was one Year elder than me , never car'd to come in my Father 's Sight , which proceeded from his stiff Behaviour to us .
But I am not laying down Rules or Examples between Parents and Children , tho ' really I think some Parents want as much Instruction that way as their Children .
Tho ' I am well-assur'd my Father had a tender Regard for his , notwithstanding his rigid Behaviour , for he punish'd severely for Faults openly , and , as I found afterwards , rewarded 'em secretly when they did well : But my Readers may with Reason say , this is but little to the Purpose .


In the next Visit my Father made me , he told me he fansy'd my Mother had a great mind to be making her Peace  but , added he , Will , I 'll take care , if it comes to that , you shall be included in the Treaty .
I told  him I should be pleas'd , let it go which way it wou'd , if he wou'd be so .
I have receiv'd another Letter since Morning , said he , with her Desire to speak with me  in the Evening I shall comply with her Request  and the Result of our Conference thou shalt know tomorrow Morning  for , added he , it will be late before I can go to her , for I expect your Schoolmaster this Evening , who is to stay all Night on purpose to see you , as he sends me Word .
And , accordingly , before Night , the good old Man came to condole with me , and in some sort to chide me , in neglecting to tell him of my Brother 's Want of Learning : However , said he , I forgive you , and have prevail'd on your Father that I may have you again  for I should be much concern'd to lose the Flower of my Flock  as he was pleas'd to call me : As for your Brother Jack , added he , I have advis'd with your Father , to prevail on your Mother to put him out to some creditable Trade , and not longer to lose his Time in fruitless Endeavours to learn what he can never attain to  for , continu'd he , I have just now been examining him in the Garden ( for as he had the Use of his Legs , he cou'd go any where ) but I am in the utmost Confusion to find him such a Dunce , and  that I cou'd be so long impos'd on between you .


I begg'd my Master to mention my Folly no more , for I assur'd him it was Want of Thought , and Tenderness to him , that occasion'd the Deceit  I had sufficiently repented of it , and if it was to come over again , wou'd sooner die than be guilty of any such Proceedings .
I added , It was the greatest Grief I ever did , or ever shou'd feel , that from so trivial a thing , as I thought , such Difference shou'd be created between my Father and Mother .
Rest contented , reply'd my Master : Thy Mother-in-law has prov'd what I always thought her , a turbulent-spirited Woman , only she had Art enough to hide it so long from your Father .
Indeed her first Husband , Sir Charles , many Years ago hinted some such thing to me .
I am pleas'd she has declar'd herself upon so slight an Occasion , that your good Father may be arm'd in time against her Contrivances  for I am apt to believe , even her Affection to him is only counterfeited , and once Women can counterfeit Love , I give 'em lost to all virtuous Principles  their Endearments are the worst of Crimes , and the greatest Affront they can put upon a Man .
I have known  some Women who have prov'd false to their Husband 's Bed , yet have carry'd it with such a Tenderness and Regard to them , that if the World had not been convinc'd of their Baseness , ` twere enough to call Truth a Lyar .


I interrupted my Master , by telling him I thought there was no Grounds even for Suspicion of any such thing concerning my Mother .
I hope so too , reply'd my School-master .


After some other Discourse of the Weaknesses of Women , he left me to my own Thoughts , but I must own they were not very pleasing ones .
I began to consider my Condition .
If my Mother prov'd an ill Woman , as I had some reason to suspect from the Hints and Discourses of my Master , I shou'd certainly suffer in the end  for if my Father was reconcil'd to her , through her Cunning , I did not doubt but she would improve it , and make me the Butt of her Resentment  and , notwithstanding my Father 's good Sense , and Knowledge of the World , there was not an Impossibility but he might fall into the Snares of a subtle designing Woman : The Thought of this spread a melancholy Cloud over my Face , which was perceiv'd by my Father , who enter'd in the midst of my Cogitations .


 How now , Will , said he , does thy Wound pain thee , that thou look ` st with such a sorrowful Countenance ?
No , Sir , said I , I was only enter'd into thinking of what may happen for the future , and the Fear of losing your Kindness , made me sad .
Well , said he , as I am assur'd from your Behaviour , that will never happen , I hope your Concern will cease .
I told you ( continu'd my Father ) when I parted with you last , that I wou'd not let thee know the Result of the Interview till the Morning  but as we are reconcil'd , I cou'd not so long delay thee thy Part of the Satisfaction .
To-morrow in the Morning thy Mother , thy Master , and all of us , are to come into thy Room to Breakfast , where I hope all Animosities will cease .
On my Side , Sir , said I , they were never begun , nor ever shall , without my Temper and Inclination shou'd be inverted .
I believe there 's no Danger of that , reply'd my Father  and so , my good Boy , Good-night .


As soon as my Father was gone , my Master came in again : Billy , said he , I cou'd not go to Bed without seeing you , to desire , since your Father and Mother are reconcil'd , to take no manner of Notice of the Discourse you and I had together concerning her .
If  told him , without any Caution , it shou'd have been as secret as if no one had known it but himself  I believe it , said he , yet I thought Caution might have been necessary  and so bid me Good-night .


When I was once more left alone , Reflexion began to be stronger than before , and weighing , according to my young Judgment , the Affairs and Condition of the Family , thought verily my Circumstances wou'd suffer by it .
I was in the midst of a thousand confus'd ungrateful Thoughts , when the Surgeon came in to dress me , and viewing my Wound , was very much surpriz'd to see it look so angry : I am afraid , young Gentleman , said he , you have met with something to-day that makes you uneasy , or have tasted something that you shou'd not have done , which occasions this Alteration in your Hurt .
Pray , said he , what have you had to eat today ?
When I inform'd him , That , said he , cou'd never hurt you  the Alteration I perceive must proceed from some Disturbance of Mind , and I value my Patient so much , that I must know the Cause , that I may speak to your Father to have it remedy'd .
I found him so pressing , that I was oblig'd to tell him Some little Accidents in the Family had given  me some Uneasiness , which were now reconcil'd , and wou'd soon be forgot .
Yes , said he , I hear your Father and Mother are come to an Agreement , and I ca n't say I am over well pleas'd at it , for if she does not play him , and all of you , some Trick , I 'll be hang'd  I have Reasons best known to myself for what I say .


I am sorry , said I , you have any secret Reason to suspect my Mother 's future Conduct  and without you disclose 'em to me , I shall imagine they are Chimaeras of your own Brain , that flow from your too much Drinking ( for he was fam'd for a great To [ ... ] er ) or otherwise from her refusing you the Cure of my Brother Jack  for when my Mother-in-law heard he was my Surgeon , her Resentment run so high , that she wou'd not employ him .


Nothing of all this , I can assure you , return'd the Surgeon  but I shall say no more at present , 'till I have observ'd her future Behaviour , and if she deserves it , I shall disclose some things that will be very surprizing [ ... ] o all of you .
I wish , said I , you wou'd ei [ ... ] her have mention'd nothing of it now , or wou'd resolve to tell me what it is you know , or I fear , if you leave me in doubt , it will not at all help me in the Cure .


 I am sorry , return'd the Surgeon , I have inadvertently said any thing to make you uneasy  but , to reconcile you to your Rest tonight , be assur'd , whenever I disclose it , ` twill help you rather than injure you  and tho ' I have many Follies , I have Discretion enough to keep this a Secret , till it shall prove advantageous to your Father and you .


I us'd many Arguments to persuade him to let me know this great Secret , but all to no purpose  so after he had dress'd me , he left me with more Cause of Uneasiness than I had before , which I too plainly shew'd by my Countenance .
The Maid who attended me in my Illness , who was one that liv'd with my Mother in her Life-time , and had the bringing of me up , told me I should not be uneasy at what the Surgeon said , he was nothing but a meer Rattle , for it was his usual way to make People imagine he knew something concerning their Affairs , and when he came to be strictly examin'd , deny'd it all , or made an Excuse that he suppos'd he was drunk when he said so .


What the Maid said seem'd probable enough  yet I cou'd not put it out of my Head , that notwithstanding his Character , there was something in his Knowledge concerning our Family .


 The Thought of this , with other Affairs , kept me from sleeping many Hours , and when I did , it was broken , and interrupted with frightful Dreams .
In one , I thought my Mother invited my Father and me to walk with her in a Garden , at the End there was a prodigious high Mountain , which we ascended with much Difficulty , and when we had gain'd the Summit , my Mother gave my Father a Push down the Brow of the Mountain , on the other Side , where my troubled Fancy gave him for lost .
She then flew towards me , and violently thrust me down the same way we came up  I thought I fell to the Bottom much bruis'd , as also scratch'd by Brambles and Stones that lay in my way , that the Pain I felt awak'd me .
I told my Dream to the Maid that sat up with me  she reply'd , it was nothing but a disturb'd Fancy with the Pain of my Hurt , and begg'd I wou'd compose myself to Sleep , which after some time I did .


I reassum'd my Dream where I left off .
My sleeping Imagination represented my Mother on the Brow of the Hill , hurling Stones and Clods of Earth at me , yet I thought none of 'em came near me to do me any Damage  and as she was endeavouring  to come down the Hill , in order , as I thought , to hurt me , she vanish'd away , but I cou'd not perceive which way she went .
Upon the Instant I awoke , in a very great Agony , when I told the Maid the Cause of my Uneasiness  she laugh'd at me , and said 't was only form'd from my uneasy Thoughts .
Whatever she cou'd say to me upon the Invalidity of Dreams , I cou'd not put this out of my Head , nor go to sleep again  and the rest of our Discourse till Morning was Stories of Dreams proving true , which I had oft heard repeated , but she call'd those things Visions  I would have persuaded her mine was such , but she laugh'd me out of it , or at least I had Discretion enough to say no more to her concerning it , whatever were my Thoughts about it .


When the Time of Breakfast came , my Father enter'd the Room , and ask'd me how I had rested last Night  the Maid answer'd for me , that I had been disturb'd by frightful Dreams  my Father return'd , he had none of the best  but , continu'd he , Dreams were the only Work of a disturb'd Fancy , and were as far from Truth , as the Glow-Worm 's dim Shine from Light and Heat  the Creatures of the drowsy Brain .


 But , Sir , said I , many have been forewarn'd by Dreams of Accidents that have happen'd to 'em  witness Calphurnia 's Dream of the Butchery of Caesar , and Ceasar 's Dream before he overcame Pompey , or that mention'd by Valerius Maximus of the two Arcadians * .
Nothing , Child , reply'd my Father ,  but the Fancy of Poets and Historians , and I hope you have Understanding enough to slight 'em  't is nothing but superstitious Opinion that gives any Credit to Dreams and Omens  but , continu'd he , I wou'd have thee put on a more pleasing Countenance , for thy Mother , Brother , and I , are coming presently to Breakfast with thee , in order for a Reconciliation on all Hands , and if she perceives that Cloud upon thy Face , she will be apt to conjecture her Presence is irksome to thee .
I reply'd , I would do my Endeavour to be compos'd , as indeed I had Reason  but I told him , I wou'd ever have my Face the Index of my Heart , for I shou'd find it a very hard Task to counterfeit any Passion .
Well , said my Father , smiling , we shall be with you presently , and went out .


When he was gone , I resolv'd to rise , and put on my Gown , in order to receive such a Visit decently , tho ' the Maid wou'd have dissuaded me .
I was but just dress'd , and set down in mv Chair ( for I was not able to stand ) when my Father , Mother , and her Son , enter'd  the Chamber .
As soon as my Mother came in , she said to my Father , he had inform'd her I had kept my Bed : Indeed , my Dear , return'd my Father , I am something surpriz'd , for I left him in Bed not a Quarter of an Hour ago .
I answer'd , that I thought it my Duty to come as near my Knees as I cou'd , and I hop'd my Mother wou'd pardon the Posture I was in  but I threw an humble Heart at her Feet , and hop'd she wou'd give me her Blessing with her Pardon .
Heaven bless thee ( said she ) my Dear  and for Pardon , 't is I ought to ask that of thee , who have really offended  but acknowledging a Fault is the Way to Repentance , and all my Hope is we shall bury in Oblivion past Transactions .
She then brought my Brother forward , who told me with a cloudy Countenance , He begg'd my Pardon , and wou'd do so no more .
I told him I had long since learnt to forget every thing , for Forgiveness was not a Word became a Child 's Mouth .
We all kiss'd round .


When our mutual Caresses were over , I cou'd perceive Tears of Joy stand in my Father 's Eyes for this our Reconciliation , and I imagin'd my Mother 's Countenance look'd with a pleasing Contentment i n't .
But alas !
 't is hard to know the Heart of Woman !
A fair Face , with a smiling Countenance , often harbour Rancour in the Soul  and as they study to set off their Features , they also study to make their Face a Mask to their Mind .


They staid with me some time , nor perhaps had gone so soon , if Word had not been brought in , that the Surgeon was come to dress me .
My Mother begg'd Leave to retire , telling me she had not Courage enough to support the Sight of my Hurt  so my Father led her out , and my Brother follow'd 'em .


Immediately after the Surgeon came in , Well , said he , I find all 's right again  I met your Father leading your Mother through the Hall , as if he had just begun to court her .
I wish it may hold on her Side .
I hope there is no Fear of it , said I , but I can assure you , what you hinted to me Yesterday , has given me a great deal of Uneasiness .


Think o n't no more , return'd the Surgeon , think o n't no more , Master  I am very sorry I mention'd any thing to you , and beg you wou'd speak of it no more .
How , said I !
do you endeavour to calumniate Persons out of a Whim of your Brain , and not expect  to be call'd to an Account for it ?
I have been inform'd of your Temper , or rather the Villainy of your opprobrious Tongue , and can farther assure you , that the chimerical Aspersions you wou'd endeavour to fix upon my Mother-in-law , shall not go unpunish'd , if my Father retains his usual Spirit , unless you this Moment tell the Truth , and either make out what you wou'd insinuate , or clear her by asking Pardon for the Injury you wou'd have done her .


The Surgeon seem'd very much in Confusion during my Speech to him , which I observing , did not doubt but it was , as the Maid said , his constant Custom to calumniate every Body .


I see , said I , by the Confusion in your Countenance , you seem'd to confess your Error  I 'll give you my Word to mention what has past between you and I to no one , on condition , for the future , you 'll leave off that vile Custom of aspersing the Characters of every Body you know  for it may prove of dangerous Consequence to other People , as well as yourself , and it 's a Crime neither becoming a Christian , or a Man .


Sir , return'd the Surgeon , I must own to you , you have open'd my Eyes more by your  Discourse , than all that I have ever had said to me upon the like Occasion , and the vile Trick has crept upon me through Custom , for come where you will , even all Sexes , Ages , and Degrees , are fond of hearing a little Scandal , and willing to know the Frailties of their Neighbours , not considering , the Parasite , to the next Company , makes as free with the last he came from  and I must own the Success I have met with , or indeed the Willingness of my Hearers , have often put me upon inventing Stories to please my Patients and their Families .
But I now repent , and am resolv'd never to be guilty of the like again , and my Repentance is owing to your Advice .
After this he ran on with many Encomiums of the Ripeness of my Understanding , and a long Rigmerole of nothing to the Purpose : But , said he , concerning your Mother , I know something that I am sure wou'd cause great Uneasiness in the Family  yet I beg you wou'd not insist upon knowing any thing farther , for the Character I perceive I have got in the World , wou'd fly in my Face , and spoil my Evidence , till I can plainly prove what I say , which if I ever see there is a Necessity for it , I can in a few Days bring to pass .
I strove many ways  to get something out of him , but it prov'd to no purpose , yet I verily believ'd he knew somewhat against the Reputation of my Mother-in-law .


When he was gone , I began to lose myself in confus'd Thoughts and Notions , as I had formerly done , which gave me vail Uneasiness , that led me to imagine my Mother 's Conduct to my Father and me all an Artifice  this put me upon a Resolution of observing nicely her Carriage , that I might be able to form my Behaviour afterwards .


We liv'd very lovingly together a whole Year , and I began to bury all my Fears , imagining still the Surgeon had wrongfully aspers'd my Mother : Therefore I apply'd myself hard to my Studies with my Tutor , for since the first Falling out , my Father wou'd not let us go to School any more , but provided a Tutor for us in the House  tho ' he cou'd make nothing of my Brother John , for he was resolv'd to remain a Dunce , which did not a little grieve both my Father and Mother , but there was no Remedy .
Therefore John was resolv'd for behind the Counter .
The Time was fix'd to put him Apprentice to a Mercer , and me to the University .
I cou'd easily perceive this Resolution ,  tho ' both Father and Mother-in-law seem'd to consent to it , was a great Grief to my Mother , and in a few Days I was confirm'd i n't .


At the End of our Garden was a large Summer-House , which I frequently made my Place of Study  having just made an end of Claudian , I was going into the House to fetch another Book , but perceiving my Mother at the End of one of the Walks , in order , as I suppos'd , to come into the Summer-House , I step'd behind it , that I might not meet her .
When she came near me , I cou'd perceive by her Countenance she was mightily disturb'd : She staid in the Walk for her Maid , a few Minutes  when she came to her , they both went up into the Summer-House  I found they were deep in Discourse , therefore must own I had Curiosity enough to listen awhile  but they spoke so low , that I cou'd only hear now and then a Word , but yet enough to pick out it concern'd my Brother John and my Self .


I had left my Claudian above in the Window of the Summer-House , which my Mother perceiving , took it up .
Ha !
said she , this , I suppose , is some of the Jackanapes 's Books !
Ay , 't is Latin , I believe , 't is his .
 Well , I 'll take care he shall have Reading enough , I 'll warrant him .
And then spoke so low , that I cou'd not hear the rest .
I listen'd farther , but whether they mistrusted somebody was near 'em , or they were consulting something that was wicked , I ca n't tell , but they spoke so low , that I cou'd not hear any thing but a continual Humming between 'em .


I went to my Study , but had no Inclination to read  my Head run too much upon what I had heard , and what I suggested  the more I thought , the more Reason I had to be uneasy .
I sent a Servant to the Summer-House for the Book I had forgot  when he return'd , I ask'd him if there was any body in the Summer-House  he answer'd , There was my Lady , and Mrs. Betty in close Conference  and farther added , they look'd upon him with damn'd four Countenances for disturbing 'em , as he suppos'd .


I found every thing concurr'd with my Thoughts , which added very much to my discontented Mind .
When my Tutor came in , he perceiv'd by my Looks my Spirits were discompos'd , and pressing me to know the Reason , I told him I was not very well .
At Supper ( for my Tutor being a Gentleman of  a good Family , that had suffer'd many Misfortunes in the World , my Father allow'd him the Privilege of eating with us ) he desir'd my Father to order me a little Physick , for I had complain'd I was indispos'd .
My Father press'd me to take it on the next Morning , but I told him it was nothing but too much Reading , and I shou'd be well presently  but if I found myself worse , I wou'd take Physic in a Day or two .
Ay , says my Mother , whether you are better or no , you ought to take Physic this Spring-time , and Johnny shall take some along with you .
So it was agreed in two Days to take it , and Word was sent to the Apothecary 's accordingly  tho ' I resolv'd with myself not to take any , as believing I wanted none , mine being an Illness of the Mind .
When the Time came , the Doses were sent us , but I convey'd mine away without taking it .


At Dinner , my Mother seem'd , as I thought , to look thro ' me , and ask'd me many Questions concerning the Operation .
I answer'd her as I thought proper .
As she ask'd her Maid ( who always waited on her alone ) for a Glass of Wine , I observ'd she look'd upon her with an odd sort of a Countenance  the Maid seem'd to return her another  Look , which plainly told me there was a Meaning between 'em .
But the Discourse was turn'd on another Subject , as being not altogether so proper at Dinner  yet every now and then my Mother wou'd come out with - Sure , Billy , you did not take your Physic !
I confidently told her I did , tho ' I abhor a Lye .
Many odd Looks pass'd every Moment between the Mistress and the Maid during Dinner .
When it was ended , they both went up into her Dressing-Room  I cou'd not help following 'em with my Eyes , and secretly wish'd I cou'd have been near enough to hear their Conversation  but as that could not be , I was oblig'd to be contented without it .


In a little time my Mother came down again  after some short Stay in the Dining-Room , my Father , Mother , Brother John , and I , as usual , went to walk in the Garden : John , as was his Custom , ran scampering before , and plaid many of his childish Tricks .
Why , Billy , said my Father , why do n't you do as your Brother Jacky does , ` twill make you strong and lusty  all Study will spoil you , weaken your Constitution , ay , and impair your Health .
So it will reply'd my good Mother , I do n't think he has  a good State of Health , for he seems to me as if he were in a Consumption  observe how pale he looks : Ay , but return'd my Father , that may be his Physic .
I do n't know but it may , says she  but , if I might advise , he shou'd take more in a few Days , as well as Jacky , for I am assur'd ` twill do 'em good : Nay , further , my Dear ( said she to my Father ) I intend to see Billy take his , for it runs in my Head he made away that he was to take in the Morning , for I know he hates Physic .
I endeavour'd to convince her of the contrary , which she seem'd to believe .


The Time drew near that we were to take Physic again , and I was putting my Invention on the Stretch how to avoid it , for I found she had resolv'd to be by when we were to take it , which accordingly happen'd .
When she gave me mine , I let it slip out of my Hand upon the Ground  this put her into such a Passion , that she gave me a Box on the Ear  but in a little time after she begg'd my Pardon , kiss'd me , put her Hand to her Purse , and gave me half a Guinea , desiring I wou'd forget it  I promis'd her I wou'd , tho ' I really cou'd not .


 When my Father came in , she told him in a merry Manner , I was resolv'd not to take any Physic , for the young Rogue , said she , let it slip through his Fingers , which convinces me he play'd the same Trick with that the other Morning .
I told my Father it was purely Accident .
Well , well , Billy , said my Mother-in-law , let it be what it will , we shall take care of the next , I warrant you .
I do n't know when that can be , my Dear , said my Father , for he must go to his Uncle 's this Afternoon , who begs to see him , and I ca n't tell when he will return .
My Mother made no Answer to it , but seem'd to be in much Confusion .


I was very well pleas'd to go to my Uncle 's , not only to get rid of my Mother 's Physic , but to see him , who was more indulgent to me than my own Father , and it was thought by every one that I shou'd be his Heir , for he was an old Batchelor , and never intended to marry .


While I was in my Study , pleasing myself with the Thoughts of going to my Uncle 's , my Father came in to me .
Billy , said he , thy Mother has convinc'd me 't is necessary you shou'd take Physic before you go , so that I have sent an Excuse to your Uncle , and let  him know you will wait on him in two or three Days at farthest .
I was confounded at what he said , yet I answer'd him , What he pleas'd .
I cou'd not tell him what I thought of my Mother , and that I believ'd she intended to give me something to injure me , for as it cou'd not be prov'd , it wou'd look only like Fear , or Malice  so I e ` en set myself to think how to avoid it .


At last I thought to get a Phial , the same Size of that she brought me in the Morning , and fill it with something near the Colour , which seem'd to me to be a dark Brown .
But then the Difficulty wou'd be , how to put the Change upon her .
In the Morning I had prepar'd my Phial , and when my Mother was going to pour it into a Glass for me to drink , I begg'd she wou'd be pleas'd to let me drink it out of the Phial , for the Sight of it in a Glass turn'd my Stomach against it .
Ay , my Dear , with all my Heart  any how , so thou dost but take it , reply'd my good Mother .
When I had got it , I put the Change upon her , and drank what I had prepar'd .
My Mother seem'd mightily pleas'd , taking her Leave of me with a It 's a good Child  keep thyself warm , my Dear .
When she was gone , I went into my Study ,  and began to examine the Bottle my Mother wou'd have had me taken .
I found it had no ill Smell  but as I had not any Inclination to taste it , I had Thoughts of trying the Experiment upon some dumb Creature , but cou'd not find in my Heart to be so cruel , yet had a vast Inclination to know its Effects .
At last I resolv'd to give it to a Greyhound Bitch , whose Surliness had given me Occasion enough not to have any great Compassion for her .
I did not think it proper to do it in the House , so took my Opportunity to wheedle her into the Stable , when no one was there , but going to open her Jaws to pour it into her Mouth , she flew at me , and ran away .
In the Surprize , I let the Phial fall out of my Hand , which broke with the Fall .
I was very uneasy I cou'd not make Proof of what I design'd , for I knew it wou'd be to no purpose to discover my Suspicions only .


When Dinner-time came I was call'd down , and observ'd the Confusion of Faces were increas'd between the Mistress and the Maid , insomuch that my Father cou'd not help taking Notice of it .
Pray , my Dear , what has Betty ( said my Father ) done , for you look at her as if she had committed some  great Crime ?
What , I warrant , she has not wash'd your Headcloaths to please you , or some such Trifle .
She knows what she has done , said my Mother-in-law , well enough  but I do n't think it worth my While to be angry about it .
Well , but do n't give her such sour Look then ( return'd my Father ) but pardon her , you 'll spoil her Stomach to her Dinner , Child .
My Father went on in a jocose manner all Dinner-time , yet notwithstanding now and then Looks past between 'em , that no body cou'd interpret but myself , or at least I thought I cou'd .
I see , my Dear , cry'd my Father , the Peace is not made up between you  give me Leave to be the Judge in this Matter  but first let me know the Case : Come , Betty , continu'd my Father , you seem to be the Offender , confess your Crime , and that 's the Way to find Pardon the sooner .
Why , Sir , return'd the Maid , I have forgot to wash my Mistress 's Lac'd Pinners , for which she has been angry with me all this Morning .
And is this the full and whole History of her Crime , my Dear , said my Father to my Mother-in-law ?
Yes , return'd the good Woman .
Why then I proceed to Judgment , said my Father .


 You , Mrs. Betty , not having the Fear of God before your Eyes , c. ( here my Father ran on with the whole Sentence that a Judge repeats to one arraign'd for Murder , and during the time of Speaking , I observ'd Betty to be very much startled ) shall for your Punishment , before you sleep , wash and starch these same Headcloaths , and in so doing , it shall remain as a sufficient Punishment for your heinous Crime , tho ' you know you deserve much worse  and be sure for the future , you are never guilty of the like .
Betty promis'd , in a great deal of Confusion , to mend for the future .


The next Day was design'd for me to wait on my Uncle , and tho ' I had a great Desire to go , yet I was not satisfy'd  I was in various Minds  sometimes I fully intended to inform my Father with my Suspicions , with all the Circumstances and Grounds for ` t .
But then again , I consider'd my Suspicions might strengthen my Opinion , and they might be really innocent .
While I was wrapt in my Cogitations , I observ'd my Mother and her Maid were going into the Garden , and I did not doubt but they wou'd get into the Summer House , in order to another Conference .
I slipt into the Garden , and got to my Hiding-Place  behind the Jessamine-Hedge , before they came .
As soon as they were up the Stairs of the Summer-House , my Mother ask'd her Maid if she were assur'd there was no one in the Garden  she told her , No , nor none cou'd come in but she cou'd perceive 'em from the Window where she sat .


What can be the Meaning , said my Mother , that this devilish Brat does not feel the Effects of what he has taken ?
I am afraid either the Apothecary , or you , have betray'd me .
Madam , return'd the Maid , I can assure you we are both innocent of your Suspicion : As for his Part , he does not know who , or what it 's for : Yet , Madam , I do n't doubt but you 'll be surpris'd at what I am going to say to you .


I wou'd not , continu'd Betty , be guilty of what before Dinner I made no Scruple of , for the whole World .
If you had observ'd my Countenance , while my Master was judging my fictitious Crime , with the formal Introductions in Cases of Murder , you might have read my Guilt in my Face .
I am assur'd Master Billy observ'd me most heedfully , and , to my thinking , his Eyes told me he knew my real Crime in the Intention .
I was some time before I cou'd recover my  Confusion , and I then weigh'd in the Scales of Justice , the Reason of your Resentment [ ... ] o him , and found the Intention to be the utmost Wickedness , and I thank'd my God our [ ... ] nhuman Designs had not taken effect .
You see Heaven is displeas'd , and shews the Abhorrence of the Fact , by hindring the Effect .
I look'd in his Face during the latter Part of Dinner , and wonder'd how we cou'd plot to take away the Life of so mucn Innocence , that never injur'd us .
I thank Heaven , my Eyes are open'd , nor even the worst of Torments shou'd make me once think of such a Crime .
Therefore let me beg of you , my dear Mistress , to forget it , bury even the Thought of it : Consider the Crime  Murder is the greatest Sin against God  't is even striking at him , by murdering his Image .
Let my Repentance be as the Alarm to yours .
I am sure , if you will give yourself time to think , your Conscience must awake , and teach you to abhor the Crime .
No one knows our wicked Intention , but all-seeing Heaven , which will pardon us on a sincere Repentance .
We are oblig'd to keep each other 's Counsel  therefore let me conjure you , by the Love you ought to owe your Husband !
by your Duty to Heaven !
which I  shou'd have mention'd first  by the Worth of your eternal Soul !
by the Affection you ought to owe your Children !
for those of your Husbands must be yours , since you are but One : Consider what it is to have a clear and a quiet Conscience , 't is the only Happiness on this side the Grave , 't is that which sweetens all the Ills of Life  the Innocent will be happy , let Fortune empty her Quiver of Malice on 'em .
If the Weight of this will have no Consideration with you , think on the Welfare of this World , if you can lull to sleep your Conscience .
Murder has many Tongues to speak , even things inanimate have divulg'd the Guilty  and when once reveal'd , think on the Punishment that must follow .
I beg , Madam , take some little time to ruminate on what I have said , before you answer me  weigh it well , for it is of the last Importance  for tho ' a poor , ignorant , weak Woman , you 'll find what I utter to be the Oracle of Heaven .


Here Betty paus'd , as expecting an Answer  and during the Interval of Speech , the Agonies I felt at the intended Wickedness , were next to Death itself .
After about a Minute 's Silence , my Mother spoke as follows .


 Betty , Words can hardly speak the Torments of my Mind  yet I have this to comfort me , 't is in Repentance to set my Soul at rest , and I do repent from the Bottom of my Heart .
What a Fiend had I entertain'd in my Breast !
How very near the Brink of Hell , his proper Habitation , had he brought me !
Thou wert my Guardian-Angel , that sav'd me from Destruction !
To Heaven and Thee I owe my Thanks .
Now this Fury is gone forth my Bosom , I think , with thee , how it cou'd be possible to harbour such a Hellish Thought against the poor Child  but , now I feel reviving Love , even equal to that of my own Son , I long to embrace and kiss him with a real Mother 's Fondness .


The Joy I felt at this Declaration , had almost made me discover myself , and it was hard to keep my Legs from running to my Mother to accept the long'd - for Blessing  but Reason got the better of my Transport  That told me , I ought to conceal from all the World my Knowledge of the whole Affair .
While I was in my Musing , I cou'd hear Betty say , Madam , my Master 's coming up the Walk , I beg you will compose yourself .
I 'll do what I can , reply'd my Mother-in-law , but no one can imagine what Torments  I feel .
Then sit here , Madam , said Betty , for here it 's dark , and my Master can not perceive your Disorder .
My Mother , as I suppos'd , remov'd to the Place she desir'd her .
Immediately after my Father came in , and ask'd 'em if they had seen me , for they had been searching me all over the House , but cou'd not find me .
My Brother 's Man , said my Father , is waiting for him .
My Mother reply'd I had not been there , but must certainly be in the Study .
No , said my Father , he is not there , neither can I imagine where he can be , and the not finding him makes me very uneasy .


Upon saying this , my Father went up and down the Walks calling me .
When he had left the two Women , Betty cry'd out , I hope in Heaven my Repentance is accepted , and he has not now felt the Effect of the Poison .
You fright me out of my Senses , return'd my Mother  let 's run to seek him .
Away they went .
When I was certain they were out of Sight , I clamber'd over the Wall , and came in the Street way , just as my Mother with her Maid came out of the Garden .
As soon as my Mother met me , she clasp'd me about the Neck , and kiss'd me with as much Transport as if I had been her own Son   which affected me in such a manner , I could not help weeping with Excess of Satisfaction .
What means these Tears , my Child , said my Mother ?
Madam , said I , be not offended , they are Tears of Joy , to see you so kind .
Bless thee !
my dear Boy , return'd my Mother , I hope always to prove so .


When my Father came in , he ask'd me where I had been  I told him , only to take a Walk in the Fields after my Physic .
We thought we had lost you , said my Father , and were sending for the Cryer to cry a great Boy of Fifteen Years of Age ?
But come , continu'd he , mount !
your Uncle 's Man waits for you , and has done this Hour .
Your Things shall be there to-morrow Morning .
I begg'd Leave only to pack up a few Books , and I wou'd wait on him instantly .


As I was in my Study , putting together what I intended to take with me , Betty came up to me .
Well , Sir , said me , how do you find yourself after your Physic ?
Better than was expected this Morning , Betty , said I. I am very glad o n't , reply'd Betty , I now believe you are , said I  but there 's a great Alteration since Morning , and I hope it will continue .
While I said this , I look'd stedfastly in her Face  she observing me , blush'd  very much .
Come , Betty , said I , 't is never too late to repent , Repent , Sir !
reply'd Betty , of what ?
Of doing Ill , I return'd , or even thinking Ill. .
I had but an ill Opinion of you this Morning  but I have Reason to think I have done you Wrong , and I ask you Pardon  be satisfy'd , I can sometimes read Peoples Thoughts .
Why then , said Betty , if it be so , you know you have no Reason to ask my Pardon , for I am sure you never offended me .
But if I have ever offended you , I ask you , and Heaven , Pardon , and I hope I shall obtain both .
Be assur'd you will , I reply'd .
She seeing me ready to go down , took her Leave of me , modestly begging leave to kiss me .
As I was going away  Sir , said she , if we both are alive ten Year hence , and I have the Honour to see you , I may make you acquainted with something very extraordinary .
Nothing but what I partly understand already , I return'd  keep in the honest Path you are in , then Heaven will bless you .


I got on Horseback , after taking Leave of the Family , and observ'd Betty in much Confusion  I shook my Head at her , with a Smile , and rid away .


 When I arriv'd at my Uncle 's , which was about fourteen Miles from my Father 's , I was told by the Servants he was gone out a little way , not expecting me so soon  but he wou'd return in a Quarter of an Hour .
During his Stay , a Coach came to the Door with a couple of old Ladies , and a young one about thirteen Years of Age , the beautifullest Creature my Eyes ever beheld : I cou'd not help gazing upon her , with a great deal of Delight .
They came to visit my Uncle , but finding he was gone out , wou'd not stay .
I look'd after the Coach which carry'd this young Angel away , as far as ever I cou'd see , and began to feel a certain Tenderness , which People , I thought , of my Years , had but little Knowledge of .


I was pleasing myself with the charming Idea , when my Uncle came in , who exprest a great deal of Satisfaction to see me .
After the first Civilities were over , I told him there was a Coach with some Ladies to wait upon him , but not meeting with him at home , wou'd not come in .
My Uncle being a merry jocose Man , said to me , Sirrah , you shou'd have done the Duties of my House , and made 'em come in .
But who were they ?
I told him I cou'd not tell .
But the Servant  reply'd , They were my Lady - her Sister and Daughter .
Odso !
you young Dog , return'd my Uncle , there wou'd be a fine Wife , if you had but Money enough  she 's an Heiress , and will be worth Fifty Thousand Pounds .
Well Sir , said I , when I think on Marriage , I must not turn my Thoughts that way .
No !
why so ?
reply'd my Uncle  a Woman with a Fortune is as soon got as one without  and when I die , you do n't know what may happen .


Sir , said I , if I never marry till I wish your Death , I hope to live single a great while .
I believe thee , Will , said my Uncle : But 't is time enough to talk of these things ten Year hence  I wou'd have no Man marry till they are past Twenty , nor Women till past Sixteen .
I wonder , Sir , said I , you never thought of that State !
Why , you young Rogue , so I have , reply'd my Uncle , so much o n't , that I resolve to live single all my Life  and I am of the Opinion , few People marry only to better their Condition .
That 's a little too hard , Sir , said I : Do you imagine no one marries for Love ?
O yes , a great many , reply'd my Uncle  but it does not last long : Lovers have large Stomachs , but are soon cloy'd , they very often surfeit the  first Meal I told him , My Mother , his Sister , I thought , lov'd my Father till the Day of her Death .
She was contented , I believe , reply'd my Uncle .
But come , young Man , this Discourse is a little too wise for one of your Years .
Not at all , said I , Uncle  I hope you will not take it ill , if I declare your Notions of Matrimony wo n't hinder me to try my Fortune , when my Inclination serves , and a good Match shou'd offer .
No , said my Uncle , I hope to see thee wedded to a good Fortune before I die  therefore I intend to carry thee to my Lady S - and there you may grow acquainted with the young Lady  your Age is much the same , and your Correspondence may be continu'd as your Years increase  beside , I wou'd have you have some Place to go to , for it wou'd be hard to have nothing but an old musty Uncle to converse with .
Age does not very well agree with Youth .


Our Conversation lasted much longer upon this Topic  and it might have lasted longer than it did , if Supper had not come in to stop my Uncle 's Mouth .
His Housekeeper sat down at Supper with us , which I thought a little odd  but I soon found how Matters went , and , young as I was , I cou'd perceive  Madam was Mistress of the Family .
She appear'd extremely civil to me , even , as I thought , too civil  for her Behaviour seem'd to say , Observe !
I am Mistress of the House , and 't is to me you are beholden for your Entertainment .


The next Day I cou'd not help hinting to my Uncle , something of his Housekeeper 's Behaviour .
Why , Billy , said my Uncle , this Woman is a good Woman , in her Way , and I shou'd be at a great Loss without her  for , as I have many Servants , and being a single Man , I shou'd be but a scurvy Manager of 'em : Now this Woman , being prudent and discreet , knows how to manage such a Kennel of wild Hounds as I am forc'd to keep , out of State indeed , for I have not Service for 'em half : But a Man of Fortune must live something answerable to it , or he will be despis'd by his Neighbours .
Once a Man has got in that Road , he must not get out of it again .


Sir , said I , I beg your Pardon for being so inquisitive , and , may be , impertinent .
Billy , reply'd my Uncle , you may say and do just what you will here , for I wou'd have you to understand , this House , and all that 's in it , is not only yours when I die , but the  Estate that belongs to it , which is upward of Two Thousand Pounds a Year  and to convince you of it , I design to make my Will forthwith .
I have so much Confidence in you , to believe I shall never have Occasion to alter it .
I beg you , Sir , said I , do n't talk of making of Wills , and Death , 't is a melancholy Subject , and whatever you will be pleas'd to leave me , will not compensate the Grief I shou'd feel for the Loss of so good an Uncle .
Why , you Fool , reply'd my Uncle , I believe you  but I hope a Man is never the nearer Death for talking o n't , or making his Will !


We were interrupted in our Discourse , by a Servant 's giving my Uncle a Letter , which he read to himself , and smil'd .
Here , said my Uncle , read that , there 's a Billet , whose Style may be altogether new to you  't is wrote by a young Lady , and a fine Lady , tho ' dictated by an old one .
I took it , and read as follows :


Mr. IRONFACE ,


WE all think you a good-for-nothing , fusty old Fellow , as indeed all old Batchelors are , which is the only Motive prevails upon us to forgive your being abroad Yesterday ,  when we came to wait upon your Worship .
However , you must not expect Absolution , before you have done Penance , which is , to come and Dine with us to Day , and stay as long as we shall think fit .
Your Compliance shall bespeak some Favour from


Your enraged Judges , MINOS , RHADAMANTHUS , and AEACUS .


A very merry , free Epistle , indeed , Sir , said I. 'T is the Style , said my Uncle , we use in Writing to one another  and if any other Form shou'd pass between us , we shou'd fansy each other offended at something .
But come , Youth , continu'd my Uncle , you must smug up yourself , and go along with me , for this is the Place I intend to bring you acquainted in  for now they have honour'd me with the Title of Knight of the Shire , I am now and then oblig'd to be with some Bottle-Companions , which will not altogether agree with your Age , or Constitution  so that I hope you will like the Company I shall provide for you  and tho ' the One is the Mother , and the Other Aunt to the young Creature I was speaking of , yet they are neither of 'em Forty  the one is a Widow , and  the other an old Maid , if we may call her one at Eight and Thirty  but she has nothing of the Stiffness or Formality of that State , but is as easy and good-humour'd , as if she had lost that weighty Burden , a Maidenhead , twenty Year ago  and , what is more surprising , resolves to die a Maid , except some brawny Rascal does her the Favour to ravish her .
The Widow , and Mother to the young Lady , has been in the State of Widowhood near Fourteen Year , for her Daughter was Posthumous-born  yet , tho ' she is Mistress of a vast Fortune , and consequently been sought by many in Marriage , ( for Money is the Loadstone that draws all the World ) yet she resolves never to change her State .
These Three , with their Family , live as contentedly as any Three in the Universe .
'T is here I go , when I have a mind to be innocently merry , without bringing any Scandal to the Family , because I am an old Fellow .
They have fitted up an Apartment for me in particular , and I very often stay all Night .
Sir , said I , I suppose the Reason why the Widow does not marry again , is the Love she bears to the Memory of her former Husband .
Rather , I believe , the Vexation she receiv'd from him , reply'd my Uncle , hinders  her  for I have heard her often say , he us'd to lead her a damn'd sort of Life  and his Behaviour to her has confirm'd the Sister in the same Mind .
She often declares to me , in her Thoughts , the best of Husbands are but Plagues , which I return by imagining the same thing by the Wives  so we strengthen each other 's Opinion by our Conversation  which is something odd , you 'll say .


But I forget , continu'd my Uncle , that I am talking to a School-Boy all this time .
Sir , I return'd , whatever you say to me , shall do me no Injury , but rather improve my Understanding  Things of Moment , I shall justly weigh  and what is not necessary to be remember'd , shall be forgot .
My Uncle made me many Compliments of my forward Sense  but at the Tag of all , to qualify 'em , told me , Ripe Fruit was soon rotten  and so we both went to equip ourselves for our short Journey .


In the Coach , my Uncle told me , I should do well to ingratiate myself with the Family  for if I was ever to enter into the Matrimonial State , I cou'd not do better for myself  for , added he , tho ' Marriage is a very bitter Pill , yet there 's Gold enough to gild it over , and a handsome young Lady to-boot .
 I told him , whenever that Time came , I shou'd value his Advice at the highest Rate .
Come , come , reply'd the old Gentleman , I do n't love Compliments , they savour of Insincerity .
I return'd , my Tongue and Heart ever did , and I hop'd ever wou'd , go together  and whatever I said , it shou'd be Truth .
Ay , but Boy , answer'd the old Gentleman , you know the old Saying , Truth is not to be spoke at all Times  many a poor Man has suffer'd for speaking Truth .


When we came to the End of our short Journey , the two Sisters ( who were both comely Women ) came to the Gate to bid us welcome  the young Lady , they gave us to understand , was walking in the Garden .
When we were brought into the Parlour , after the usual Civilities , my Uncle told 'em , he had brought along with him a Person that he design'd one of their Acquaintance , and if they balk'd his Intention , he threaten'd 'em severely with his Indignation .
The Ladies reply'd , I shou'd be welcome upon my own Account , without his Recommendation .
Well , well , reply'd my Uncle , I do n't care how it 's done , so it is done .
But hold , cry'd the Aunt , wo n't it be something dangerous to allow him the Conversation and Acquaintance  of Isabella ?
( meaning the young Lady ) he 'll perhaps , in time , wipe away from her Memory the good Advice against Matrimony , we have taken much Time and Labour to inculcate .


Fear not that , reply'd my Uncle , for I have , and shall take as much Pains with the Youth , that they may be on a Footing .
Upon this , the young Lady came in , to whose Acquaintance I was introduc'd .
Tho ' she was the handsomest Creature my Eyes e'er beheld , the Charms of her Person were equall'd by those of her Understanding  and I soon found , young as I was , Love had taken full Possession of my Heart .


The Conversation of the Day was chiefly compos'd of Mirth , and laughing at former Transactions , which were larded , every now and then , with Contempt upon the connubial State  and I was almost ready to die with Despair , to hear the fair Isabella join with 'em , with more than ordinary Malice and Satyr .


My Uncle desir'd she wou'd not be so inveterate , for she was taking the only Method for him to fall directly in Love with her .
And that 's the only way , reply'd the Sister , to get rid of your troublesome Company .
I  told the Lady , I hop'd my Uncle wou'd not prove troublesome , 'till such a Declaration .
I believe not , young Gentleman , reply'd the Lady  but I fear there 's much more Danger from your Worship , than your Uncle  your Years will bring you forward , but his will make him lag behind .
I told her , I shou'd always endeavour to keep myself in the good Graces of that Family  and that nothing but Destiny shou'd make me forfeit it .


Oh then , return'd the Lady , if it ever comes to that , the Fault must be laid on Destiny , Fate , Ill Stars , and I know not what !
I tell you , continu'd the Sister , smiling , if your Years did not plead for you , I shou'd begin to think you guilty .
I must own , tho ' this was but Rallying , I cou'd not help blushing at what she said , as knowing myself a Criminal already .


Bed-time broke up our Company , and every one retir'd to their several Apartments .
When I was alone , Reflexion began to make me very uneasy .
The blind God had wounded me , tho ' not so deep as if I had more Years over my Head , yet enough to break my Rest , and trouble and confuse my young Imagination .
I got up at the Dawn of Day , as uneasy as I went to Bed , and walk'd in the  Garden alone , for none of the Family were stirring .
All my Thoughts were busied on the fair Object of my Wishes .
I continu'd , in my uneasy Contemplation , several Hours .


The first that interrupted my Meditations , was the Charmer of my Heart , who came to me , with a smiling Countenance .
I am inform'd , Sir , said she , you were early up this Morning , I fear you did not like your Lodging !
There 's nothing in this House , I reply'd , but what I have the utmost Regard for  but ( I continu'd ) it was my usual Custom of rising early to my Studies .
We fell insensibly into the Affairs of the Family , for I had not Courage once to mention what I felt within my Breast  neither did I imagine she cou'd have a right Conception of what my Inclination wou'd have declar'd to her .
Among other things , I told her , we shou'd have the World unpeopled , if every body was of her Mother , Aunt , and my Uncle 's Mind .
She reply'd , there was no Danger of that , for the Men wou'd find Means to have Heirs to their Estates , without troubling the Parson


I was a little confus'd at her Answer , for I imagin'd she insinuated I was design'd my Uncle 's Heir , and therefore cou'd hardly  make her an Answer  for my Uncle told me , when he mention'd making his Will , that I was the first that knew his Inclination , and gave me a particular Charge to keep it a Secret from every one , till he himself divulg'd it .
It was some time before I cou'd recover my Confusion  for I was not assur'd they might not hint something of it to my Uncle , and do me a Prejudice with him  not as to the Estate , for I little regarded my Interest , but fearing I was not capable of keeping a Secret , even of the utmost Consequence .


The young Lady , finding she had created some Confusion in my Thoughts , began to comfort me , with telling me , my Uncle 's Mind might alter  and tho , he was stiff in his Opinion concerning Matrimony , did not doubt but his Eyes wou'd be open enough to see Merit , where it was so conspicuous .
Her endeavouring to bring me out of Confusion , plung'd me farther into it , and sometimes I was thinking she was uttering Riddles , and I knew not how to answer upon the Topic : But at last I told her , Whatever my Uncle shou'd think fit to do concerning his worldly Affairs , shou'd never trouble me , while he continu'd to do things correspondent with  Honour and Honesty .
I am very glad to hear it , reply'd the young Lady  and I fansy young Gentlemen , like you , who study much , acquire Understanding , Fortitude , and Resolution , and all other Manly Virtues , before their Years write 'em Men .
Madam , I reply'd , in some it might be so  but I had made no Progress in any of 'em , but one , and that I fear'd will be rather counted a Weakness .


I fansy then , return'd the Lady , since you own it a Frailty , you will make me your Confessor  and if I judge it to be , as you call it , a Weakness , I 'll tell you what Penance you shall undergo for Pardon .
Madam , I reply'd , you are the only Person in the World that I will confess to  but then , you must promise me , like a true Confessor , to keep it for ever a Secret from all the World , whether it displeases you , or not  tho ' I am under dismal Apprehensions of losing your Favour , more dear to me than all the World .


Heyday !
reply'd Isabella , if we were not both too young , I shou'd imagine you were going to make Love to me .
Madam , I answer'd , you have guess'd the very Secret of my Heart .
The tender Thoughts my Breast  contains , are all for you .
Do n't think it a Boyish Passion , apt to change  for whatever Usage I meet with from you , I must continue to adore you .
I have weigh'd our Years  yours and your Family 's Aversion to Matrimony , by your Yesterday 's Discourse  and no Consideration can put a Stop to my Passion : All the Favour I ask , or desire , is only Leave silently to adore you  and if you find your Heart averse to my constant Wishes , let me beg you to grant me Pity for all that I shall suffer , and I shall rejoice at every Pang I feel , because they are for you .
I am convinc'd your Understanding far exceeds your Years , therefore I intreat you to think beyou speak  and consider this , 't is in your Power alone , to make me live , or die .
I own our Fortunes are at present unequal , but Time may produce many things  inspir'd by you , I wou'd aim at every thing that is honourable to deserve you that Way , nor shou'd I doubt succeeding .
I said every thing my Tongue cou'd utter , prompted by Love , and had this Satisfaction , to observe her Face was not dress'd in Frowns .
After many rallying Speeches , finding me continue in my Distress :


 Well , said she , as I promis'd to be your Confessor , I 'll keep it a Secret , as we agreed on  and perhaps , if I thought you in earnest , I shou'd think of some Punishment equal to what your Crime deserves : But you have been reading Ovid lately , I suppose , and you wou'd be endeavouring to put some of his Rules in practice upon me .
It is a pleasing Satisfaction to me , I reply'd , to hear you understand Ovid so well  and , by your Choice , I hope you will remember all his Rules .
What !
return'd the young Lady , because I have read that Author , as our English Translators have given him to us ( for I own I am not so happy to understand the Original ) wou'd you interpret for me , that I like the Subject ?
No , continu'd Isabella , I have read Reynolds on Murder , and yet I hope you will believe I abhor the Facts related there .
I hope fo too , Madam , I reply'd  therefore you will consider , that what my Tongue utter'd , was from the very Bottom of my Soul  and if you will not receive my Declaration favourably , you will be the Death of me , which will make you a passive Murderer .


Few People , I believe , die for Love , in this Age , reply'd Isabella  however , our  Years will protect both of us .
I told her , the Tree that took deepest Root , stood the longest .
Yes , returned Isabella , and the Impressions cut in young Barks , soonest wear out  and often kill the Tree , Madam , said I. Well , well , cry'd Isabella , we have had enough on this Subject for once .
Madam , said I , does the Word Once imply you wou'd pardon me whenever Fortune will give me another Opportunity of declaring my Passion ?
I have not Time now to answer you ( said Isabella ) for I perceive your Uncle , my Mother , and Aunt , are coming towards us .
But I thought her Words were accompanied with so sweet a Look , that bid me hope  and Hope is all the Pleasure of our Lives .


When we had join'd Company , we were the Theme of the old Folks Raillery for some time .
Hark you , young Man , said my Uncle , how came you to rise so early this Morning ?
Only because I do it every Morning , Sir , said I , to read .
Why , Sirrah , said my Uncle , if I had thought you had brought a Book along with you here , I wou'd have taken it from you , and burnt it .
Is not here Contemplation enough for you ?
pointing to the Ladies .
Yes , Sir , reply'd the Mother , I think he does well to have something to entertain  his Thoughts , alone , for I do n't much relish the young Ones getting together so early  I do n't well know how they cou'd entertain themselves , without talking of Love .
Why , if we shou'd , reply'd Isabella , 'twou'd be only to fortify each other against that Passion .
Well , well , said the Aunt , your Ages secure you at present  but I shou'd be loth to trust you five or six Years hence .
Ay but , said my Uncle , Will studies the Mathematics , and he knows every thing of Geography and Navigation already , but just going to Sea  and can tell you in what Latitude the Cape of Good Hope lies under , tho ' he was never there  he has all the Theory , and only wants the Practice .


None of your Allegories , reply'd the Mother  I have a very good Opinion of the young Gentleman , therefore hold your Tongue , for what you can say for him , will only lessen it .
Come , come , the Tea stays for us , said the Aunt .
I 'm glad o n't , cry'd my Uncle , for now we shall have a little Scandal , Tea has no Relish without it .


My Uncle having no Business at home , we continu'd in this agreeable Company three whole Days  and tho ' we were to receive a Visit from them in two more , yet the Separation  from that I held most dear on Earth , was very irksome to me  but the Hope of seeing her so soon , mitigated my Grief .


When we came home to my Uncle 's , I observ'd a Youth walking in the Garden , very near my own Age , as I cou'd guess at the Distance I saw him  for as soon as he perceiv'd me , he walk'd another way , as not being willing I shou'd see him .
I ask'd one of the Servants that happen'd to be in the Garden , who that Youth was I just before saw at the Fountain .
He reply'd , it was the Housekeeper 's Son .
What , is the Housekeeper marry'd then , said I ?
Not now , reply'd the Servant , and smil'd .
Observing the Humour of the Man , by his Countenance , I ask'd him many Questions concerning the Housekeeper and her Child , but could not learn who was the Father positively  yet he gave me Hints enough to imagine my Uncle had some Interest in the Affair , which created in me a great deal of Uneasiness  for it soon occurr'd to my Memory what the divine Isabella told me in her Mother 's Garden , that Heirs to Estates might be procur'd without the Help of the Parson .
My Uneasiness did not proceed from any Disappointment relating to the Estate , any farther  than I thought it might have reconcil'd me to Isabella 's Family  for I imagin'd if ever I cou'd move her Heart to love me , she wou'd as much despise Riches as myself  for even , young as I was , I cou'd have been contented to have got my Subsistence from my daily Labour , if Isabella wou'd have submitted to have shar'd my Fortune  for I never once thought of hers , but I wish'd it much less , or rather none at all , that I might have been more on the Equality .


While I was musing on the State of my Love , I was interrupted by my Uncle 's Housekeeper , who , with a familiar Air , inquir'd concerning our Entertainment at the Widow 's : I found , by her Discourse , the poor Creature was jealous of my Uncle , and to increase her Opinion , I told her , I fansy'd we shou'd shortly have a Wedding , for it look'd very like it .
Between whom ?
ask'd the Housekeeper , hastily  why , between my Uncle and the Widow , I answer'd .
I observ'd her Countenance change at what I said , and a very great Disorder appear'd about her .
But I did not think fit to have any further Conversation with her , so left her to her own disorder'd Thoughts .


 When my Uncle and I were together , he ask'd me how I lik'd the young Lady ( for he had not an Opportunity to ask me in the Coach as we came home , because we brought a neighbouring Gentleman home with us , that came to make a Visit at the Widow 's ) I told him , I had a very great Regard for her , and I did not doubt but my Years wou'd increase it .
I wou'd advise you , said my Uncle , to make your Addresses there , but secretly , for I am convinc'd you wo n't meet with a more beneficial Match .
I answer'd my Uncle , I was of his Opinion  tho ' not from the Greatness of her Fortune , but from the Charms of her Person and Understanding .
Why , I wou'd have you affect what you marry  but , I hope you do n't imagine , young Man , said my Uncle , a good Fortune will be any Hindrance .
Not in the least , Sir , said I  but I wou'd have no Two join in that holy Ceremony , if they cou'd not despise Fortune .
Well , well , reply'd my Uncle , Experience will tell you another Tale , when you have a few Years more over your Head , which is now fill'd with Notions of Honour , and I know not how many chimerical Ideas , that have their Being in thy Brain  You read too much .


 I hope , Sir , said I , Reading is design'd to cultivate the Understanding , and raise our Imaginations above the Vulgar .
I am of the Opinion , a Man of Quality with a Plebeian Soul , is a Plebeian  and on the contrary , a Plebeian with exalted Merit , ought to change Fortunes with him .
But you forget , with all your Learning and Philosophy , that Fortune 's blind , young Man , reply'd my Uncle , and distributes her Favours as blindly .
I have seen Dullness and Stupidity in a Coach and Six , while Virtue , Merit , and a whole Library of Learning walk on Foot .
The more Shame to the degenerate Age , you 'll say , young Man .
True , Sir , said I  and if I had a Fortune answerable to my Inclination , I wou'd never see one of those you mention'd last , twice in the same Condition .


Do n't think , reply'd my Uncle , that I am endeavouring to blot out those Notions of Virtue that I see wrote in thy Soul  for it is on the Consideration of thy noble Inclinations , that I have lately resolv'd in my Will , to leave thee a considerable Fortune , being assur'd thou wilt make the right Use of it .
The Bulk of my Estate was left me by an Uncle , an old Batchelor as I am , which I intend to leave to thee in the same manner .
 Neither can I think thy good Understanding , Boy , continu'd my Uncle , will receive any Prejudice from our Contempt of the Marriage State  tho ' the Reason why I have not chang'd my Condition , is , that the first Object of my Wishes was , by Fate , deny'd me .
But I suppose you have heard your Father often repeat the Story .
Never in my Life , I reply'd  for I have been at School ever since Five Years old , and very seldom convers'd with any of the Family  and I may justly say , Sir , that I am almost as great a Stranger in the Knowledge of my Ancestors , as one that never heard of us : Well then , said my Uncle , I 'll let you into as much as I know of 'em .


We are originally Welch : Many of our Ancestors have flourish'd in the Church , as well as State , and left a sweet Scent of Virtue in their Ashes .
I was the youngest of three  the eldest dying in the Wars , when he had gain'd many ever-living Laurels .
Your Father prov'd Heir to the Estate , who is one Year elder than myself .
My Father 's Brother having acquir'd a great Estate by Merchandize , in the Indies , and having an Inclination for me , always declar'd me his Heir , and I liv'd with him as such  therefore  I think it almost your Due to be Heir to mine .
About the Age of Seventeen , I fell in Love with a young Lady of a very small Fortune , but that was supply'd by the Charms of her Mind and Person .
Her Mother ( for her Father had been dead many Years ) was averse to my Passion .
She wou'd often tell her Daughter , I was but a younger Brother  and tho ' every Body imagin'd I was to be Heir to my Uncle , yet no body was assur'd of it .
Old Men were as subject to change their Minds , as young ones  therefore she wou'd by no means consent to my Courtship  but when she found I continu'd my Addresses , she secretly inform'd my Uncle , who took me to task on the other side  with many Arguments , prov'd I shou'd be much to blame to think of a Woman of such a narrow Fortune , when , in Prospect , I was Master of such a large one  and hinted to me , if I continu'd in my Folly , as he call'd it , I might be balk'd of my Expectation .


Tho ' my Love was as great as cou'd be , yet I thought it was but common Prudence to dissemble  and I told my Uncle , I hop'd I shou'd never give him any Occasion to forfeit the good Opinion he had already conceiv'd  of me .
He gave me very good Advice , which I promis'd to follow .
But every thing must submit to Love  Fortune , Interest , Relations , and Friendship , must give way to that soft Passion .
And I doubt not , young Man , notwithstanding your Learning and pretended Fortitude , but Time will convince you of what I say .
I sigh'd , and was in some Confusion at my Uncle 's Discourse , but made him no Answer , because I wou'd not interrupt him .


By secret Interviews , continu'd my Uncle , I gain'd the Heart of the young Lady , unbiass'd by her Interest  for in the mean time she was courted by a Gentleman , possess'd of a Fortune much beyond the Hopes of her Family , who soon gain'd the Mother 's Consent , and , being an obstinate Woman , she promis'd him her Daughter 's .
In the mean time we met almost every Night , by the Help of the Maid , who by Bribes and Promises was in my Interest  and one Evening among the rest , I took Possession of the willing Fair One .


Our Amours were not so secret as we imagin'd  for my Rival being inform'd of our Correspondence , tho ' he had no Notion how far our Intimacy was carry'd , sent me a Challenge ,  which I accepted of , tho ' unwillingly  for I am of that Opinion , Men 's Honour often prompts 'em on to those Acts their Consciences and Wills wou'd leave undone .
We met , and Fortune declar'd in my Favour , by dangerously wounding my Adversary , without my receiving the least Hurt .
The Mother to the Fair One was exasperated to the last Degree , and , in the Heat of her blind Rage , took her Daughter along with her to visit her intended Son-in-law , where she agreed , notwithstanding his Wounds , and her Daughter 's Cries and Lamentations , to marry 'em immediately , which was perform'd .


You may guess what we both felt at this Shock of Fate , for Possession had heighten'd my Passion .
I tore and rav'd like a Madman , and was almost inconsolable  and nothing but the Regard I ow'd my Uncle , kept me from doing some rash Act .
But Time , that cures most Sorrows , gave me some Consolation , as imagining I shou'd have still a Correspondence with the disconsolate Fair One , for her continu'd Sorrow convinc'd me she mourn'd for the same Cause .


I took an Opportunity , and got a Letter convey'd to her  but what was my Surprize and Sorrow at her Answer !
I have read it  so often , and 't is so well imprinted in my Memory , that I can repeat it verbatim .


SIR ,


THO ' I love you more than Life , which I am convinc'd I shall not long keep , yet the Duty I owe my Husband shall prevent any future Interviews .
Strive to forget me , as I willingly wou'd you , tho ' impossible , and never more think there ever was such a Wretch as the unfortunate


MARIA .


I strove many ways to come to a better Understanding  but she as carefully avoided it .
I linger'd out many Days in this Interval of Life , if I may call it so  for I cou'd not say I was alive .
One Morning her Maid brought me a Letter  and tho ' I offer'd her Gold to stay the Reading of it , yet she wou'd not .
The Contents of this last were as surprising as the first .


MY DEAR ,


I AM now going , I firmly believe , into another World , to answer for my Miscarriages in this , for I find the Pangs of Child-Birth upon me , which I hope , and am almost assur'd ,  I shall not out-live .
It is the Fruit of our guilty Joys .
Let me conjure you , if the Infant shou'd survive , find some means to prove a Father , for it can not expect any other in this World  and cherish the Memory of your unfortunate


MARIA .


I was so far plung'd in Grief at the Knowledge of her State , that I went into the Fields to have more Freedom for Contemplation  and tho ' it was Morning when I receiv'd the Letter , I had not thought of returning , if the Curtain of the Night had not began to spread the Hemisphere  but ere I cou'd get out of the Fields , I heard somebody walk very fast behind me , and turning about , I was somewhat surpriz'd to see the Husband of Maria , with his Sword drawn in his Hand , as ready to attack me .
Tho ' I was weary of Life , I had no Thought of rendering it to one I had no very kind Thoughts for : Yet I was resolv'd to parly with him , and do my Endeavour to bring him to Temper  for I consider'd , he had Matter enough to gall him .
But Words signify'd nothing  and he press'd so violently upon me , that I was oblig'd to oppose him ,  and in a little time left him dead upon the Ground .


I immediately got home to my Uncle 's , who waited for me , and was going to chide me  but seeing me look so pale and confus'd , and without my Sword ( for in the last Thrust , that gave him his Death , he fell down towards me , and I let it fall out of my Hand , and his Body fell upo n't ) he very tenderly ask'd me the Cause of my Concern .
When I had inform'd him : Well , said my Uncle , be not so troubled  since you have kill'd him fairly , I 'll warrant thy Pardon .
But were there any Witnesses of the Action ?
Several , said I , on the other side of the River , tho ' I know not who they were , I was in so much Confusion .
However , he deserv'd Death , said my Uncle , for killing the unfortunate Maria , and her innocent Infant .
I did not hear what more my Uncle said , for the Use of my Senses was taken from me , and I fell into a Swoon  yet , when I recover'd , I found myself in Bed  for my Uncle , imagining I had receiv'd some Wound in the Encounter , order'd a Surgeon to be brought  but when he was inform'd of the Truth , he was convinc'd that 't was pure Grief that had overcome me , and almost  compell'd me to be let Blood .
I was in such a Condition , that Despair had got the Ascendant over me , and had resolv'd with myself not to live : And in order to put my Design in Execution ( being inform'd my Uncle was gone out upon some urgent Affairs ) I order'd my Man to go to another Surgeon of my Acquaintance , and bring him along with him  which was quickly done .
I then took an Occasion to send my Servant out of the way , and desir'd the Surgeon to let me Blood in the other Arm , which he comply'd with , not knowing I had been let Blood before .


As soon as he was gone , I undid both the Bandages  the Blood pour'd out of my Veins , and I soon became insensible .
Heaven forgive me !
for I now declare I had no other Thought , but following my dear Mistress , whom it was plain , I lov'd more than Life  which that Day wou'd have put an End to , if it had not been purely for an Accident  for the last Surgeon meeting with him that first bled me , among other Discourse , told him he was going to see how I did after my Bleeding by the Order of my Uncle , who was oblig'd to go out , and that he was to stay with me till his Return .


 The last Surgeon , in a sort of Surprize , told him , he had not been long come from me , and had let me Blood  and soon finding there must be some extraordinary Meaning in my Proceeding , came both together , and broke open the Door , that I had lock'd before I let loose my Arms .
I was so far gone , that they gave my Uncle no Hopes of Life , which , I was inform'd , almost put him into my Condition .
'T was two whole Days ere I open'd my Eyes  and three more before I recover'd my Understanding  and the Thoughts of the Catastrophe of my dear Maria , had made me resolve to take nothing to support Life , if I had not been prevail'd upon by my Uncle , whose Sorrow quite confounded me , and a religious Man , who set before me the heinous Sin of Self-Murder , a Sin he told me cou'd never be pardon'd , for it was directly flying in the Face of Heaven , without a Possibility of repenting the Action .


The Thoughts of Eternity made me repent of the Act , and resolve to live .
By degrees , I recover'd my former Strength  and meeting one Day with Maria 's Maid , by Accident , I desir'd she wou'd give me some Account of the melancholy Action .


 Sir , said she , when my poor Mistress felt the Pangs and Throes of Labour upon her , she wrote that Letter , and order'd me to return upon the Instant I had deliver'd it , for she shou'd want me in her unhappy Condition .
When I came back , I found her Pains grew worse .
When I found how it was , I told her I wou'd go and send for the Midwife .
Do then , said she  for tho ' I wish for Death , the poor Innocent has done nothing to deserve it  That may live to meet with a better Fate than its unhappy Mother  and in her utmost Pangs , she softly utter'd your Name .
The Midwife came , and she was deliver'd ( after great Agonies ) of a fine Girl , whose early Features promis'd to exceed her Mother 's Beauty .


Maria 's Mother , and the rest of her Relations , were in the utmost Confusion at what they saw  for seeing it a beautiful full-grown Child , they were well convinc'd the Husband was not the Father of it .
The Mother came up to her , and , notwithstanding her weak Condition , gave her all the ill Language she cou'd think of .
The poor Lady , at last faintly told her , it was her own Fault , to force her to that Marriage : That she was join'd to you by Heaven : And she believ'd  she had no Guilt to answer for what she had done  for she had ever liv'd with her Husband virtuously , and ceas'd all Correspondence with you , since the Day of her unfortunate Marriage , which I witness'd for her in the Letter she had wrote to you .
She was brought to Bed pretty early in the Morning .
Her Husband was gone to Hunt with some Gentlemen of the Country .
But when he return'd , he soon came to the Truth of every thing , for there was no concealing how Matters went .
Is is so ?
cry'd he , all enrag'd  And am I an antedated Cuckold ?
I 'll have no Man say I keep a Whore , or Bastard of his .
Therefore , upon the Instant , he flew to the Bed , first ran his Sword into the unfortunate Maria 's Breast  and , snatching the lovely Infant from the Nurse 's Arms , threw it against the Ground , and dash'd out its innocent Brains .


It was some time before either of us cou'd proceed in the sad Narration , for Tears , at the unhappy Act .
When the Maid had a little recover'd herself , she proceeded .


The Wound the barbarous Wretch gave the unfortunate Maria , did not immediately rob her of Life  but she liv'd to make all the Hearers weep at what she related   even her unkind Mother cou'd not refrain Tears  wishing a thousand times , she had dy'd , before she had forc'd her to that unlucky Match .
Dear Mother , reply'd the fainting Fair One , do not repine , but learn to forget Me , and this unhappy Day .
Consider , Fate is in every thing .
I beg yours and Heaven 's Forgiveness : And then began to faint .
She wou'd see the Infant , tho ' in that piteous Condition : After looking upon it for some time , Poor Babe !
said she , thou hast severely paid , tho ' Innocent , for the Crime of thy Father and Mother , which I hope is forgiven by Heaven .
Here she began to faint again , and only said , Heaven forgive me  preserve , and support my Dear - Here her Tongue fail'd  she only gave a Groan , and expir'd .
We all suppos'd it was your Name she wou'd have utter'd , but Death stept between .


This Relation had almost brought me to my former Despair  and I often wish'd the Wretch alive once more , that had been the Cause of poor Maria 's Death , that I might have kill'd him again .


'T was several Years before I cou'd wipe away the Thoughts of my dear Maria : Nay , I can never forget her , nor seldom remember  her without bringing Tears into my Eyes , as I have at this Repetition of my former Sorrow ( for , indeed , we both cou'd not refrain from weeping ) but for her sake only , I am resolv'd to live and die a Batchelor , which , said he , ( reassuming some of his former Gaiety ) is the better for you .
Tho ' my Uncle often told me , added the old Gentleman , if he had known my Passion had been so strong and sincere , he wou'd not have been against our Marriage .
Since , I have assum'd a freer Air , and having got acquainted in this Family , rail along with 'em , they having known nothing of my Story  for it did not make any great Noise , because my Uncle procur'd Witnesses enough that heard our Discourse  and the barbarous Act spoke so much , that I was never try'd for it  which was , in some sort too , prevented by my Illness , and weak Condition .


This Story of my Uncle 's , seem'd to me an Introductory History to my Misfortunes , which caus'd me much sorrowful Thinking  yet I had ever some secret Hoping , that kept up my sinking Spirits .
When we went to Dinner , Madam , the Housekeeper , look'd very glum upon my Uncle , tho ' she continu'd her Civility to me , yet I took but little  Notice of it .
After Dinner , I went to Fish in a River at the bottom of the Garden , and in an Hour 's time my Uncle came to me .


Hark you , young Man , said he , I have a Crow to pluck with you : What is the Reason , good young Spark , that you have disturb'd my Housekeeper with a Story of a Cock and a Bull , about Marriage , and I know not what , with I know not who ?
Why really , Sir , said I , she examin'd me so strictly this Morning , that I hope you will pardon me if I tell you , I thought her impertinent  neither did I imagine she had any Right to be angry , or pleas'd , at what I said  tho ' , I must own , I saw it disorder'd her  but I suppose that only proceeded from her Interest  for if she imagin'd you marry'd , you wou'd have no Occasion for a Housekeeper  for , added I , smiling , my Lady wou'd take that Work off her Hands .
Well , young Spark , said my Uncle , I find you are a prying young Gentleman  and since you resolve to know all my Secrets , I 'll declare another to you : This Woman is now and then pleas'd to Tuck me up  and , moreover , has laid a Child to me , but the Boy is so unlike the reputed Father , I have no Notion I had any  Hand in the forming him .
Now this makes her assume an Authority .
And , to let you know further , 't is the very Maid that liv'd with the unfortunate Maria .
I thought it was my Duty to do something for her , and , at my Uncle 's Death , I took her into the House .
The Freedom I gave her in talking now and then , of that melancholy Adventure , grew at last into an Intimacy  Flesh and Blood being frail , and different Sexes at all Hours of opportunity together , will show themselves .


Sir , said I , what you have entrusted me with , shall only teach me to pay her more Respect than I have done , without letting her know I am let into the Secret .
And , for the future , I shall not tell her any thing that will perplex her , upon your Account .
Nay , said my Uncle , smiling , I shall ever make her know the Difference between the Handmaid and the Master : And whether her Child be mine , or not , whenever I die , I shall provide handsome enough for 'em both  tho ' , perhaps , not according to her Expectation .
The Boy is ignorant who his Father is , pursuant to my Instruction to the Mother  and I am apt to believe she has kept it a Secret , for he is not yet of Age to be  trusted with it  tho ' the Lad is forward enough in every thing , but just Learning , which makes me the more suspect , I am none of his Father .


Our Conversation has lasted for Six and Twenty Years  and in Fifteen of my juvenile Years , she never pretended to make me a Father .
I know she has fed herself with vain Hopes , I wou'd make a Will , and put him down for Heir : But , I can assure you , it never was my Intention , nor ever will be  and I shall leave 'em the less for Impertinence .
Whatever you please , Sir , said I  but do n't leave 'em the less upon my Account .
Well , a few Days , answer'd my Uncle , will put an End to their Hopes , or Fears  and tho ' when an Heir is settled to an Estate , he looks like a Coffin to some People , yet , Youth , I do n't know how to part with you to the University  I am convinc'd you will have little to learn , but ill Customs , which many Scholars imbibe , where they shou'd avoid 'em : But I am not at all in pain for you  I believe the Tenets of Virtue sufficiently stampt in your Mind : Therefore I have some Thoughts of riding over to your Father , to prevail upon him to let you and your Tutor live with me .
I 'll take care you  sha n't want Books  I have a good Library of my own , and if that wo n't do , let me but know your Wants , and they shall be supply'd .
I gave him Thanks suitable to so agreeable an Offer  but hinted to him , a Person is not so well esteem'd in the World without a University-Education .
That 's but a small Consideration , reply'd my Uncle , and if we meet with no other Difficulties , I hope we shall get over that .


From this Subject , we proceeded to that of the Widow 's Family .
I believe , Sir , said I , Isabella is , and will be , as averse to Marriage ( at least by her Discourse ) as her Mother , or Aunt .
I fansy , young Man , reply'd my Uncle , you begin to fear it .
Come , come , continue your Correspondence  there 's a great deal in the first Impression , and Nature will prevail .
But enough of this  I 'll now shew you my Library , which you have not yet seen  and give you the Key , that you may make use of it when you please  but , added he , if you use it too much , I 'll take it from you again .


When we came into the Library , which was a spacious Room built on purpose , I was surpriz'd to find it so well stor'd with such Variety , and valuable Books , especially  all the Classics of the best Editions .
I told my Uncle , I lik'd my Situation so well , that if he wou'd give me Leave , I wou'd employ myself a few Hours to look 'em over .
That was one Reason why I brought you here now , reply'd my Uncle , for I am oblig'd to go for some Hours upon some urgent Affairs  and imagining I shou'd bring you into Company you wou'd like , made me the more willing to introduce you to 'em , and if you find yourself tir'd , and their Conversation shou'd not please you , they wo n't be disoblig'd at your leaving 'em .
So saying , he gave me the Key , and shut me in .
While I was in high Delight , for I had even forgot the fair Isabella , I heard Whispering in the next Closet , which made me awake from my pleasing Amusement  and in a little time I cou'd hear the good Housekeeper say , You may speak louder , for I am assur'd there 's no one within hearing , for the old Gentleman 's gone out .
Ay , but , reply'd the Man 's Voice , What 's become of the young One ?
Gone with him to be sure , return'd the Housekeeper , for he does not stir a Foot without him , and therefore let us make good Use of our Time , for I fear our Meetings will be less frequent .
I am convinc'd this young  Gentleman will be a Thorn in our Side , for when he and his Uncle were together the Day that he came , I heard him inform him , that he wou'd make his Will shortly , and put him down his Heir .
Now , as you , no doubt , are to draw the Writings , I wou'd have you find some Means to provide for our Child , which he imagines to be his .
That , I think , will be impossible , answer'd the Man  for , be assur'd he will read it over before he Signs it  or if he does not do it then , he may at some other Time .
No , no , that will never do .
We must e ` en wait with Patience till his Death , and I 'll find it easy enough to make a Will for our Advantage , of a later Date than what he intends to make .
I own , said the Housekeeper , it goes against me to think of defrauding the young Gentleman .
But when you consider , reply'd the Man , you do it for your own Flesh and Blood , you ought to have no Scruple .
Well , return'd the Housekeeper , I must leave the whole Affair to you .
I shou'd be contented to share the Estate between the two Boys  and I think , if he does otherwise , as he imagines our Child his , he will not do Justice .
We shall see what he intends to do , when he makes his Will , reply'd the Man , and , in  short , till then , we ca n't make a Judgment on any one thing .


I found , afterwards , they had left speaking aloud , and were making themselves as merry as they cou'd .
They were so boisterous , that several Folios I had lean'd against the Wainscot , tumbled down , which alarm'd 'em very much .
Bless me !
cry'd Forsooth , What 's that ?
I ca n't tell , return'd the Man  I hope the Squire is not in his Study .
No , that I am sure of , said the Housekeeper .
Now I recollect myself , continu'd she , 't is some of the Books tumbled off the Shelves .
They made themselves easy with that Supposition , and continu'd their Game .
After some time , I cou'd hear 'em go softly down Stairs .
I waited at the Window some time , and at last saw him go thro ' the Court-yard .
He was a tall thin Man , had a Cast of an Eye , and seem'd about Forty .


As soon as I found all was still , I went softly out of the Library , and went into my own Room , a pair of Stairs higher , to avoid all Suspicion .
When I was there , I resolv'd to acquaint my Uncle with the whole Truth  for I thought it wou'd be Injustice to conceal it , if it had not concern'd myself .
When my Uncle came in , he was in a very good  Humour , and wou'd often smile at his own Imagination .
I told him , it was a great Pity he shou'd stay at home as he usually did , if going abroad made him so merry .
Billy , reply'd my Uncle , I have so much Reason to be merry , at least in my own Opinion , that I 'll tell you the Cause of my Mirth  and I have so good a Regard for your Understanding , that I 'll rule my Risibility , for this once , by it  and if you declare I am in the wrong to be merry , I 'll do my Endeavour to be otherwise .


Sir , said I , if that is the only Reason in letting me into the Secret of your Mirth , you need not give yourself that Trouble , for I am apt to believe , you will be right in every thing you do .
No Compliments , Boy , reply'd my Uncle  I have told you before , I do n't like 'em .
But to proceed .


You remember that Gentleman we brought in the Coach from the Widow 's , yesterday .
That Gentleman is about Five and Thirty : Three Years ago , he was one of the most eminent Merchants upon the Exchange , and his Credit wou'd have stretch'd as far as the best of 'em .


In the Time , of his Prosperity , he fell in Love with a Widow-Lady of a vast Fortune ,  without the Incumbrances of Children upo n't .
The Lady gave him all the Encouragement he cou'd expect .
The Day of their Espousals was fix'd , and near approaching , when the uncomfortable News was brought him , of the Loss of almost all his Fortune  for three of his richest Vessels were taken by Pirates .
This , as you may suppose , was a very great Shock to him  but being a Person of the utmost Philosophy , he calmly resign'd himself to the Will of Heaven .
He immediately left off Trade  and when his Debts were paid , he that was but ten Days before , in every Body 's Opinion , worth a Hundred Thousand Pounds , found himself Master of Seventy Pounds a Year , and his Country House , which he instantly sold , and , as I thought it a good Bargain , I became the Purchaser .
His greatest Satisfaction in his Misfortunes , was the Thoughts of the Widow 's proving constant to him  and he did not doubt , but with her Assistance , to recover his Losses .
But few Women , my Boy , are sincere in their Protestations .
'T is true , sometimes the blind Spark stings 'em in the Tail , that they become as blind as Fortune  or otherwise they are as hard to deal with , as a Parson for his Tithes .


 The Gentleman , after his Misfortunes , I can with Justice declare , was more welcome to me than before  for it wou'd be a Hardship indeed to have the Unfortunate slighted  and I am assur'd that generous Minds resent things that are offer'd 'em in their Adversity , that they wou'd not have regarded in their Prosperity .
One Morning , at Breakfast , I observ'd him very melancholy , insomuch that he refus'd his Chocolate  I encourag'd him as much as I cou'd , as imagining the Thoughts of his Losses had attack'd him .
But I was very much surpriz'd to hear him say , his former Losses were nothing to what then oppress'd him .
I must own , said he , I had some Omens of it Yesterday  for when I went to visit the Widow , as usual , I was told , she was not at home  but returning by the Garden-Wall , I heard her talking to her Maid  and when I call'd to her , cou'd get no Answer .
This Morning my Suspicions are confirm'd , for she has just now sent me a Letter , where she tells me , She is very much grieved at my Losses  and as Merchandizing is so very precarious , she hopes I will pardon her if she intends to keep her Fortune to herself  and endeavour to mend my Credit with somebody else .
The Loss of her Money  does not vex me half so much , as her insulting me  and tho ' , I must own , I have a very great Regard for her Person , yet I wou'd not wed her now , if she shou'd repent of her Usage .


I believe there 's little Danger of that , said I. Women have Obstinacy enough to keep bad Resolutions .
All I cou'd say to him , gave him but little Comfort  and , I must confess , his Uneasiness infected me .
But , as I have told you , Time is an excellent Doctor , for the almost bald Gentleman wrought a Cure , so that he often wish'd it in his Power to be reveng'd on the Widow .


Many Weeks pass'd on , and his Inclination strengthen'd , tho ' no Accident cou'd assist him , till about two Months ago , an old Barn that belong'd to the House , I order'd to be pull'd down , with an Intention to make an Addition to my Garden  for I had some Overtures made me by a Nobleman , concerning a Purchase , in which I shou'd make a considerable Profit , tho ' with a secret Intention to give it to the Gentleman I had bought it of .
The Barn , in reality , did still belong to him , for it serv'd a Farm near the House I had bought , which was the Remainder of the Gentleman 's Estate , and the same he liv'd in .


 In digging the Earth of the Foundation , there was found a Pot of Money that contain'd upwards of a Hundred Pound , which was given the Gentleman .
As we were at Supper , and pretty merry at the Accident , an odd Thought came into my Head .
Why may we not , said I , to the Gentleman , report , we have found a larger Sum ?
No one knows what we have found , but the Man that dug it up , and we can instruct him to favour the Deceit .
But to what End , return'd the Gentleman ?
Why , to be reveng'd on the Widow , said I. I am assur'd 't was covetous Interest at first made her comply with your Addresses  and when once she finds it her Interest , she 'll receive 'em willingly again  and if we can bring Matters about , to compleat your Revenge , you must e ` en marry her .
The Gentleman smil'd at my Project , but thought it wou'd be impossible to bring it to any thing .
Well , said I , you shall have little to do  I warrant , I 'll make your Part easy enough .
Accordingly , I went to work .
We reported about the Country , that such a Gentleman had found a vast Treasure in his Barn , suppos'd to be hid there in the Civil Wars , even enough to recompense all his Losses .
The Fellow that dug up the Money , was an  arch Rogue , one fit for our Design  I took care to instruct him  and , to carry every thing on with a good Face , as I wanted a Coach , I bought a new one , sent the Gentleman to his House again , as if he had made a new Purchase of it , in the new Coach , and Attendance suitable .
I also let the Sister to Isabella 's Mother into the Secret , who , by her Contrivance , receiv'd the Addresses of the Gentleman .
You must imagine , this surpriz'd every Body , and soon came to the fickle Widow 's Ear : She , it seems , began to be very inquisitive , had sent for the Fellow that dug the Money up , and examin'd him .
He afterwards came and inform'd us what pass'd between 'em .
I was very much pleas'd to hear it  and we instructed him how he shou'd behave to her .
We order'd him to let her know , that we were to meet to settle our Matters at a neighbouring Tavern in the Town , and several People , along with the fortunate Squire .


When the Fellow came back from her , we took him into Examination again .
As soon as I came before her ( said the Fellow ) she ask'd me , if I was the Man that had found the Money .
Yes , Madam , said I. Well , and is it as much as the World reports ?
Really ,  I ca n't tell , forsooth , said I .
There was sixteen great Pots , that wou'd hold about a Gallon a-piece  and in one of 'em there was abundance of such Stuff as your Ladyship has about your Neck , forsooth , and in your Ears  I ca n't tell what they are good for , not I  but they say they are worth Twenty Thousand Pounds .
Well but , said the Lady to him , do you know what was in the Pots ?
Why , in nine Pots , forsooth , said I , there was nothing but Pieces of old Gold  and the rest had all Silver in 'em .
But I did say , Sir , I thought it was too good for you , for you gave me but Ten Pounds in old Jacobus 's for my Honesty  for you know , Madam , said I , I cou'd have secur'd a Pot or two for myself .
But when I told her you were to meet at the Tavern , she gave me a Crown , and said she wou'd give me another , if I cou'd find means to bring her into the next Room to where you were .
I am to bring her Word to-morrow , when you are all met , and she 'll be ready to come with me .


Well , what say you now ?
said I , to the Gentleman  our Plot begins to thicken .
Why indeed , he reply'd , I begin to conceive some Hopes of it .
We gave the Fellow his Instructions  and I told him , I wou'd make  one of his Lyes a Truth , if we succeeded , and that shou'd be the Ten Pounds .
He gave us good Assurance , that he wou'd not fail in his Part .


The next Day we met at the Place appointed , with Gentlemen that we had let into the Secret  and , among the rest , one to represent a Lawyer  for we did not much care to trust a real One , there is so little Honesty among 'em .
The Fellow was to give Notice when the Widow was come , by shutting a Casement in the Room where she was to be  for it was an old-fashion'd Window , and made Noise enough in the Shutting to be heard all over the House .
We at last heard the Signal to begin our Farce .
I had provided a great Number of old Writings and Papers , that if she shou'd have the Curiosity to peep , she might perceive we had all our Implements .
One of our Company told our Gentleman , the most that cou'd be made of his Jewels , was Eighteen Thousand Five Hundred Pounds .
Another cry'd , There 's your Bills for the Forty Thousand Pounds from the Goldsmiths .
And there 's the Five Thousand Bank Notes  but , added he , the Tellers were surpriz'd !
they had not seen so many Pieces of old Gold in their Lives , neither  wou'd they accept 'em , but by Weight .
It ca n't be help'd , cry'd our Gentleman , they will have a good Profit by it , for I suppose it will all be paid out to the full Currency .


Every body play'd their Parts to Admiration .
And when our Business was over , we sat in to Drinking , with many Healths to the Gentleman , as Top of our Company .
We had not been at it long , ere our Emissary came in , who told us , Madam had got Intelligence enough , he believ'd  for after we were set in to Drinking , she presently retir'd , first giving me a Guinea , as a golden Key to lock up my Tongue  which I promis'd her faithfully to perform  and , Masters , you may perceive , I intend to keep my Word .
We spent the rest of the Evening with good Wine ( tho ' at a Tavern ) and the Hopes of succeeding in our Design .


The next Morning we found it began to work  for this Letter ( pulling one out of his Pocket ) came from the Widow to the Gentleman .


SIR ,


I AM surpriz'd I have neither seen or heard from you these three Months .
I expected an Answer from a Letter I sent you out of a Joke ,  to see how you wou'd resent a Refusal .
But that Passion is not very strong , to be thrown down at a seeming Denial .
I have something to say to you , which is not altogether so proper to commit to Writing  but if you 'll take the Trouble to come our Way , I can inform you of a Person that wou'd be glad to see you .


Yours to command , c..


Why now , Friend , said I , she begins to nibble , and it 's your own Fault if you do n't catch her  I 'll engage she takes the Bait , if you 'll be but careful in playing her .
Why , what wou'd you have me to do , said the Gentleman ?
Do !
said I  do as you shou'd do  marry her , for you ca n't be sufficiently reveng'd without it .
I ca n't do that , he reply'd , that will be too full-grown a Cheat  you must consider , that Station lasts for Life , and to have all my Hours imbitter'd with Upbraidings , wou'd prove a Hell upon Earth .
Why , said I , the World will but laugh at the Trick  I mean , those that know it  and for those that do n't know the Artifice we have us'd , they will have the better Regard for your Wife .
Besides , when she finds the Imposition , her Understanding will make her quiet  for my Part , I think it will be a fitting  Punishment : Besides , I am assur'd she must have some Inclination for you , or she wou'd not have accepted your first Addresses  but that her Avarice prov'd too weighty for her Love .
This ought to reconcile you to the Design .
If you have any Regard for her , you 'll soon find means to make all even  and if you 've none , your Conscience will not long trouble you .
I 'll assure you , if I thought there was the least Guilt i n't , I wou'd not have any Hand i n't : Besides , in the long Run , she may not prove a Loser  Fortune has fair Looks , as well as Frowns , and her Ill Humour may be worn out .
The Consideration of that , said he , has wip'd away all Scruples , and I 'll venture thro ' all Dangers .
In short , he made his Visit , and in all his Discourse hinted , that the Report of finding so much Wealth was false  and told her the Truth , in hopes not to be believ'd .
To cut my Story short , he once more gain'd her Consent  and this Evening they were marry'd .
Now this is the great Business I have been about .
What makes me smile , is , the Lady 's mighty Inclination to live in the House where the Money was found , imagining there were more Mines of Wealth to be work'd out yet .
To-morrow I intend to visit  'em , and let her know the whole Truth of the Matter , which I did not care to do till after Consummation .
And now , continu'd my Uncle , I have let you into the Secret of my Mirth , tho ' it is impossible to inform you of all the merry Circumstances .
I wish , said I , Sir , your Punishment is not too severe for the poor Woman .
I warrant you , said my Uncle , she 'll soon forget her Resentment .
A Blessing , you know , Billy , must always follow Wedlock .
I wish it may , Sir , said I .


Our Discourse was interrupted by a loud Ringing at the Door .
We all ran to the Window to see who it was in such Haste  and saw a Person at the Door , with his Horse all in a Foam , enquiring for Squire Bridgford , which was the Name of the Gentleman who was marry'd that Evening .
The Wedding being a Secret , my Uncle told him he would not be in Town till the Morning .
He seem'd very uneasy  which my Uncle perceiving , began to enquire into his Concern .
Sir , said the Man , I bring him welcome News , and the sooner he knows it , the sooner I shall be easy .
He was invited in , and his Horse taken care of .
The Person told my Uncle , he had brought the Squire News of above Forty  Thousand Pounds .
That 's News indeed !
reply'd my Uncle , and welcome , if it be true .
It 's true , by G - d !
said the Person , being a blunt Sailor  for I am an Eye-Witness of it .
After the Man was refresh'd , he told my Uncle , that one of his Ships had made her Escape from the Pirates .
We were all taken , said the Tar , near the Coast of Malabar , by French Pirates , who us'd those Men that refus'd to make Part of their Crew , vilely  some they cut their Noses off , some their Ears , c. which the major Part considering , resolv'd to seem to comply , 'till a fitter Opportunity shou'd offer , to get out of their Clutches .
I understanding a little French , was their Spokesman  I told 'em , we did not comply out of the Fear of Punishment , but that it was what we all chose .
Many of us had , a long time before , Thoughts of running away with the Ship .
They receiv'd us very kindly , gave us good Usage , and those that did not come into their Measures , were not only tortur'd , as I said before , but put under Confinement in Fetters .
We took an Opportunity to inform the poor Wretches of our Intention , which made 'em repent they had not thought of the same Method : Most of 'em , hoping for better Usage , begg'd to  be admitted  but the wily Frenchman utterly deny'd 'em , well knowing they wou'd not be true Pirates .


They carry'd all their Prizes to their Rendezvous , into a Bay upon the Island of Madagascar , where we had the Liberty to go on Shore , and consort among their Hellish Crew .
We fitted out again , and took several Chinese Joncks , richly laden , and in every Engagement behav'd so well , that the Captain of the Pirates set very much by us .
When we came back to our Rendezvous , there was some Disturbance among 'em , concerning some former Shares  but we thought it was all hush'd .
They had loaded one of the largest Ships that was taken from us , with Goods out of the other Two , in order to go and trade with the Dutch at Batavia  and one Night , Seventy of the discontented Party got in her , cut some that were on Board in Pieces , slip'd their Anchors , and stole away in the Night .
The next Morning , the Captain was out of his Wits , and the rest of the Men were as mad as himself .
But , in short , the whole Fleet , which consisted of four stout Ships , were sent after 'em different Ways .


 We steer'd N. N. W. three Days , and on the fourth discover'd a Sail  we crouded all we cou'd to come up with her , and soon perceiv'd 't was She we wanted .
While they were busied in getting ready to engage , I stole down into the Powder-Room , which I had the Care of , open'd all the Barrels , and pour'd Water into most of 'em , and with the rest I mix'd some of the Ballast of the Ship .


When we came up with 'em , a desperate Fight ensu'd , as long as the good Powder lasted  then I ran up to the Captain , call'd him into the Cabbin , where I told him , in a seeming Confusion , I was certain some of the Men were in the Interest of the other Ship .
I then inform'd him what was done to the Powder .
The Captain ask'd me , What was to be done ?
Board 'em , Sir , said I , and fight 'em Sword in Hand .
What shall I do ?
said he .
There 's no trusting our own Men .
Why , said I , there 's sixty English of us , I 'll engage we shall soon overcome 'em .
I wou'd have you , reply'd the Captain , inform 'em of it , and tell them they shall be well rewarded .


We bore off a little , while we were consulting , for we cou'd overtake the other Ship when we wou'd , because she was heavy-laden .
 I acquainted all my Ship-Mates with the Resolution I had taken , and they , one and all came into it .
When we had consulted proper Measures , we bore after 'em again .
I inform'd the Captain , when we had overcome the other Ship , I wou'd put him in a Way to find out the Knaves that had plaid him that Trick .
He thank'd me , and away we went to work .
We boarded her upon the Starboard-Quarter , enter'd her Pellmell , and soon cut to Pieces those that made Resistance , with the Loss of Seven Frenchmen and One Englishman  for we had Fifteen French to assist us .
Six and Twenty of our Opposers call'd for Quarter , but it was not granted , before the inveterate Frenchmen had knock'd in the Head Nine of 'em .
Five more were so wounded , it was thought they cou'd not live , which still answer'd my Purpose .
The others were clap'd under Hatches , and a Guard put over them .


The next Day , the Captain put me in mind of my Promise , to find out the Guilty .
Sir , said I , call all the Men upon the Quarter-Deck  all I put on the Larboard-Side , Order to be seiz'd , and clap'd under Hatches  you may tax 'em with their Crime when they are secur'd  tho ' they deny it , I 'll prove  what I say upon every one of 'em before Night .
My Advice was follow'd  the Men were call'd up , to the Number of Sixty Eight , Forty One I plac'd on the Larboard-Side , of those Men that were out of the Captain 's Sight during the Engagement , tho ' doing their Duty .
The other Twenty Seven were on the Starboard .
The Men on both Sides , cou'd not imagine the Meaning of this Division .
All the Englishmen were upon the main Deck  and , by some Means or other , according to my Directions , had their Arms about 'em  those that cou'd not conceal 'em , made as if they were cleaning 'em .
The Captain told those on the Larboard-Side , they were suspected to be in the Confederacy with the Runaways , therefore , he wou'd not have 'em take it ill , if they were confin'd till their Guilt , or Innocence , were made to appear .


They were all amaz'd at the Captain 's Speech , which he took for the Signs of Guilt .
Some were refractory  but at last , they consented to be confin'd , well knowing their Innocence .
They were put under Hatches accordingly .
As they were going down , the Captain said , the Innocent shall be rewarded .
When they were below , a Guard was set upon 'em , and I had taken care to have all their Arms secur'd .


 The Captain then told the Starboard-Side Men the whole Story , and that it was by my Advice and Conduct the Ship was taken , c..
The Men were surpriz'd , to be sure .
It was pleasant to hear their Discourse  they found 'em Guilty : I always thought there was something in the Wind , in such a Mess , says one  says another , I even heard something of their Design last Night , but as I was not sure , I did not care to speak o n't  nay , says another , I believe Jaques such-a-one had a great mind to corrupt me , for he follow'd me every where Yesterday , and only wanted an Opportunity of breaking his Mind to me .
In short , most of 'em had something to say , and all to prove 'em guilty .
It was Matter sufficient for our Mirth afterwards , but I was a little too much concern'd to laugh then .


The remaining Frenchmen were got into Cabals by Fives and Sixes all over the Deck  and our Englishmen were impatiently expecting the Word of Command to seize 'em .


When we had proceeded thus far , I told the Captain , if he wou'd please to go into the great Cabbin , I wou'd convince him how he shou'd prove 'em .
When we two were there by ourselves , I took a Pistol out of my  Pocket , and told him , I was the Man that had damag'd his Powder , in order to bring that to pass , which was happily effected .
I let him know , I had gone too far not to take his Life , if he resisted , or call'd out  and inform'd him , it wou'd signify nothing if he did , for I had two Signals to my Countrymen , one to seize his Men , and do 'em no further Hurt , and the other to kill 'em all immediately .
And I farther added , Not one of 'em shou'd suffer , if they wou'd be quiet  and that we only contriv'd this Stratagem to gain our Liberty .


The Captain thank'd me , and told me he cou'd not blame me for what I had done  but wonder'd at himself that he shou'd be impos'd upon in such a manner .
He submitted himself to be ty'd very patiently .


When I had done , I went upon the Deck , and gave the Word , Now , which was to seize 'em only  the other was , Now do your Work  tho ' I did not intend to use those Words , except I had found Resistance .
Upon the Word , the Frenchmen were all seiz'd .
It 's impossible to tell their Astonishment  but their Surprize was heighten'd , when I brought out their Captain , bound , who soon let 'em into the whole Matter .
They were all struck  dumb for some time , and then fell a gabbling out their Mort de ma vie , like so many disturb'd Geese .
But tho ' their Tongues were at Liberty , we did 'em the Favour to bind 'em all by the Hands .
Some of our Men whom the others had releas'd ( those , I mean , that were ill us'd for not consenting to turn Pirates , who , by good Fortune , were all in our Ship , tho ' in the Frenchmen 's Reign , did all the servile Offices of the Vessel ) were for cutting to Pieces those that were instrumental in their ill Usage  but as they gave me the Command , I order'd , not one shou'd be touch'd , which the Frenchmen thank'd me for .


The One and Forty below soon found what we were at , and we as soon prevail'd upon 'em to be ty'd to their good Behaviour .
When we had secur'd 'em all in the Steerage and Great Cabbin , and order'd Centries , with a great Gun charg'd with Musquet-Ball to fire in upon 'em , if they seem'd to make any Resistance , we went on Board our Prize , and took care of the other ten Frenchmen that were set on as a Guard to the Thieves , as the rest call'd 'em , as if they were none .
We carry'd 'em all on Board .
When every thing was quiet , we directed our Course for England   and in two Days more , we took every thing out of the Pirate that wou'd be useful to us in our Voyage , leaving 'em a Month 's Provision .
We secur'd all their Arms and Ammunition , and cut some of their Rigging , leaving 'em only a Foresail , with a Main Topsail , to prevent their getting into Harbour too soon for us , and cause us to be pursu'd .


Thus every thing being order'd , as we hop'd , for the best , we Englishmen went on Board our own Ship , and left them to steer their Course back to Pirates Harbour , as we call'd it .
We continu'd our Voyage to England , where we happily arriv'd , meeting nothing to molest us all the way .


We were mightily pleas'd with his Narrative , and highly commended his Undertaking and Resolution .
Said my Uncle , Mr. Bridgford is oblig'd to you for his good Fortune  and I doubt not but he will reward you accordingly .
He told us , he was a Relation of Mr. Bridgford 's , and Mate of the Ship , the Captain dying when he was in the Pirates Hands  and all he desir'd was , only to make his Promise good to the Sailors , which was , to allow 'em double Wages for the whole Voyage .
My Uncle told him , he  wou'd assure him of that .
After a little Conversation and Repast , the Messenger was sent to Rest , for he had come sixty Miles that Day , upon one Horse .


When he was gone , we cou'd not but admire at his Conduct in the Affair , and the Providence of God to Mr. Bridgford .
This good Fortune , said my Uncle , will be a great Means of bringing on a Reconcilement .
Now you see , Sir , said I , there is a Blessing attends the Marriage-State .
Yes , said my Uncle , but nothing to provoke me to enter into the Noose .
It must bring some Cares along with it , be the Comforts ever so many .
I fansy , Sir , said I , there 's Cares attend your present Way of Living .
It may be so , said my Uncle , but none that I am ty'd to bear .


I finding a fit Opportunity , thought it a proper Time to inform him of what I had heard in the Library  but conjur'd him not to take any Notice of it , 'till we cou'd find an Occasion of his being an Ear-Witness .
Well then , said my Uncle , I 'll take your Advice , and let it rest 'till after my Friend Bridgford 's Affair is over , and then we 'll contrive some Way or other to catch 'em in their own Snares .


 The next Morning , my Uncle took me along with him , to wait upon the new-marry'd Couple , and the Sailor with us .
We gave him Instructions to wait till we call'd for him .
When we came to the Lady 's House , we were usher'd up into the Bed-Chamber , where we found the Bride in Tears  for tho ' it was agreed not to open the Affair till my Uncle came , yet the Husband cou'd not be easy till he had told her all .
She took it very heinously at first  but , weighing every thing well , she had only Recourse to her Tears , which she wip'd away as soon as she perceiv'd us .


Come , Sir , said she to my Uncle , I can now forgive your Plot upon me  tho ' I must own , the Disappointment caus'd me much Uneasiness  yet I find what is appointed by Heaven , must be  I am satisfy'd we have enough , and I begin already to loath my former Temper .
Why now , Madam , said my Uncle , you strike a true Harmony , and , to indulge it , I have brought you a Present  one must never come empty-handed to a new-marry'd Pair , Billy , continu'd my Uncle , call in the Man .
When he came in , Mr. Bridgford was surpriz'd : Cousin Brooks !
said he , I am very much pleas'd to see you   and this is a very acceptable Present , for I thought you in the Hands of Pirates .
Pray how got you from them ?
Why , to bring home to you the good Ship Elizabeth , reply'd Mr. Brooks .
We then let him into the whole Story , and he bore his Joy , as he did his Grief , with a Serenity of Temper he was ( as my Uncle said ) always Master of .
I am pleas'd with this Present from a Fortune , Madam , said he , only that it may be a Means to make you forget some Part of your Loss in your Chimerical One .
She made him a suitable Reply , and all past Actions were soon forgot .


Mr. Bridgford gave his Cousin Brooks a Ring off his Finger , with a Promise of a Thousand Pounds , and to make him Captain of the Ship he had so worthily sav'd .
But , my Dear , said the Lady , you give the Gentleman a Present , which I suppose he is not to dispose of , but never consider he has been in the Hands of Pirates , and perhaps all his Ready-Money 's gone  and , added she , smiling , you have not receiv'd the Money for your Jewels yet , therefore I must do something for you  with that she went out , and immediately return'd with a hundred Guineas , which she gave to Mr. Brooks  there , Sir ,  said she , that 's something better than Promises  however , it 's only as Earnest , my Husband shall keep his Word .


We finding her in so good a Humour , took our Leaves : She much intreated us to stay Dinner , but my Uncle told her , her Husband 's old Sweetheart was to dine with him , who long'd to hear how Matters went .
What , more Confederates ?
return'd the Lady  but I forgive all , and thank you for tricking me into my Happiness .


As we were going home , my Uncle told me he was very well pleas'd he had been instrumental in converting one Woman  but I had almost forgot , that I have one at home out of the Pale of Salvation : Yet I shall not take any Pains in her Conversion , if it is as you say ) which I believe ) continu'd my Uncle  I shall turn her , and her Cub , to Grass , tho ' with a moderate Maintenance , yet much more than they deserve .
But we 'll let all Thoughts of that Affair sleep awhile , for the Ladies will be here by and by , and I have never any thing that looks like Discontent when we are together .


I found a secret Pleasure in the Hopes I had of seeing the amiable Isabella  but then , intruding Fears wou'd creep in to disturb my  Thoughts .
I imagin'd I shou'd be slighted , or perhaps she might disclose my Passion to her Mother , or Aunt , and then all my Hopes wou'd be intirely lost  for I had not any Notion they wou'd , either of 'em , consent to my Desires .
The Time was spent between Hopes and Fears , 'till the Arrival of the Ladies .
When they came in , any one might have perceiv'd my Passion by my Countenance  but they were so much taken up with their Discourse about Mr. Bridgford 's Affairs , they had not the Leisure to mind any thing else .
My Concern was redoubled at the little Notice Isabella took of me , and her entring so readily into the Conversation , without so much as vouchsafing me a single Look , almost distracted me  so that I took a proper Opportunity to retire , to conceal my Confusion .
I went into the Garden to indulge my Melancholy : Finding so many Reasons to increase it , that had almost distracted me , I was so lost in Thought , that I did not consider how the Time went away  and 't is possible I might have remain'd in my Musing till Night , if a Servant had not told me Dinner was serv'd .


I was in some Confusion , to think what Excuse I shou'd make for my long Absence .
 When I came into the Dining-Room , my Uncle ask'd me where I had been so long .
I told him , I found them so very deeply engag'd in their Story , that , as I knew my Company wou'd not contribute any thing to the Conversation , I chose to take a Walk in the Garden , and my Imagination wandring , I had lost myself for some time .
I was very much rally'd for my Speech , by every body .
I thought , said the Aunt , the Company of Isabella wou'd have had sufficient Strength to have held you here .
I suppose , return'd Isabella , the young Gentleman has been so well tutor'd by his Uncle , that he is beginning to put his Advice in Practice , by shunning the Women .
I told her , whatever Advice I follow'd of my Uncle 's , I was assur'd neither his Inclination , or mine , wou'd debar me of the Satisfaction of their Conversation , whatever I suffer'd in Person , or Censure .
I continu'd my Excuse , by telling 'em , the Story was not new to me , and I thought it wou'd be some time before they wou'd have Leisure to enter upon any other Subject .
Whatever I had to say in my Justification , had not stopt their Mouths , if Dinner had not .
While it lasted , I narrowly observ'd Isabella , but cou'd not get one  Look from her .
I had but little Stomach , as those in my Circumstances may easily imagine , tho ' none made any Observation upon it .
When Dinner was over , we all walk'd in the Garden , and my Endeavours to single out Isabella prov'd fruitless , which much increas'd my Agony of Mind .


In the Afternoon , Mr. Bridgford , his new Wife , and Mr. Brooks the Sailor , came to visit my Uncle .
Tho ' , said Mr. Bridgford , it is not usual for new-marry'd People , the Day after their Wedding , to make Visits , yet my Wife and I thought it partly our Duty to wait upon this good Company , to take our Leaves of 'em  for , continu'd he , tho ' a Week past I was no Man of Business , yet now I find I have Work enough on my Hands , not to mention my Matrimonial Affair .
I am oblig'd to leave you for Twenty Days .
The Smiles of Fortune must be regarded , or she may change her Countenance .
I have experienc'd it , therefore am resolv'd to keep up her Good-Humour , if it lies in my Power .
I must own , the Sorrows that touch me at present , are rais'd from what I feel in parting ( tho ' but for a short Time ) with such Company as will always be very dear to me .
Many Compliments pass'd between  the Parties , but they were ended by taking Leave , for Mr. Bridgford set out for London from my Uncle 's , with his Spouse , and his Kinsman the Sailor , who found it necessary for his immediate Presence .
After the usual Compliment of Tea , the Ladies were resolv'd to go Fish  it seems it was their common Recreation  and accordingly , their Implements were carry'd to the River , no farther than the Bottom of my Uncle 's Garden .
I was resolv'd to be only a Looker-on , as not being compos'd enough to follow the Pastime  and perhaps I might have run the Hooks into my Fingers , instead of the Baits .
Every one had tolerable good Sport , but Isabella , and her ill Luck made her fret much .
Billy , said my Uncle , this is a Diversion you delight in .
You know the Fishes retiring Holes  pray see if you can help the young Lady to a little better Fortune .
I told my Uncle , I wou'd contribute all I cou'd to Isabella 's Entertainment , with a very good Inclination .
Come , Madam , said I , if you will be pleas'd to walk a little farther , we 'll see if Change of Place may not change your Luck .
She made me no Answer , but with a condescending Nod , follow'd me .
I took care to take her out of the Sight and Hearing  of the rest of the Company .
I then look'd a little carefully after her Bait and Tackle , and she caught a Fish presently .


Well , said she , I find my Luck is chang'd  but yet I am but half reconcil'd to the barbarous Diversion  it does not suit with the tender Sentiments of our Sex , to rob any thing of Life  neither can I see the Death of a poor Partridge , or the most diminutive Bird , widiout a secret Tenderness and Sorrow for its being robb'd of Life , which it is not in our Power to restore again .
But yet , Madam , said I , with all this Tenderness of Soul , you can see a poor suffering Wretch in all the Agonies of Despair , without thinking once of Pity .
I am sorry , reply'd Isabella , you shou'd tax me with a Crime I most abhor  but , as I am innocent , it does not give me much Uneasiness .
Madam , I reply'd , I speak of Proof  I am the poor suffering Wretch , wounded by your resistless Charms , which you know very well , and you 'll neither give me Death , nor Ease .
Why indeed , young Gentleman , return'd Isabella , this Playing at Lovers is what we now shou'd leave off .
We are too young to act in Reality , and too old to act in Jest .
I 'll allow , your Understanding runs something before your  Years  but , to tell you ingenuously , if it were otherwise , I do n't think for myself , I have a Mother and Aunt , who have the Privilege to think for me , and they so worthily deserve those Characters , I hope I shall never have a Thought against their Inclination .
I reply'd , it was my Desire she never shou'd , I only wish'd she wou'd have a favourable Regard for me , and give me the smallest Grounds to hope I was not hateful to her .
She reply'd , Hate was not in her Nature  and that she cou'd say no more , than that she esteem'd me equally with all Mankind , and enough to be concern'd at any ill Accident that shou'd happen to me .


I was so transported at this faint Glimpse of Hope she gave me , that my Tongue broke out in extravagant Expressions of Thanks .
Hold , Sir , said she , you 'll disturb the Fish , and spoil the Diversion I expect  beside , my Mother and Aunt will hear ypu , and I have kept your former Confession from them , according to your Desire  but will not promise Secrecy for the Future , it is a great Task for one of my Years .
I had not time to make her a Reply , for the rest of the Company had near join'd us , to know whether Isabella 's Luck was chang'd or no .
Truly ,  said she , I have no Reason to complain , I have caught two , with the Assistance of this young Gentleman  and had like to have caught another , but , for want of Experience , had let him go again .
Ay , but Billy , said my Uncle , can teach you how to play a Fish up and down the Stream , when once you have it fast , and be in no Danger of losing it .
You must manage a Fish , as you will hereafter do Hearts  tho ' , I must own , if handsome Women are mere Fools ( which is not Isabella 's Case ) they soon learn that .
We do n't allow you to be a Judge , reply'd Isabella , your Heart has been Eye-proof all your Life  or else you have conceal'd that Part of it from us .
Why , reply'd my Uncle , if I have never lov'd , I might have had Attempts made upon me , enough to find out the Cunning of the Sex  as your Aunt , I suppose , may answer for ours .
I do n't desire to have the Question begg'd , reply'd the Aunt  but this I am sure of , there 's no knowing whether a Man courts the Purse , or the Person .
For my Part , return'd my Uncle , I think a Woman , without a Purse , is but a despicable Creature .
I wish we cou'd find out some other Discourse , return'd the Widow  I think , when we meet , we can  never talk upon any other Subject , and , because we despise it , I think it the best way quite to forget it .


While this Discourse lasted , I observ'd Isabella more thoughtful than usual , and I cou'd not help secretly hoping , I might have some Concern in her Musing .
Yet I was very uneasy I cou'd not get an Opportunity to speak to her the whole Evening .
As we were taking Leave , my Uncle promis'd to Dine with 'em the third Day following , and the Thought gave me some Consolation .


When the Company was gone , my Uncle and I walk'd in the Garden again .
Well , said he , I must own the Thoughts of the Persidy of this ungrateful Woman do not sit so easy upon me , as I cou'd have wish'd  in spite of all my Fortitude , it stole in upon the Pleasure of the Day , and sour'd my Satisfaction .
But , continu'd he , I am resolv'd to have an End put to every thing on that Account , to-morrow , if it 's possible  but I am a little at a Nonplus about it  it wou'd vex me , if we cou'd not bring it about , for Doubt is a very uneasy Companion .
Sir , said I , you have a back Way up to your Study , and I believe it will be no great Difficulty to steal in unobserv'd of any body .
You must  give it out to-night , that you will be abroad to-morrow , all the Morning , and I must wait on you .
That shall be done at Supper , said my Uncle .
'Till that Time came , my distracted Thoughts were roving on the dear Isabella , and Hope and Fear , by turns , possess'd my Soul .
Young as I was , I perceiv'd Death wou'd be more welcome to me , than her Disdain .
At Supper , my Uncle told me we shou'd rise betimes to go a Hunting , with some Gentlemen that he nam'd  and , added he , I design to take my Leave of that Diversion , for some time , having some Business will keep me at home for a few Days .
I obsev'd the Countenance of the Housekeeper , and thought I saw her shut up in her Brain some secret Intention .
When she was gone from Table , my Uncle said , he did not know how to order it , for it 's possible she may go to this Rogue of a Lawyer , and consult there  and then our Project will come to nothing .
We must trust to that , Sir , said I  we shall soon find it out , and if it proves so , we must wait till some fitter Opportunity .
Well , said my Uncle , we shall see how it proves tomorrow .
But , Billy , I 'd have you go up into the Study , unbolt the Door that leads to the Back-Stairs , lock it only , then bring me the Key .


 As I was coming from doing what he order'd me , I took Notice the Housekeeper was busy in Talk with her Son .
Immediately after , the Boy took his Hat , and went out .
I told my Uncle what I had seen .
We both imagin'd the Boy was gone to give Notice of our going abroad the next Day , for Mr. - the Lawyer , liv'd but a little way from my Uncle 's .
Why , said my Uncle , after all , Suspicion strengthens our Imagination , and every Action of a suspected Person alarms us  I wish I cou'd be sure he is gone there .
That you shall presently , Sir , said I. Upon saying that , I immediately follow'd him , and walking a good round Pace , got Sight of him just as he rung at the Door .
I got time enough at the back-side of the Porch , unobserv'd , just as the Door was open'd .
The Boy ask'd for Mr. - who came out to him presently .
As soon as he saw him , I understood he was very fond of him , and call'd him his Dear Boy .
Sir , said the Boy , my Mother gives her Service to you , and sent me to tell you , that the Squire goes out to-morrow to Hunt , 'till Dinner-time , and will expect you by Ten in the Morning .
My Love , said he , I 'll be sure to come  I wo n't ask you to stay now , because I have  some Company with me .
So away went the Boy , whistling home  and I follow'd , a more slow Pace than I went out .


When I came to my Uncle , I inform'd him all I had heard .
Well , said he , I find it will come to the Catastrophe to-morrow .
I 'll go to Bed , and think over my Part .
So we parted .
And I am apt to believe , both our Pillows were uneasy enough .
Tho ' my Passion kept me long awake , yet I cou'd not chuse having some Concern at what wou'd happen on the Morrow .
When we rose in the Morning , we both mounted , with a Servant  and after riding about a Quarter of a Mile , my Uncle ( as we had concerted ) told me , he had no very great Got to the Sport , therefore wou'd e ` en go back again .
But you , said he to me , and Tom ( meaning the Man ) may go , if you please .
No , Sir , said I , I do n't care for going without you .
So we turn'd our Horses Heads homewards  and as we were going slowly along , my Uncle order'd the Man to take all the three Horses to Town ( about two Mile from my Uncle 's ) and bespeak new Saddles .
So we alighted , walk'd over the Park , and got into the Library , unperceiv'd of any .
When we were in , we bolted the Door on the Inside , and  each of us took a Book in our Hands , to pass away the Time till the Play was to begin , for it was not proper to talk to each other  but yet , I believe , we neither of us well knew what we were reading .


The private Door we came in at , was contriv'd by my Uncle , that he might more conveniently make Madam a Visit , unobserv'd by the Family , when his Concerns call'd him , and the Door of her Apartment join'd to it , upon the Head of the Stairs , which we soon heard open  the Lawyer enter'd alone , where he staid some time , and diverted himself with humming a Song .
At last , the Lady came to him , who inform'd him , she cou'd not come sooner , being she was oblig'd to see the Coast a little clear .


We soon found , by the Lawyer 's Discourse , he had some Inclination to be merry , before they talk'd of their Affairs .
Come , come , said Madam , let 's mind Business first  we shall have time enough to divert ourselves , I 'll warrant you .
Ay , but reply'd the Lawyer , 't is better to be caught in Conversation , than the other Affair  therefore let 's make an End of that first .
And we soon found , he was resolv'd not to be deny'd .


 During this Business , 't was pleasant to see my Uncle 's Countenance , which was compos'd of half a Smile , about one fourth Part Shame ( as I suppose , to have me a sort of an Auditor in this unlook'd - for dumb Work , ) and the other Fourth , Anger .
I believe such a Face cou'd not be compounded out of Le Brun 's Passions .
When their loving Affair was over , Consultation came on .


Well , said the Lady , what 's to be done ?
I have Reason to fear every thing  for I find this Boy grows upon him every Day .
To tell you the Truth , reply'd the Lawyer , I 'm at a Fault , and have lost the Scent , and know not how to proceed .
I know you Women are more fruitful in Inventions of this kind .
Indeed , if the Squire 's Head were once laid , I cou'd find an Expedient to secure the best Part of the Estate , without Danger , or finding out .
'T is not the first time I have disinherited the True Heir , without the Consent of the Predecessor , even for a small Sum  and you may be sure I shou'd use my utmost Skill for Thomas , who is our own Child  tho ' the Squire , I believe , imagines himself sole Proprietor in You and Him .
It 's a very perplexing thing , I vow !
reply'd the Housekeeper  I wish both their Necks  broke to-day in Hunting , with all my Heart !
Ay , that wou'd do , reply'd the Lawyer .
I 'd find a Will by to-morrow Night ( like Moscas in the Fox ) shou'd disappoint every boby else , without coming near his Punishment .
Well , I hope it 's no Crime , return'd the Housekeeper to wish 'em both in Heaven  nay , if I lent a helping Hand to fit 'em for their Journey , I believe my Conscience wou'd be as drowsy , as if it had sip'd off a Dose of Laudanum .
Oh fy !
return'd the Lawyer  let us not think of Murder , however  tho ' , if we were in Italy , I cou'd soon procure a Tradesman or two that deal that way , wou'd do the Work neatly , and very cheap too .
But let us not think of that any farther , than in our good Wishes .
And now let me hear what you can propose .
What Ready-money does he generally keep at home ?
( Not that I purpose to rob him , I have a better Principle . )
Or what Bank or Goldsmiths Notes has he at a time .
I do n't know , reply'd the Housekeeper , he keeps himself very close as to those Matters , and I seldom see any of his Money , but his paltry Hundred a Year that he allows me , and what I can ship out of Housekeeping , cutting off Tradesmen 's Bills , and so sorth , which does not amount to above Fifty more .


 Come , come , return'd the Lawyer , that 's good Pay only for rubbing a Man 's Head that 's turn'd of Fifty  he does not give you much Trouble , I believe .
I wonder how you wou'd conceal your Joy , to see that Head we speak of dangling over the Horse 's Tail , brought home as Crook-back'd Richard 's was , with his Neck , broke .
That wou'd be a joyful Sight indeed , return'd the virtuous Housekeeper .
My Uncle cou'd bear no more , but rush'd in upon them , just as she had ended .
But since I have sav'd my Neck hitherto , return'd my Uncle , I am resolv'd to hunt less , that I may not cause such an Alteration in your Minds , for those violent Emotions of the Soul often endanger the Body .


Perseus 's Shield cou'd not have a greater Effect on those that saw it , than the Presence of my Uncle had upon those two Wretches , for they both stood like Statues  but my Uncle put a little Life into the Lawyer with his Cane  yet not being fully reviv'd , he ran round the Room several times , before he cou'd find the Door .
At every Stroke of Acknowledgment my Uncle gave him for the Favours design'd him , he expostulated with him  and , to end his Favours , kick'd him down Stairs , telling him , he wou'd not take  any other Revenge , because , indeed , he did not think it worth while  but bid him go like a Villain as he was , and let his Crime be his Punishment .
But if he offer'd to make any Words in the Affair , he wou'd find some other Method , besides exposing him , to have him punish'd .


The Lawyer made no Reply , and , I believe , thought himself very well off .
Neither was there much Fear of his Tattling , because it wou'd only expose himself .
Now came the Lady 's Share of the Matter , who stood quaking and trembling in a Corner of the Room .
Will your Ladyship be pleas'd , said my Uncle , with your utmost Expedition , to pack up your Trumpery , and walk off ?
All the ill Usage you may expect from me , is to forget you  tho ' I think no Punishment bad enough for you .
Neither shall I leave you , or your Brat , to starve ( who in deed is innocent ) but allow him the Hundred Pounds a Year for his Life , that he may not suffer for the Faults of his Parents .
Go , continu'd my Uncle  let me have no Reply  take what , you can with you , and send for the rest when you think fit .
She went down Stairs , follow'd by my Uncle  and when she had taken a few Things , went out , without  opening her Mouth  but whether Grief , or Anger , ty'd her Tongue , I ca n't tell .
When she was gone , my Uncle order'd all her Things to be put together , ready against they were sent for , to the great Surprize of the rest of the Servants .


After Dinner , my Uncle took me with him to Town , to a Lawyer of his Acquaintance , and order'd him to fill up a Deed , that made his Estate liable to a Hundred Pounds per Annum , to be paid during the Life of the Housekeeper 's Son , tho ' not quite Fourteen .
I was made one of the Witnesses .
The next Morning , my Uncle order'd it to be sent to his Mother , for her to be satisfy'd  but the Lawyer that made it , was to be the Trustee , whose Honesty and Probity were as great as the other 's Villainy .
We then set out for the Widow 's House  and my Uncle told me in the Coach , he was resolv'd to be merry , notwithstanding this Bustle that happen'd : And , young Man , said he , You have sufficient Cause for Mirth at what has fall'n out , for your Estate will be increas'd  for if I had made my Will before , or not have found 'em out , I shou'd have left 'em more considerably .


When we came to the Widow 's , my Uncle told 'em the whole Story , and they all  seem'd mightily pleas'd upon my Account  for they imagin'd the Son of the Housekeeper was to have been Heir .
Yet I fansy'd Isabella 's Countenance seem'd the least concern'd , which struck me to the Soul .
After Dinner , I got the happy Opportunity of being alone with her , tho ' I imagin'd it was with much Regret on her Side .
Madam , said I , my Uncle 's expected Fortune does not give me half that Satisfaction , as this Opportunity , if you wou'd be pleas'd to consider my Passion .
I have consider'd it so far , Sir , return'd Isabella , that I desire we may think of it no more .
The Answer she gave , struck me dumb with Grief  and it was some time before my troubled Heart permitted my Tongue to speak .
Well , Madam , then , said I , you have resolv'd my Death .
I own , even the Hopes of Fortune do not give me Merit enough to raise my Eyes to such a Pitch of Happiness .
But Time , that produces very strange things , may befriend me in That .
I have told you , Sir , return'd the young Lady , our Years are too few to admit of Love  but whenever I shall feel the gentle Flame , I have very good Reasons to believe , I shall not much consult Fortune  I am convinc'd that Money-Matches are not always the happiest   yet the first thing ask'd in this Age is , What Fortune has she ?
If that answers their Expectations , then they proceed  if not , they look out farther , and barter for a Wife , as they wou'd for a Set of Coach-Horses .


In all our Discourse , I had some Hope , because I cou'd not find any Grounds for hating me  neither cou'd I prevail upon her to declare any thing in favour of me .
Her general Answer was her Want of Years  yet she told me , she had Discretion enough to conceal my Passion for her  and she wou'd often say her Reason was , that if a Person cou'd not have an Inclination for a Lover , yet they ought to have some Regard for 'em .
I was pressing her to give me some Token that I was not indifferent to her , when my Uncle came in , and interrupted us .
It was , I own , the first time I ever thought his Company a Trouble .
Come , young Man , said he , you 'll be suspected , you have been together a long time .
The Mother and Aunt sent me to part you .
Besides , yonder 's Matter for the young Lady 's Tears , the Burial of two Lovers .
We all went into the Garden , and saw two Coffins bearing to the Church .
We were told , the young Man  had liv'd in the Neighbourhood , and courting a young Woman of the next Parish , her Father had prevail'd upon her to marry another of a better Estate , which occasion'd the young Man 's Death , for the Morning of the Marriage was the last of his Life , making the River his Winding-Sheet .
The Bride and Bridegroom coming from Church , were stop'd by his Corpse lying in their Way  the melancholy Object had such an Effect upon the Bride , that she fell down speechless on the Body , and in a few Days expir [ ... ] d with Grief .
And her last Request was , to be bury'd together .


The Story made us all very melancholy , and Isabella cou'd not forbear shedding Tears at the Relation  but we rally'd one another out of our Sorrow .
Methinks , said the Mother , this Story wou'd make a very good tender Ballad .
You need not fear the Ballad , reply'd the Aunt , by some Grub-street Bard or other .
Why , said my Uncle , ca n't you make a Ballad , Billy ?
I have seen some of your Translations from Ovid 's Elegies , and such a dismal Subject , in my Imagination , will fit your Muse to a Hair .
Isabella seem'd mighty fond of such a Thing  tho ' I declin'd it , as having never drank of  the Streams of Helicon .
But when we came home , I sat down , and lanch'd out , tho ' I did not understand how to steer my Muse .
But the Hopes of pleasing Isabella , made me embark  and the next Day , I sent her the following Letter , by a Servant of my Uncle 's , with a Charge to deliver it into her own Hands .


1 .


MADAM ,


IN the pleasing Hope of giving you some small Satisfaction , I have ventur'd to walk out into the Field of Poetry : And tho ' perhaps , I have gather'd Weeds , yet you must consider , it is for want of Knowledge in the amiable Flowers .
But I had rather err in endeavouring to please you , than not to obey your Commands .
I beg you will not expose 'em .
I know you have Good-Nature enough not to let any one else laugh at my Want of Numbers .
Consider , all the Faculties of my Soul are yours  and I fear poor Damon 's Fate will be mine  for I am assur'd I neither cou'd , or wou'd , survive his Fortune .
But I too much doubt , if it comes to that , I shall never , after Death , meet with the same Pity as the unfortunate Damon .
I fear what I have already writ has disgusted you  but , consider it comes from one ,  that shall ever esteem it his only Happiness to subscribe himself


Your eternal Admirer , c..


2 .
THE BALLAD .


I. DAMON , whose tuneful Pipe had Charms , To wound and heal the wondring Throng , Long courted CAELIA to his Arms , 'T was CAELIA that inspir'd his Song .
II .
The lovely Virgin joys to hear His thrilling Pipe , and humble Verse  Yet frowns , when Sighs his Pains declare , Regardless of his Happiness .
III .
A sullen Swain , whose Wealth was great , By Force of Gold , her Parent gains : Poor DAMON , he bewails his Fate , In sighing melancholy Strains .
 IV .
And thus complains - Accursed Gold !
Thou base Betrayer of my Love !
Mean are the Hearts are bought , or sold  'T is Int ` rest does the Fair One move .
V .
The Nuptial Day was fixt , and near , Which added to poor DAMON 's Smart , Who ev'ry Moment dropt a Tear , The Prelude to a broken Heart .
VI .
The dusky Morn came low ` ring on , When all for Church prepare to go  The sable Clouds obscur'd the Sun , As loth to see the Lover 's Woe .
VII .
The jocund Bridegroom , swell'd with Joy , Ey'd CAELIA , as he pass'd along .
Exulting o'er the lovesick Boy , Who faintly press'd among the Throng .
VIII .
With wat ` ry Eyes he view'd the Bride , Who , seeing DAMON , sigh'd aloud !
And trembling by the Bridegroom 's Side , The Wonder of the gazing Crowd .
 IX .
Some pity'd DAMON  others rail : Such Wretches are no Friends to Love  On such the God will ne'er prevail , To sigh within the Paphian Grove .
X. Poor Slaves to low and base Desires , 'T is Love that new-creates the Mind !
Without his pleasing , gentle Fires , We 're sordid Metal , unrefin'd .
XI .
DAMON , depress'd with mortal Grief , Walks slowly by the River 's Side  By Hope forsaken !
No Relief !
And all his Thoughts were on the Bride .
XII .
Ye murm ` ring Streams !
the Shepherd cry'd , Who oft have heard my plaintive Voice , Convey my Body to the Bride , And shew that Death is now my Choice .
XIII .
Fond Love , farewell !
Adieu , vain Dream !
Farewell to ev'ry Grief and Pain  Thus said , he plung'd amid the Stream , And ne'er rose up to Life again .
 XIV .
The rapid Torrent rolls him down , Depriv'd , alas !
of breathing Life , Regardless now of CAELIA 's Frown , Who now returns , a Virgin Wife .
XV .
The Stream , repenting of the Deed , Threw DAMON 's Corpse upon the Grass , Scarce cold ( from Worldly Troubles freed ) Where CAELIA , and her Train , must pass .
XVI .
But when she view'd the well-known Face , And knew each pale , dead Feature there , She cry'd , poor DAMON !
hapless Case !
My stubborn Heart was too severe .
XVII .
But why do I accuse my Heart ?
'T was always thine , poor lifeless Boy !
In all thy Pains it bore a Part , A Part in ev'ry Grief , or Joy .
XVIII .
My rigid Parent caus'd this Woe , Whose flinty Heart no Love can prove  'T is he has wrought thy Overthrow , And robb'd me of my only Love .
XIX .
 But , since on Earth we cou'd not wed , This only Comfort still I have , My Heart shall join our Hands  tho ' dead , We 'll keep our Nuptials in the Grave .
XX .
Then kneeling down , his Lips she press'd , And , eager , clasp'd his pale cold Hand  The other beat her troubled Breast , While all the Hearers wondring stand .
XXI .
Come , gentle Death , the Virgin cry'd , Give DAMON to my longing Breast !
She sighing wept , and sighing dy'd , Replete with Woe , and sunk to Rest .
When the Servant return'd , he inform'd me , he had given it into her own Hands , unperceiv'd of any one .
I shew'd my Uncle the Song , who told me , he believ'd it as good as any of the Grub-street Quill-drivers cou'd write  but he wou'd not allow it to be a Degree better  however , said he , it may please the Women well enough , who seldom consider Sense , but Sound .
I reply'd , I was to be excus'd , it being my first Essay , and very probably might be my last .


 While we were at Dinner , a Messenger came with a Letter from my Father , desiring my Uncle to let me come home for a few Days , in order to get every thing ready for the University  when that was done , I shou'd return , and stay with him till I was to go there .
My Uncle agreed to it , and wou'd accompany me himself .
Sir , said I , wou'd it not be proper to wait upon the Ladies , to take Leave ?
Ho !
return'd my Uncle , are you so loth to part with 'em for so short a Time ?
What will you do , when you are at the University , where you must not return for the first Year ?
For a whole Year , Sir ?
said I : Is there a Necessity for staying so long , before I wait on you , or any of my Relations ?
Yes , reply'd my Uncle , if you wou'd be thought to mind your Studies  but I ca n't perceive , continu'd he , there is a Necessity for going there at all  and that is the Reason why I shall wait on your Worship to your Father , to endeavour to persuade him to let you and your Tutor be with me  I dare answer for you , it will not hinder the Progress of your Learning  you shall want neither Masters , Books , nor Money  and I am convinc'd the Universities often spoil more Youth , than they cultivate with good Education .
 Youth is like Wax , fit for any Impression  they as soon take an ill , as a good one .
Tho ' , I must own , I have nothing to fear from you  and I freely confess , 't is the Regret I have to part with you , makes me desire your not going to the University  tho ' if it does not agree with your Sentiments , I shall say no more about it .
I told him , I was very well inclin'd to it , and cou'd not but agree with his Thoughts .
Well then , said my Uncle , we 'll away immediately , and , if it 's possible , return to-morrow .
I hope that short Absence from the Ladies will not break your Heart .


I made him no Reply , but went to prepare for my Journey with a good Inclination , for , I must own , I long'd to see my Father , and observe how Matters were carry'd on at home , not doubting but my Mother-in-law was still in the Way of Goodness  tho ' I had receiv'd no Recommendation from her , either in my Father 's Letter , or by the Messenger , but I knew my Father seldom regarded those formal Matters .


As we came within three Mile of my Father 's , my Uncle 's Servant stopt a Horse that was running away without his Rider , and a little farther , we cou'd perceive a Man lying  weltring in Blood  when we approach'd him , we found him senseless  and I was something surpriz'd to find it the Surgeon that had the Care of me , when I was wounded by my Brother .
My Uncle was as much concern'd as I was , when he knew who it was .
We took him up , and found his Scull was fractur'd  but we did not doubt , if we cou'd get timely Aid , but he might be recover'd .
We put him into my Uncle 's Coach , and drove to the next Town , with all the Expedition was consistent with the Surgeon 's Condition  by good Fortune , we met with one of his own Acquaintance and Profession , who took him in Hand , dress'd him , and brought him to his Senses , tho ' with much Fear of his Life  he being a gross Man , a Fever had seiz'd the Blood  and all agreed , his Life was in Danger .
However , he seem'd very much pleas'd to find me so near him  and I had some Thoughts it might prove a convenient Opportunity to work out that Secret he inform'd me he knew of my Mother-in-law  but finding it not proper to talk much , I resolv'd with myself to come to him again : So we took our Leaves , and arriv'd safe at my Father 's , who , not expecting us the same Day he sent to us , was gone to visit a neighbouring Gentleman .


 My Mother seem'd very much rejoic'd at our Arrival , and welcoming me with Tears , her Tenderness gave me no small Satisfaction .
My Brother John , indeed , look'd as glum upon me , as if I had been come to rob him of his Birth-right .
My Uncle perceiving his Behaviour , rattled him , in his merry way  but it had no other Effect , than bringing Tears into his Eyes , and running to tell Mama .
Zounds !
says my Uncle ( when he was gone ) what a Country Cub it is !
Why do n't they put him Prentice to a Farmer , for he 'll never be fit for any thing , but to follow the Plough .


When my Father came home , he told my Uncle , he did not think he shou'd have comply'd with his Desires so soon , as not expecting me in two or three Days .
Why , said my Uncle , we made the more Expedition here , that we may return the sooner  and , because you shou'd not keep him too long , I came with him , to carry him back .
In short , the Matter was made up that Night .
It was agreed my Tutor and I shou'd go back with my Uncle .
I must own , I was not a little pleas'd , for I fear'd the good Woman , my Mother-in-law , might oppose it  but she readily consented , to save Charges , I suppose .


 While I was walking in the Garden alone , Betty came up to me , and wept for Joy to see me .
Well , said I , Betty , how go Matters between you and my Mother ?
Is the Affair made up ?
I hope I am to take no more Physic !
The poor Girl was ready to sink at the Word Physic .
Indeed , Sir , said she ( after a long Pause ) I believe you know every thing of former Affairs  but if you do , you also know I have sufficiently repented of my Part , and I hope my Mistress has of hers .
I gave her so many Hints , that she confess'd every thing .
I was struck with Horror at her Relation , for she discover'd such Traps they had design'd to get rid of me , that I thought it almost impossible they shou'd enter into the Minds of Women .
Sir , said Betty , you may find , by my Story , I am at a true Confession  nay , I wou'd kneel down at your Feet for Pardon , if it might not be observ'd by any body .
I told her , I had pardon'd her long ago , as well as my Mother , who might have had something of a stronger Tye to use me well , than she .
I hope , said Betty , she has forgot what is past , or if she remembers it , 't is only as I do , to think with Horror on what was design'd , and a high Satisfaction in knowing we are innocent  of the Fact  tho ' , pursu'd she , there does not seem to be that Candour and Freedom between us , as there was when we were wickedly caballing against your innocent Life  therefore I have some Intention of leaving her Service , and going to my Relations in Wales , where , I hope , I have enough to last me moderately all my Life .
I told her , I was assur'd my Uncle wou'd accept of her for his Housekeeper , upon my Recommendation , if she thought fit , for at present he had never a one .
She seem'd mightily rejoic'd at the Proposal , telling me , it was the only Thing she shou'd desire .
I bid her not take any Notice of it to any body , till she heard from me again  which she promis'd , and we parted .


The next Day , I took an Opportunity , early in the Morning , to visit the Surgeon , and found him much better than any one expected , tho ' he himself had no Thoughts of Recovery .
He told me , he was very much oblig'd to me , for the Care I had taken of him  and , notwithstanding he was convinc'd his End was near , yet he thought Providence had a Hand in sending me to his Assistance  therefore , as I wou'd not willingly go out of the World ( said he ) without acquainting you  with what I had formerly hinted to you , for fear you shou'd nourish the Opinion , that I wanted only to create Uneasiness , without any Grounds  therefore , if you please , now I find I have Strength enough , I 'll acquaint you with all I know , if you 'll order the Room to be clear'd for a little while  which was soon done .
I sat down by his Bedside , when he began as follows .


You know , we Country-Surgeons are generally bred Apothecaries .
I serv'd my Time with one , eminent in both Faculties , and it was allow'd by every body , I was not behindhand in my Master 's Experience .
He us'd to trust his Patients , in general , to me , after my Capacity had been thought equal to such a Charge .


Sir Charles , your Mother-in-law 's former Husband , liv'd near die Town , and my Master was very great there  insomuch , that it was thought the Knight was in a fair Road to Heaven , with my Master 's Assistance  but it is often the Fate of Cuckolds , to be one of the last in discovering his own Horns .
For several Years , the Knight and my Master were very gracious : They often rid a Hunting together .
But one Day , when it was suppos'd my Master wanted an Opportunity  of conversing with the Knight 's Wife , took an Occasion of leaving him , making all the Haste he cou'd to visit the Lady .
The Knight missing my Master , tho ' not mistrusting any thing of the Matter , went home likewise , and going up to his Lady 's Chamber , found the Door shut  but peeping thro ' the Keyhole , perceiv'd she had got his Companion with her , and both in a Posture not very decent .
The Knight , being neither a Hercules nor an Ajax , stood some time to consider what he shou'd do ( as he told me afterwards ) but at last , summoning all his Courage , he burst the Door open , and surpriz'd 'em very disadvantageously , giving my Master several Strokes upon the naked Buttocks , ere he cou'd put up the proper Covering  but , being a good-humour'd easy Man , and a Wittol to boot , at their Tears and Entreaties , forgave 'em both  but wou'd not allow of my Master 's Correspondence any more .
When any thing was wanted from the Shop , I always carry'd it  till , by degrees , I got into the good Graces of the Knight , and rid out a Hunting with him  tho ' not so often as my Master us'd to do  but I believe he gave me Leave more readily , that he might have a better Opportunity of visiting the Lady ,


 In one of the Knight 's drunken Moods , he discover'd what I have told you , between his Wife and my Master , which I was ignorant of before  but , said he , they have promis'd me never to do the like again .
I only smil'd at his Simplicity , and confirm'd him in his Belief  tho ' I was pretty well convinc'd , when I look'd a little backwards , they only met as often as they had an Opportunity .
In a few Days after this Confession , when I was a Hunting with him , he seem'd to be less merry than usual : I ask'd him the Reason : He told me , he believ'd his Wife continu'd to see my Master in a criminal manner  tho ' he was not convinc'd by Proof .
I ask'd him the Reason of his Belief .
Said he , going into my Wife 's Chamber this Morning , as she was dressing herself , a Letter drop'd from her Bosom , which I took up , and was well assur'd 't was your Master 's Hand  I open'd it , and had but just time to read , My Dear , when my Wife , in some Confusion , snatch'd it out of my Hand , and told me it was a Letter from a Relation of hers .
I told her , I was assur'd it was the Doctor 's Hand .
Well , said she , if you are jealous , you sha n't see it now  but I 'll give you Leave to read it when you come back from Hunting .
I  was forc'd to be satisfy'd , continu'd the Knight  but I shall be convinc'd 't is so , if she pretends to have lost the Letter .
The Knight took an Opportunity of seeing me the same Evening .
He told me , with a great deal of Joy in his Countenance , that he was deceiv'd .
See here the Letter that gave me so much Uneasiness .
I took it from him , and soon knew my Master 's Hand , tho ' he had endeavour'd to write not like himself .


I cou'd not chuse but smile at the Cheat that was put upon him  it was plain enough that she had acquainted my Master with the Matter , and while the Knight was gone a Hunting , he wrote her another in a Woman 's Name , beginning as the other did , about nothing at all to any Purpose .
I was convinc'd in my Supposition when I came home , for my Master pulling out a Parcel of Papers , gave me one to take Directions for compounding some Medicines  I soon found it was the Father to the Letter the Knight shewed some time before , for it began as the other did , and Sir Charles 's Name was mention'd in it .
I told my Master , smiling , I cou'd find no Directions there for me .
Odso !
said he , I have given you the wrong Letter  that neither concerns you nor me .
He immediately  fumbled out the right one , and went away in some Confusion of Countenance .
I was very uneasy myself , that he knew I had discover'd the Secret of his Intrigue , tho ' it cou'd not properly be call'd a Secret , that was whisper'd every where .


Some time after , my Master was caught again , making the Beast with two Backs with the Knight 's Wife  which so enrag'd the Cuckold , that he resolv'd to have Recourse to Law for Redress  but , as I was now his Oracle , I persuaded him from it , tho ' with some Difficulty , and in a little time his Resentment began to sleep again  tho ' he watch'd his Wife so narrowly , there cou'd be no Time to graft another Antler  for I must own to you , I did all I cou'd to prevent it , giving him Notice , when I suspected any Movement that way .
Yet , I must confess , had it been my own Case , I shou'd sooner have thought of revenging myself on the Cuckold-maker , than bore it so patiently  but there is nothing to be said for the Tempers of Men .


This Strictness continu'd for near half a Year , and , I verily believe , much to the Discontent of the Lady .
At last the Knight fell sick , perhaps thro ' his Perturbation of  Spirit , or for want of his usual Exercise  for he had undertaken a voluntary Confinement , in order to inspect the Actions of his Wife .
During his Illness , she seem'd very tender of him , hardly ever being from his Bedside  which the good-natur'd Knight took so kindly , that I even fansy'd he was resolv'd , when he was recover'd , to leave her to her own Conduct  for she express'd so much Sorrow for her past Actions , that I was myself deceiv'd .
The Disposition to Goodness of the Wife , had an extraordinary Effect on the Husband , and he began to mend apace : He left his Bed , where , thro ' Weakness , he had remain'd for ten Days , and walk'd about his Chamber , gathering Strength hourly , in less Time than his Illness had kept him in Bed .
He had recover'd his former Strength , and had fixt a Day with me to ride out  but , in the mean time he was to take some Physic which I sent him  but , to my great Surprize and Confusion , the Day he had taken it , I found him expiring in the utmost Agonies .
He was speechless when I came to him , and in less than five Minutes breath'd his last .


The Lady was all in Tears , rav'd at me , telling me I had certainly given him something by Mistake .
I assur'd her to the contrary ,  and inform'd her it was compos'd by my Master , before my Face , and what he had taken cou'd not hurt an Infant .
She held her Tongue , when she understood who it was that had made up what he took , which immediately struck my Fancy there was some Villainy in the Case .


My Master hearing of the Knight 's Death , came while I was there , and examining the Body , seem'd in very great Confusion .
We both went home together , without one Word passing between us .
When we had been there some time , my Master told me he had something to disclose , if I wou'd swear solemnly to keep it a Secret .
I answer'd him , if he was in any doubt of my Fidelity , to keep the Secret to himself .
Well then , said he , give me your Word not to discover it , and I will tell you  which I did .


I am afraid , said he , the Knight has not had fair Play for his Life  for , viewing his Body , I cou'd easily perceive strong Symptoms of Poison  and what strengthens my Opinion is , that some time ago she prevail'd upon me to let her have some Ratsbane , in order , as she said , to clear the Granary of Vermin .
I easily came into my Master 's Opinion  and , by his declaring it to me ,  was well assur'd he was innocent .
I am so shock'd , said my Master , at the Barbarity of the Woman , that I am resolv'd never to go near her more  neither will I make any further Enquiry into the Business , but leave her to her own wicked Thoughts .
Tho ' perhaps I have not , in my past Days , had any great Regard for Religion , and might leave it to be decided by Chance , as the King of Macasar did * : Yet she has so alarm'd my drowsy  Conscience , that I shall , for the future , endeavour to lead a Life consonant to one that thinks of Futurity .
We both agreed , it was the best way to be silent in the unhappy Affair .


In a few Days the Knight was bury'd , without the least Suspicion of any thing but a Natural Death .
My Master and I were invited to the Funeral , but neither of us went .
And , for my own Part , I never car'd to go near the House  for the Thought of its harbouring so cruel a Woman , made me abhor it .
My Master , I believe , imagin'd the same , for he never made the Widow a Visit .
In a Fortnight after the Funeral , she sent a Letter to my Master , which was to this Effect  ( for he gave it to me to read , having before that , freely declar'd to me the Correspondence that had past between 'em . )
She wonder'd  mightily at his long Absence  and that she wou'd have come to him long before , if Decency wou'd have permitted her  but she hop'd to see him that Evening , having dispos'd every thing to favour their Meeting .


My Master return'd her an Answer , I believe , little to her Expectation  telling her plainly , he resolv'd never to see her more  also hinting her unnatural Barbarity to her Husband .
I ca n't tell you what Effect it had upon her , but she sent no more Letters or Messages .
I often told my Master , I was afraid she wou'd resent his slighting of her , to his Prejudice : He laugh'd at that , as imagining himself out of her Power .
But , in less than a Month 's time , my unfortunate Master going to visit a Relation , about ten Miles from the Place where we liv'd , was found murder'd and thrown into a Copse near the Road .
He lay several Days before he was found  and might have laid longer , if a Gentleman had not gone thro ' that Way a Hunting .
I must confess , my Heart forboded some such Mischance , when sending to seek him at his Relation 's , was inform'd he went from thence the same Evening he came there .


 Great Inquisition was made after the Murderer , but was never found to this Day  yet , whoever did it , I was well assur'd within my self , the Widow had put 'em on  but as I cou'd not bring any Proof , I kept my Opinion to myself , well knowing , if I shou'd endeavour to prosecute her , it wou'd be a certain Charge to me , and perhaps discover nothing .
Yet , I must own , I cou'd never give her a good Word  and tho ' I had always a Watch upon my Tongue , yet I cou'd not avoid raving against her in all Companies .


Some time after the Death of my Master , I imagin'd I had found out the Murderer .
A Trooper that was quarter'd in the Town , of a sudden had got into the Equipage of a Gentleman , and it was shrewdly suspected he occupy'd the Widow .
I was convinc'd in my Suspicion .
One Morning early being call'd to one that was taken suddenly ill , and being oblig'd to pass by the Widow 's Door , I cou'd perceive , tho ' dark , her Door open , and this Trooper , mention'd before , let in by the Widow herself .
This Fellow , whenever he pass'd by our Shop , I cou'd perceive always a sudden Turn of Countenance from what he had on before .
One Day , as he was passing by , some of my Neighbours were talking  with me concerning the Murder of my late Master  and I cou'd not help saying , loud enough to be heard by the Trooper , that I suspected a Person that often pass'd by our Door , had been his Murderer , and look'd full in the Fellow 's Face .
He chang'd as pale as Ashes .
But all the while I staid in that Town , which was upward of two Years afterwards , I never set Eyes on him  and the next time I saw him , I found him lurking about your Father 's House , which convinces me not only that he was the Murderer of my Master , but that he corresponds with your Mother-in-law at this Time .


Now , Sir , added the Doctor , I have told you this Secret , which I have kept near Seventeen Years  neither shou'd I have discover'd it now , if I did not firmly believe I am going into another World  for , notwithstanding every one tells me I am much better , I am convinc'd I have not ten Days to live .
I endeavour'd to put him out of that idle Conceit , but all to no purpose .
So I took my Leave , after promising him to keep his Secret  and within the Time he mention'd , I was inform'd he dy'd , after telling the very Hour of his Death .
I return'd home , full of many disjointed Thoughts , wondering  how Providence had order'd my Father to marry such a wicked Woman .
But then again , I did not doubt but she had repented of her former Wickedness , and walk'd in the Paths towards Grace , which gave me some Comfort , but not enough to hinder my wishing she never had been one of our Family .


Betty had told me nothing of this Affair , neither was I assur'd she liv'd with her at that time  but I was resolv'd to be inform'd the first Opportunity .
In the Afternoon , I took an Occasion to get my Tutor out of the way , and being alone , beckon'd Betty to come to me .
Pray , said I , Betty , do you know any thing of my Mother 's former Husband , Sir Charles ?
No , Sir , said she , I came to live with my Lady not long before her Marriage to your Father .
But , said I , know you nothing of a Galant of my good Mother-in-law 's ?
for I have some Reason to suspect her of being guilty that way .
Indeed , said she , blushing , that is the only Thing I have kept a Secret from you , and , I believe , the very Reason of my Lady 's Coldness to me  for the Person she corresponds with , or rather , the Person she has corresponded with , for I have great Hopes she has left it off , coming to me as usual , I flatly deny'd him Entrance ,  and farther told him , I was assur'd my Lady wou'd break off with him , being asham'd of the Injury she had done so good a Husband .
I never acquainted my Lady with what I said to him  but I observ'd her Coldness took beginning some time after this .
I ask'd her what sort of Person he was ?
She told me , a young Gentleman of a very good Family , fallen to Decay , who she believ'd was forc'd , thro ' Necessity , to what he did .
That ca n't be the Person , said I , that I suspect  for he I mean , must be above Forty .
There is , said Betty , sometimes , a Man of that Age with my Lady  but she ever took care to keep their Affair private , even from me  but however , I am assur'd there is no criminal Conversation between 'em .


I did not tell Betty any thing that I knew of what the Doctor inform'd me  but we parted with an Assurance of my succeeding with my Uncle in what I promis'd her .
In the Afternoon my Uncle rid out with me , when I broke the Matter about Betty .
I thought , said my Uncle , you had enough of Housekeepers already .
Sir , said I , I have enough of such a one as your last  neither am I afraid of any great Familiarity between you , for Betty is neither young , nor handsome .
 Nay , said my Uncle , I can give you a better Reason than all that , which I am assur'd you 'll soon come into , and that is , I am not so young , by Twenty Years , as I was Twenty Years ago .
That 's true , Sir , said I  but I am flatter'd I can give you a better Reason that you shou'd accept of Betty , that is , it is the only Thing I can desire of you .
Well , said my Uncle , your Desires shall be granted .
But we must limit Betty 's Power  for you know the former had all in her own Hands .
I told him , I wanted nothing else , but that she might be accepted  we would both leave the Terms to him .
But hold , said my Uncle , I have one Scruple just now arose , concerning this Affair , which must be got over , and that is , whether my Sister will be willing to part with her .
Sir , said I , if you will hear me a little while with Patience , and give me your Word never to disclose what I shall tell you , I will inform you of something will very much surprize you .
Well , said my Uncle , I shall come to your Terms , be they what they will .


I then related to him all that had happen'd while I was at home , in every Circumstance .
When I had finish'd , my Uncle was quite confounded !
Is it possible , said he , there  can be such a Woman breathing ?
If I did not give Credit to you , continu'd he , I shou'd have imagin'd I had heard a Romance .
But , however , I am convinc'd , and think my Service for Betty but poor Recompence for her Return to Virtue .
But I know not how to look on that injurious Woman , who may , under the Cover of Affection , still retain her Barbarity .
I think it wou'd be but just and reasonable to give my Brother some Hint of her former Inhumanity .
A Woman of her Cunning may counterfeit Virtue , when she is replete with Vice .
I beg'd my Uncle not to take any farther Notice of it , 'till we had some Grounds of her returning to Wickedness  and if we shou'd find the least swerving from Virtue , to bring Betty for Proof of what was past , and put my Father out of all manner of Danger from her Wiles , or Resentment .


I know not , said my Uncle  I like it not , and shall hardly be persuaded to conceal the Knowledge of her Perfidy .
You know the old Saying , Boy , What 's bred in the Bone , is never out of the Flesh .
Dear Uncle , said I , let me intreat you to conceal what I have told you , till we perceive something in her Conduct to give us Cause to suspect her again ,  and then you may do just as you please , He promis'd to comply with my Request , which gave me no small Satisfaction .


When we came home , we found my Father , and Mother-in-law , very merry in the Garden  but finding myself little inclin'd to Mirth , I left my Uncle to make one of the Company .
Beside , I wanted to confer with Betty , but cou'd not find her all over the House .
I imagin'd she might be walking under the Trees before the House , so , upon that Supposition , went to seek her  when I had got thro ' the Court-Yard , I perceiv'd Betty was not there  but I cou'd not help observing an old Woman prying about the House , with a Basket upon her Arm : I went to her , and demanding of her , whether she had any Business there , she answer'd she had some fine Oranges for my Lady .
My Lady is at present busy , said I  but pray let me see your Oranges  which she did , after some aukward Difficulty .
Her Reluctance in shewing me her Fruit , rais'd a Suspicion in my Mind , which made me resolve to be satisfy'd , if possible .
They are fine Oranges , good Woman , said I  and I believe my Lady will buy 'em all : But I wish you had some Peaches , for I have a great Mind to  some , and wou'd give a good Price for 'em .
I wish I had known that , said the old Woman , I cou'd have brought you some of the finest in England .
I told her , if she wou'd go back and fetch 'em , I shou'd be very much oblig'd to her .
You may leave your Basket in that Green-House , to secure 'em  I 'll lock the Door , and give you the Key .
She seem'd willing to consent to that  so I did as I said , gave her the Key , and away she went .
As soon as she was out of Sight , I went the Back-way , and got into the Green-House thro ' the Window .
I began to examine her Basket very narrowly , yet found nothing that I expected to find  but handling the Oranges , I perceiv'd one of 'em to be very light , and at last found it was hollow .
I undid it , with much Difficulty , for it was put together with Pins without Heads .
In it I found a Slip of Paper roll'd up , whose Contents I transcrib'd with a Pencil :


MY DEAR ,


I AM out of my Senses .
Burleigh has been with me , and threatens to discover both you and me to your Husband  and farther adds , if you miss sending him Fifty Pounds in three Days , he will declare a Secret that will endanger  your Life , and yet escape himself .
I know not what he means  but if he has any such Secret , the best way will be to stop his Mouth , by sending him the Money .
Shall we never meet again ?
Consider how long it is since you blest me last .
I am amaz'd at the Treatment I receiv'd from Betty .
And notwithstanding in your last , you gave me Hopes of a sudden Meeting , yet I am apt to believe she spoke Truth , when she declar'd you wou'd shake of all Commerce with me .
Therefore ( if you wou'd not have me believe her ) let me see you to-morrow at the Bearer 's House , where I shall wait the whole Day with impatient Expectation .
If you will comply , and have not an Opportunity of Writing , tell her , All 's well  and by those Words , I shall be satisfy'd till to-morrow .
For ever Yours ,


S. W .


When I had done , I put it up again , and , with much Difficulty , left it in the same Order as I found it .
I then return'd to expect the Woman .
I really imagin'd by this Letter , that my Mother-in-law design'd to be honest , and what she had wrote to her Galant , was only a Pretext to keep him quiet .
However I did design to suspend my Judgment  till the next Day  and if I perceiv'd my Mother went to the Place appointed , it wou'd not be unnatural to believe her still guilty .


When the Woman brought me the Peaches , I ask'd her , if I shou'd acquaint my Mother that she was there .
Yes , Sir , said she , if you please , and thank you too .
I immediately went , and met her coming out of the Garden .
When I told her who wanted her , I cou'd perceive her Countenance change  but she hid her Confusion , by wiping her Face with her Handkerchief .
I wou'd fain have follow'd her , to have observ'd ( tho ' at a Distance ) her Behaviour to the Woman  but she took her into a back Parlour , shutting the Door after her .
They were a pretty while together , and , when they parted , I cou'd perceive a great deal of Discontent in the Countenance of my Mother-in-law .
When the Woman was gone , I resolv'd to follow her , and try , if by any Stratagem I cou'd find my Mother 's Resolutions .
I soon overtook her , at which she seem'd something surpriz'd .
Good Woman , said I , I came after you to know whereabouts you dwell , for your Fruit was so good , as I ride out now and then , I design to call upon you , to buy some more   for tho ' , added I , we have Fruit enough in our own Garden , it is so narrowly watch'd by the Gardener , according to my Mother 's Directions , that I can never get any .
That is ( reply'd the old Go-between ) for fear you shou'd eat too much .
However , if you have a mind to traffick that way with me , I live in such a Place , I am easy enough to be found , every Child knows Goody - Well then , said I , I 'll come to see you to-morrow in the Afternoon .
Odso !
return'd the old Woman , now I think o n't , I sha n't be at home to-morrow  but any other time you 'll be sure to find me .
Why , if you are not , said I , I suppose you have somebody at your House that can serve me .
No , indeed ha n't I , return'd the Woman .
I ask'd her so many Questions , that , tho ' a Woman ignorant enough , she began to smell a Rat , and seem'd so very shy in her Answers afterwards , that plainly inform'd me she was tir'd of my Company .
She at last told me , she wou'd not sell me any Fruit if I came for it , for fear it shou'd do me an Injury .
I try'd many Ways to bring her into Humour again , but to no Purpose , and I did not care to say any more , for fear she shou'd be confirm'd in her Suspicions .
However , I kept her so long in  Talk , that a Man met us , who I observ'd wanted to discourse the old Woman .
When he came up with us , I cou'd perceive the old Woman wink at him , and seem'd to exact from him a cautious Behaviour .
The Person seem'd to be in some Confusion  however , he call'd her by her Name , and ask'd whose Child I was  with a great many common Words of Pretty Youth , and so forth  but when she told him who I was , his Countenance express'd the utmost Confusion .
He ask'd her , in a hasty manner , What Business I had with her ?
I do n't know ( said the old Woman ) Master wants to buy some Fruit of me , and wou'd fain come to-morrow , and I have told him , I sha n't be in the Way .
If that be all , answer'd the Gentleman , looking wistfully on the old Woman , you may comply with the young Man , for I suppose you will not be abroad all Day .
No , said the old Woman , only in the Afternoon .
Why , said I , 't is only in the Morning that I can come out  but you seem , said I to the old Woman , not very willing to part with what you deal in , to me , as perhaps doubting my Pay .
But to convince you I am sincere in what I say , there 's Money beforehand , and I desire you will save me two Dozen of the  same I had of you to-day , and I 'll be with you by Seven a Clock in the Morning .


She made several aukward Speeches in receiving my Money  but I found the Sight of it pleas'd her very well  and so we parted .
I had a strong Desire to know their Conference , but I was oblig'd to be contented till the next Day .
I did not doubt of my Mother-in-law 's going to the Place of Rendezvous  but then I imagin'd she might go to pacify that Burleigh mention'd in the Note .
However , I resolv'd with myself to keep it a Secret from my Uncle , and use my utmost Endeavour to know something of their Conference the next Day .


I arose next Morning , without sleeping a Wink all Night , my Thoughts were so confus'd and troublesome to me .
I got out before my Uncle , or any of the Family were stirring , except some of the Servants .
I directed my Steps towards the Town , and met the old Woman before I had got half way .
I was somewhat surpriz'd , because it was not much past Six , which was an Hour before I promis'd to come .
So , said I , good Woman , you are resolv'd to save me a Walk , I see .
No , Sir , said she , not for that  but I have a fresh Parcel of Oranges come in last Night ,  and my Lady order'd me to bring some of the first I had .
Why , good Woman , said I , she ca n't want any yet , sure  you brought her a sufficient Quantity Yesterday , to serve her a great while , even as long as they will last good .
I ca n't tell for that , said she , but as long as she order'd me to bring her some , I 'll e ` en carry 'em .
But , said I , why did not you bring my Fruit at the same time .
Laud !
said the old Woman , I protest I forgot it .
But I shall be back presently , and then I 'll gather 'em fresh for you  for as yet , I 'll assure you , they are growing .
I soon found , by all this Hurry , there was another Letter to be deliver'd , and I was resolv'd to read it by fair means , or otherwise .
Pray , said I , good Woman , how do you sell your Ware a Dozen ?
Why truly , Sir , said she , Half a Crown .
Why then , said I , I 'll give you the Money , and make my Mother a Present of 'em .


The Woman was struck dumb at what I said .
But at last she recover'd her Confusion , and , with a stammering Tongue , told me she wou'd not do such a Thing for all the World .
Pray , good Woman , said I , can you , out of your Wisdom , tell me what Reason you have for refusing me your Oranges ,  when I offer to pay you for 'em , and carry 'em home myself , without giving you any farther Trouble ?
She cou'd not give me any reasonable Answer to my Question  so I e ` en resolv'd to declare to her my Knowledge of her Affair , which , when I had done , she fell down upon her Knees , and begg'd I wou'd forgive her  telling me , she wou'd never be guilty of the like again .
Good Woman , said I , the Way to make me excuse you , and keep this a Secret , ( tho ' such a guilty Commerce is the greatest Crime ) is to deliver me your whole Affair , and deal ingenuously with me .
I have given you convincing Proofs that I know your Proceedings hitherto , and shall be able to judge whether you are sincere or no .
Why then , truly , Sir , said she , all I have done was merely out of Necessity .
Mr. Wigmore , you know , has a very persuasive Tongue , especially back'd with his Money .
Well , good Woman , said I , go on , for at present , I have no Acquaintance with the Person you mention .
Really , nor I neither , but that he has come often to our House to meet my Lady  and it was the same Person you saw with me Yesterday .


 I was too eager to ask many Questions , therefore , I bid her tell me what was her present Errant .
Nothing , Sir , but to carry a Letter in an Orange , as I did Yesterday in the Afternoon .
Upon that , I took out the Orange she told me it was in , and read as follows :


DEAR MADAM ,


THO ' I was infinitely rejoic'd at your kind Letter Yesterday , and the pleasing Hope of seeing you to-day  yet I must beg of you , for both our Safeties , to defer my longing Expectations , till we can find some more convenient Place of meeting .
That Villain , Burleigh , has been with me again , and has , by some means unknown to me , discover'd our Meeting  therefore , let me once more intreat you to think of some other Place , where we may feed our famish'd Joys .
The time will not permit you to send me any Answer by our Emissary , who , I believe , is very faithful  therefore I will wait in my usual Disguise , at the usual Place  but let me beg you , by our past Enjoyments , to fix by this Afternoon , a secure Place , where I may take to my Arms all that is valuable in this World , to the expecting


WIGMORE .


 P. S. I beg you , for both our Quiets , to stop the Mouth of the implacable Burleigh .


When I had read the Note , I was well convinc'd my Mother was return'd to her former Vice  but cou'd not determine which was the best Way , either to send the Letter , or keep it to shew my Father and Uncle , to convince 'em of her Perfidy .
While I was reading the Epistle , the Woman had time to come to herself  and ask'd me how she shou'd behave in the Affair .
For , said she , if I go back , Mr. Wigmore will certainly discover me  therefore , if you will please to instruct me in what I shall say to him , I will be sure to follow your Directions .
Well , good Woman , said I , since you are so condescending , I 'll ask your Advice , for I do n't doubt , however you express yourself in Words , you have Cunning enough in your Business to advise me .
If you think so , Sir , said she , you shall have my Counsel , such as it is .
Hold then , said I , since it is so , let me do as a Client shou'd do , pay my Fee beforehand .
Upon saying this , I gave her a Crown .
She was very much surpriz'd at it , and view'd me from Head to Foot , as if she had said , she cou'd not imagine I was  Master of such a Sum .
When she had recover'd her Speech ( for old Women do n't want Tongue long ) I find , said she , by your Fee , you expect good Counsel  therefore I wou'd advise you , if you can counterfeit a Hand any thing like your Mother 's , to send him an Answer , that shall forewarn him to come to her any more .
I fear , said I , good Woman , we shall be found out , for such an Answer will be too sudden for the kind Return she sent him Yesterday .
Why , I think you are in the right there , reply'd the old Woman  and I believe it was kind enough , for he kiss'd it several times when he first had it , seeming greatly pleas'd  and since you do n't approve of my Advice , I dare swear you can tell what to do without me .
Pr ` y-thee , said I , good Woman , know you any thing of the Affair between my Mother-in-law and this Wigmore ?
Your Sincerity in your Confession shall oblige me to find a Recompence .
Really , reply'd the Woman , I know nothing more , than that they have met at my House about some Dozen times  and I was so well paid , that I must freely own , I wish it had been oftner  for indeed , young Sir , I am a very poor Woman , and Money , as I told you before , carries a great deal of  Persuasion with it  tho ' I must needs own , I wou'd much rather have gotten Money honestly : But then again , if I had not undertaken the Affair , somebody else wou'd  so I thought it was as much my Business as - Well , well , Mistress , I am not asking what was the Motive that induc'd you to it  I am pretty well acquainted with it already : But I wou'd know what Correspondence has been carry'd on between the Parties .
Indeed , Sir , I know no more than I have told you before , that they meet at my House , and have a private Room to themselves .
Mr. Wigmore and your Mother , both were Strangers to me a Twelvemonth ago  and I know no more of Mr. Wigmore now , but that he comes to our Town almost every Day , and they say he lives at a Lord 's about ten Mile off , but I have forgot his Name .
But , Sir , I wou'd not have you defer what you intend to do , any longer , for Mr. Wigmore will think me long a coming , and perhaps come to meet me , as he has often done .
You advise well , I return'd  one Word more , and I have done .
Have you no Knowledge of one Burleigh that is mention'd in this Note ?
No really , Sir , said she  but I know there has been a Man with Mr. Wigmore , and his Visits  have given him much Uneasiness  but I do n't know the Reason of it .


I was convinc'd by the Woman 's manner of speaking , that she was sincere in what she said  and as she knew nothing more , I was resolv'd to ask her no more Questions  but being fortunately provided with a Pencil and some Paper , I wrote the following Words :


Mr. WIGMORE ,


I HAVE at last repented of my Behaviour to a Husband that deserves the best of Wives  therefore I beg you will do your endeavour to forget me , it being the safety Conduct for us both .
I fear I am suspected already , and the way to wipe off all manner of Suspicion , is no more to be guilty .
Farewell , and be happy .


I read the Note to the old Woman , who approv'd of it .
I had counterfeited my Mother 's Hand so well , that it cou'd hardly be distinguish'd , especially being wrote with a Pencil And I order'd the Woman to tell Mr. Wigmore , that my Mother was in a Chamber where she had not the Conveniency of Pen and Ink .
The old Woman put it up in the room of the other , giving me her Promise to be very faithful in her new Commission .
 I gave her Assurance of being well rewarded for her Pains , and so we parted .


As I was going home , I began to consider what I had done , and soon imagin'd this Affair of my Mother 's cou'd not be long a Secret  therefore I resolv'd within myself to take an Opportunity of disclosing it to her , with a faithful Account of all the Proceedings , as well as the Knowledge I had of her intended barbarous Design against me .
I did not know , but this might deter her from her cruel Intentions .
But then I began to consider , that in all my Readings I had learnt , the Cruelty of a Woman was hard to be remov'd .
Therefore I determin'd to declare all to my Uncle , and take his Advice upo n't .


When I came home , the Family were at Breakfast , which was something earlier than usual  but I was soon acquainted with the Reason , for my good Mother-in-law , it seems , did design to set out immediately to see a Friend that was dangerously Ill. .
As this was no new thing , so it alarm'd no one but me  for the good Woman pretended to understand abundance of things , and was a second Lady Bountiful .
This Practice , I suppose , she took up to blind the Eyes of my Father  and Family , that they might not look too narrowly into her Actions .
When I was sat among 'em , I was ask'd to drink Tea , but I excus'd myself , by telling 'em I had my Breakfast already , and look'd my Mother full in the Face  but she regarded me not , having , I suppose , her Thoughts taken up concerning that Day 's Business .
Pray , said my Uncle , have you broke your Fast with Homer , or Virgil , this Morning ?
Neither , Sir , said I  I have kept no other Company but Juvenal to-day .
And why so fond of Satyr , Sir ?
said my Uncle  that favours of Ill-Nature .
True , Sir , I return'd  for I can not think the Writings of either Juvenal or Petronius , true Copies of those Times : I can not imagine either the Men , or the Women , such Monsters of Iniquity , as those Authors represent 'em .
That , reply'd my Uncle , proceeds from the simple Innocence of thy own Thoughts : But we have Instances every Day of the Inhumanity , and all other vicious Principles , of either Sex .
Are not the Sessions-Papers frequently fill'd with barbarous and inhuman Murders , Men of their Wives , and Wives of their Husbands and Children ?
But the crying Sin of Murder is oftner perpetrated by the Women  than the Men , being their Passions are more violent and vindictive , and once enter'd in the Road of Wickedness , they generally travel to the End o n't .


I observ'd , my Mother-in-law did not very well relish the Discourse , therefore order'd her Pad to be ready .
What , said my Uncle , does my Sister go alone ?
Sure , it will not be improper for a Servant to wait on her , No Sir , reply'd my Mother , I always visit my Patients alone , for this Reason  if I shou'd take a Servant with me , they wou'd presume on the Benefit the Patient might hope to receive , expecting some Reward  which to avoid , I never take one with me .
Beside , I am so well known round me Country , that I never met with any Insults from any one .
Nay , said my Uncle , smiling , Innocence and Virtue are sufficient Guards  and those , I do n't doubt , but my Sister takes along with her .
She made him no Answer , but immediately mounted , and rode away .
As soon as she was gone , I ran up to the Top of the House , where was a Cupola that commanded a large Prospect .
I perceiv'd , ere she had got a Quarter of a Mile from our House , she met a Countryman , who stop'd , and discours'd together .
I had a Perspective in  my Study , which I had brought up with me , and I cou'd plainly perceive they were very earnest in Discourse  for I cou'd distinguish their Countenances as plain as if they had not been forty Yards from me .
After talking some time , I observ'd my Mother stoop down to kiss him ( first looking about if the Coast was clear ) then turn'd her Horse 's Head , in order to come home again , as I thought .
Upon this I immediately went down to acquaint my Uncle with my Morning 's Adventure , but was inform'd that my Father and He were shut up together in his Closet .
As they had lock'd the Door , I suppos'd they had no mind to be disturb'd , therefore retir'd , with a Mind in the utmost Confusion of Thought  for I imagin'd , with Probability enough , that my Uncle was acquainting my Father with what I had inform'd him of my Mother-in-law .


The Anxiety I felt for what I suppos'd wou'd follow , when all was discover'd , almost robb'd me of my Understanding .
I took several hasty Turns in the Court-Yard , without knowing where I was .
At last it occur'd to my Memory , that I had seen my Mother-in-law turn her Horse 's Head , in order , as I imagin'd , to come Home , but wonder'd  at her Delay , for more time was past than was necessary for her Return , at a moderate Pace .
After waiting , and not seeing her , I began to think she had alter'd her Resolution , and proceeded on her intended wicked Journey .
While I was ruminating on this wretched Affair , my Father and Uncle came to me .
My Uncle told me , he had been depositing a Copy of his Will into my Father 's Hands , that if Death shou'd pay him a Visit unexpectedly , and the Lawyer out of the way , we might , by having Recourse to that Copy , know how far I was beholden to him .


After some Talk , I took an Opportunity to let my Uncle know I had something to communicate to him , who was as forward to give me an Occasion of talking with him .
When we were disengag'd from my Father , I acquainted my Uncle with what I had done Yesterday , and this Morning , and what Observations I had made on my Mother-in-law .
Certainly , said my Uncle , this Woman as far exceeds the lascivious Queen of Naples in Wickedness , as she did the rest of her Sex .
What think you , Sir , said I , if we take Horse , and follow her ?
It may be we may have the Fortune of finding the Bottom of  this Intrigue  or at least , from thence , know how to form your Behaviour to her and my Father .
My Uncle lik'd my Advice so well , that we immediately mounted our Horses , without letting my Father know of our going .
Ere we had gone half a Mile , the Horse my Uncle rode on , which was one of my Father 's , fell a neighing , and was answer'd by another in a neighbouring Thicket .
As we went forward , the Horse seem'd willing to go that way .
Nay , said my Uncle , if you have such a Mind to go out of the Road , I 'll humour you for once  it may be , as we are Knights-Errant , we may meet with some extraordinary Adventure .
Accordingly , he gave the Horse the Reins , and he readily enter'd the Copse .
The first thing our Eyes encounter'd , was my Mother 's Pad ty'd to a Tree  and a little farther , behind some Shrubs , we discover'd my good Mother-in-law , and a likely Country-Fellow , very familiar together .
You may guess their Surprize at the Sight of us  and ours was almost as great .
But my Mother-in-law recover'd herself the soonest , ran to Horse , mounted without any Help , and rode off .
On my Conscience , said my Uncle , the honest Countryman has put Vigour into her  Ladyship  but I think it a Pity he shou'd go unrewarded , and that he may be the fitter for running , we 'll make him something lighter .


The Man found it was to no Purpose to attempt running away , as he was on Foot , therefore he approach'd us with a submissive Behaviour , and beg'd our Pardon , imagining we were Strangers to my Father and his Wife  telling us , he hop'd we wou'd not expose a Lady to an injur'd Husband 's Resentment .
Sir , said I , I remember you now , notwithstanding your Disguise , and this is not the first time you have seen me : Call to mind Yesterday  look in my Face , and then consider the Injury you have done my worthy Father and his Family .
I then inform'd my Uncle , this was the Person that met me Yesterday conversing with the old Woman who was the Letter-Carrier .
Then , said the disguis'd Countryman , I find all is discover'd !
But , if you are Persons of Honour , you will not oppress a naked Man .
I own my Guilt , nay , will confess the whole Progress of it , if you will forgive me : Do but keep it a Secret from the Husband , and I farther vow , never to be guilty that way again .


 I am a Gentleman of a good Family , but fallen to Decay .
Necessity first drew me into this criminal Conversation with the Lady  tho ' I must own , notwithstanding our Disparity of Years , I have a tender Regard for her .
Youth do not always weigh their Actions , and , for want of Thought , plunge into Crimes , we are afterwards asham'd of .
Well , young Man , said my Uncle , tho ' you have injur'd a noble Family , yet , as you seem to repent of your past Folly , and if you fulfill your Promise of revealing this black Correspondence , I shall freely pardon you , and desire never to see you more .
I thank you , reply'd the Offender  but I must farther beg you to mend your Promise , by concealing this Affair from all the World .
Well , said my Uncle , notwithstanding this Woman 's Wickedness , which you are a Stranger to , at least , the worst Part of her vile Intentions , I will , with this young Gentleman 's Consent ( pointing at me ) keep this a Secret , till we have Reason to suspect she continues in her wicked Courses .
That 's all I ask , or can well desire , said the Gentleman in Disguise , and began as follows .


I was born younger Brother to a numerous Issue , and therefore design'd for a Tradesman .
 I was put Prentice to a Mercer in the City , where I learnt little else but Idleness and Intriguing  and wronging my Master , by mispending his Time and Money .
You may perceive , Gentlemen , said he , I intend to be sincere , by revealing the Crimes of my first setting out in the World .
My Fellow-Prentices , I believe , had no more Honesty than myself , tho ' we were never privy to each others Secrets .
Before I had serv'd three Years of my Time , my Master found his Business in a very declining Condition  as indeed how cou'd it be otherwise , when he had so many Harpies about him .
His Friends , to do him Service , had a Statute of Bankrupcy taken out against him , which , in a Year or two turn'd much to his Advantage  for by that means he got rid of his Creditors , and his Servants .


He has since marry'd a good Fortune , and drives a flourishing Trade .
My Relations press'd him to accept of me for the Remainder of my Time , but he had too just an Opinion of me , to comply with their Requests .
The Character I bore , was the Obstacle that no one of the Trade wou'd entertain me  and my Relations perceiving how Matters went , thought it was to no Purpose  to think of the Counter for me , therefore prevail'd upon a noble Lord to accept me for his Gentleman , who , out of Regard to my Family , us'd me like one .
'T is needless to inform you of the many Intrigues I went thro ' while I was a Retainer with this noble Peer  but I shall proceed to the Affair with this Lady .


The first time I saw her , was at a neighbouring Gentlewoman 's , a Relation to our Family , and a Lover of Intrigues .
Once every Week she had an Assembly , where all the idle People of Fashion resorted to Game , and make merry .
I observ'd , she often cast a favourable Eye upon me , tho ' it was some time before I took any Notice of it .
But one Day losing a considerable Sum at Quadrille , I was walking very melancholy alone in the Garden , with troubled Thoughts how to get more  I was interrupted in my Meditations by this Lady , who , after much Talk of indifferent Matters , told me , a young Gentleman without Money , made but a dismal Figure .
Come , come , said she , do n't let 's lose your Company for want of a little Trash .
Gamesters have various Fortune  she may cast a more favourable Eye upon you , at your next Trial  therefore there 's a  Hundred Pieces to tempt her  I do n't doubt but you will soon be in a Capacity to pay me .


I was so overjoy'd at the Sight of the Money , that I was too eager for Play , to return her then the suitable Thanks for so great a Favour  but immediately hurry'd among the Gamesters , and in less than an Hour , recover'd my own Money , and a handsom Sum beside , at Basset .
Immediately after , the Company broke up Play , and went to Supper .
My good Fortune had so much elevated me , that I had no Stomach to eat ( for I believe Extremes either way , for some time , spoil the Appetite ) therefore I took a Walk in the Garden again , in a far better Temper than when I was there before .
I had not walked long , ere I perceiv'd the Lady in the same Walk  but whether she had continu'd there , or had come after me , I cou'd not tell , for my good Fortune had quite blinded me .
However , I went up to her , and thank'd her for the great Favour I had receiv'd  and was fumbling for the Money to repay her .
Come , said she , I am not in such Haste , we 'll find a Time to be paid  after Supper , no doubt , you 'll try the fickle Dame again , therefore keep it , till I demand  it of you  it 's very possible I may soon stand in as much need of it , as you did some time ago  till then , you shall be my Banker .


I do n't know how much farther we shou'd have proceeded , if we had not been interrupted by some of the Company  which she perceiving coming towards us , gave me a gentle Press by the Fingers , and left me .
It was not very difficult to guess , she had a farther Meaning in leaving her Money in my Hands , and I must own I was not displeas'd with the Thoughts of it , for even her Person did not seem despicable to me  so , on that Score , I shou'd not need much Constraint in my Compliance  but the Pleasure of being paid for whatever Trouble I shou'd be at , was the most prevailing Argument .
The next Assembly I was prevented in making one of the Company , because my Lord took me out a Hunting .
The Morning following , an old Woman brought me this Letter ( pulling one out of his Bosom ) which I took from him , by my Uncle 's Order .
See , Billy , said he , if it be that ill Woman 's Hand  when I assur'd him it was , I read the Contents as follows 


 SIR ,


I SHOULD have been very well pleas'd if you cou'd have made one of the Company Yesterday , for Fortune was so favourable to me to keep me in Countenance during the whole Evening .
I have another Sum to put into my Banker 's Hands  and if he will follow the Directions of the Bearer , he may have full Possession of it this Evening .


Yours , c..


I was very well pleas'd with this Billet , and took Instructions where to wait on the Lady .
When Evening came , I went to the Place appointed , where I found her waiting with some Impatience , as she told me .
The old Woman left us alone  and it was not long ere we came to a right Understanding , which Acquaintance has continu'd upwards of four Years  yet I must own to you , her Conversation was always agreeable to me , setting aside my Interest .
But , Sir , said I , in one of your Letters you sent a Day or two ago , you mention one Burleigh , and that you fear'd some rash Proceedings from him .
Pray what do you know of him ?
Really , very little , reply'd Wigmore : But I am very much surpriz'd  that you know any thing of that Letter  I never thought the old Woman wou'd have betray'd me .
No , said I , she has not betray'd you , she was only over-reach'd  tho ' now , I believe , she repents of her past Actions .
Why then , said Wigmore , the Hand of Heaven has pointed her out as a Mark for my Repentance , which I will sincerely , for all my past Follies .
Well , Sir , said my Uncle , I am inclin'd to believe you .
But pray , to make me stronger in that Faith , deliver us what Letters you have of hers .
Upon my Honour , I 'll never put 'em to a wrong Use .
I shall confide in you , reply'd Mr. Wigmore , and therefore put 'em into your Hands .
I carry 'em always about me , that no Accident shou'd discover our Affair : But I am convinc'd Heaven will not let such Actions be ever a Secret .
You may see , added he , how they follow'd one another , because I have number'd 'em as I receiv'd 'em .
After my Uncle had given him some wholsome Advice relating to Conduct in Life , we left him .


Well , said my Uncle , now let 's examine the Contents of these fine Epistles .
Come , Billy , your Eyes are younger than mine , read 'em .
I then open'd Numb .
2 .
( having read Numb .
1 .
before ) which was as follows :


 WHAT Words can express the Satisfaction I receiv'd at our last Conversation !
I am impatient till I see the Light of my Life again  and , if you wou'd not leave me for ever in Darkness , come this Evening to the same Place , to receive with the utmost Transports from One , all that is in her Power to give , who thinks it her only Happiness to call herself


Yours , c..


Well said !
cry'd my Uncle  the Woman was well pleas'd , I find .
She writes pretty plain .
But what will not Women do , when they abandon Modesty !
But come , to the next .
Let 's have some more of her Wit and Parts .


NUMB .
III .


MY dear Boy , some hated Family-Business will prevent my seeing the Darling of my Soul to-morrow  but be assur'd the usual Time of the Day following , shall bring me to your Arms , where we will revel in Delight , and laugh at my foolish credulous Husband , who imagines , when I come to see you , I am visiting the Sick  But the poor Man is very wicked ,  and I can think of no other way of sending him to Heaven , but with the Assistance of my dear Wigmore .
I wou'd have you make our Go-between , Goody - a Present of a Pair of Sheets , for she complain'd to me heavily of the Want of 'em  and tho ' I believe she 's very faithful to us , yet now and then a small Trifle that way , will not only keep her in Humour , but make it her Interest to observe us .
Farewell , and be happy , tho ' I shall not taste of it , till I see those Eyes .


Yours , c..


O Woman , Woman !
said my Uncle , how ripe in Wickedness !
The most profligate of Man wou'd not have been open-hearted so soon .
But come , let 's make an End with her as fast as we can , for I have almost enough of her .


NUMB .
IV .


WHAT a despicable Creature is a Husband , after the ardent Embraces of a Lover !
I thought nothing cou'd have added to the Aversion I had already conceiv'd for him  but since I have known thee , thou Charmer of my Soul , I find that Aversion daily increase .
I yield to his fulsome Caresses , as the Criminal receives  the parting Kiss of the Executioner  and what 's the greatest Torment , I am oblig'd to fain a wanton Joy , which you know is real .
But I must dissemble to all the World , but my dear Wigmore  and whatever I say or do to him , comes from the warm Blood of my Heart .
I am sick of this Evil of a Husband  but one Touch from you will Heal my Disease .
I only wish , as we have shewn him the ready Road to Heaven , he wou'd set out towards his Journey  nay , to make the more Haste , I wou'd lend him a Hand to pull on his Boots .
But let 's have a little Patience .
Time kills as well as cures .
Tomorrow I shall open my Heart to him that has the Soul of


J. V .


Sure , said my Uncle , this is the Quintessence of all ill Women put together !
But on .


NUMB .
V .


PITY , my dear Wigmore , the Grief of Mind I lie under .
But you may guess the Cause , when I declare it is not in my Power to see you these ten Days , except you can think of some Disguise  for my Son Johnny is taken ill of the Small-Pox .
I am oblig'd to attend him myself , for he will not let any of the Family  give him the least Nourishment .
But if you can think of any Disguise , and venture at the Back of our Garden , near the Tree where I hide my Letters , in the Dusk of the Evening , ( tho ' no Disguise can hide the dear Wigmore from me , who will ever carry his Image in my Heart ) I 'll find an Opportunity of seeing him in Reality , who is always present to the Imagination of One who shall be ever


Yours , c..


Pray , said my Uncle , is there no Date to these loving Epistles ?
No Sir , said I  but we may guess pretty near the Time by my Brother 's having the Small-Pox , which is near three Years ago .
Well , on to the next , said my Uncle .


NUMB .
VI .


I THANK my Stars !
my Boy is past all Danger .
That , and the Hopes of seeing my dear Wigmore again , at a more convenient Place than our last , made me comply with my Husband 's Request of making one Bed serve us both .
But as I thought of you all Day , I dreamt of you all Night .
When wish'd Morning came , my Husband went out a Hunting , and having an Opportunity , with a Poetical Fancy in my Head , I have put my Dream into as good Verse  as ever I cou'd  but you must forgive bad Numbers , since Love of you has made me a Poet .


When balmy Sleep my Eyelids clos'd , And half the World their Cares repos'd , Your Image fill'd my fancy'd Breast  My eager Arms the Phantome prest .
Wak'd with th ` imaginary Bliss , I strove to give my Love a Kiss : But , Death to Love , and all Love 's Charms , I found my Husband in my Arms !
The nauseous Joy his Tongue exprest , Quite robb'd my gentle Heart of Rest .
But yet , to cover the Deceit , I was compell'd to aid the Cheat , And Kiss for Kiss return again , When nothing cou'd be greater Pain : For Bankrupts too to make Demands !
Curse on the Priest that join'd our Hands !
But all my Grief , and all Annoy , At Sight of thee will turn to Joy  When you my dazled Eyes shall bless , All Sorrow turns to Happiness .
Oh the Devil !
said my Uncle  shall such a wicked Wretch as this Woman , pretend to taste of the heavenly Drops of Poetry , when all Hell is in her Soul !
It is the greatest  Profanation to the Muses .
Yet tho ' Clio can not tune her Lyre , Melpomene presides over her black Soul , together with Alecto , and the rest of the Furies .
This Woman wou'd have been well pleas'd to have been a Samorin Wife * .
But I hope , continu'd my Uncle , there is not many more .
Yes , Sir , said I , there 's Five more  and I find by the Numbers , there 's some wanting , for the next is Numb .
9 .
Those , reply'd my Uncle , no doubt , contain'd something too dangerous to be kept .
As we were preparing to read the next Letter , we cou'd perceive running towards us , the Person they were sent to .
We were something surpriz'd at his Return  but when he came up to us ( for we stood still to  read the Letters , ) he told us ( almost out of Breath with running ) that Burleigh was coming the same way , and no doubt , for no good , for I know he has been disappointed by my Lady , concerning the receiving of Money , which Disappointment has so much exasperated him , that he resolves to ruin my Lady , tho ' I know not by what Means .
We perceived a Man about a Quarter of a Mile behind us , bending his Course towards our House , the Foot-Way .
My Uncle ask'd what was best to be done ?
Why Sir , said Mr. Wigmore , if you will give me Leave to advise you , I wou'd have you prevent his getting to my Lady 's , if possible , for this Time  who knows what may follow ?
I intend , if you approve of it , to write to my Lady , which Letter , if you please , you shall see first  wherein I will declare all Correspondence , for the future , shall be intirely broke off between us  and , to convince her I am sincere in what I write , to crush all her Hopes at once , in a few Days I intend to embark for Virginia , where I have some Relations in Power , that I am assur'd will provide for me .
Do so , said my Uncle .
But how shall we see this Letter ?
Why , return'd Mr. Wigmore , I 'll be walking before the Court-Gate ,  under the great Trees , three Hours hence .
My Disguise will prevent my being known by any one , but you two Gentlemen , or my Lady  and if I can meet with my Lady , I shou'd be pleas'd to deliver the Letter to her myself .
Well , said my Uncle , let it be so .
But Will tells me , there 's some Letters missing , as you have number'd 'em .
Pray what might they contain , if it is not improper to know ?
Really , reply'd Mr. Wigmore , I ca n't very well remember the Contents , but , in gross , they were something too free for a Woman 's Pen .
I believe , said my Uncle , if the Story of the Norman Monk was true * , and this Woman was in his Condition ,  it wou'd not be hard to guess which Angel wou'd have the Guardianship of her Ladyship .
Come , Sir , said Mr. Wigmore , may be Heaven intends all for the best .
I hope so too , reply'd my Uncle  but I fear , without a Miracle , she 'll go the other Way , for all that .
However , I 'll wait patiently , tho ' with little Hope  more for the Peace and Quiet of my Brother and his Family , than any good Will to such a wicked Woman .


I fear , Sir , said I , you will not have Time enough for Reflexion now , for Burleigh walks at a very great Rate  therefore , the sooner we think how to prevent his getting to the House , the better .
Od so !
said my Uncle , that 's true  then let us be gone , and leave Mr. Wigmore to think of his Epistle .


 The Horse-Road to our House was even with the Foot-Road , 'till within a Furlong of the Gate , and then there was no other Way but the common Road .
We kept just before Burleigh all the way , and as he came over the last Style , he stumbled , and fell on his Face .
Why , how now !
honest Friend , said my Uncle , you seem so much in haste , that you do n't regard your Way .
Take care .
Remember the old Saying , The more Haste , the worse Speed  which has indeed no other Meaning , than when People go about things unlawful , they shou'd not succeed .
If you were a Roman now , you shou'd take that for an ill Omen .
Why , ( reply'd Burleigh , something surlily ) what Matter is it to you , or any body else , whether I am a Roman , or a Protestant , a Dissenter , or a Muggletonian , an Anabaptist , or a Quaker , or - Hold , hold !
cry'd my Uncle ( smiling at his Absurdity ) you seem to be pretty perfect in the Names of many Opinions  and yet I fancy you are a mere Stranger to the Tenets of any of 'em .
I am well skill'd in Physiognomy , and to assure you that I am , you are now going about a black Work , that , let it go which way it will , must , of mere Necessity , bring you into extreme Danger and Trouble .


 Why , the Devil 's in the Gentleman , ( reply'd Burleigh , with a less-assur'd Tone than at first ) or if the Devil is not in you , you must be the Devil himself , or at least a Conjuror .
Good Friend , return'd my Uncle , I am neither the Devil , nor a Conjuror  and yet I can tell , and foretell  and farther , I assure you ( looking him full in the Face , which put the other out of Countenance ) if you proceed in this Business , you 'll be in some Danger of a Halter .
Examine your Conscience .
You know if what I say be true , or no .
Return from whence you came : And , for the future , amend your Life , and know me for your Friend .
Amend your Life , and know me for your Friend !
cry'd Burleigh , muttering  sure I am asleep , and all this is a Dream .
He stood some time gazing at my Uncle , and then at me .
Pray Sir , said he , after a Pause , who the Devil are you , and what Business have you with me ?
I am going about my Affairs , and sha n't stay any longer losing my Time .
Upon saying this , he was pressing on .
But my Uncle cross'd him with his Horse , and calling him by his Name , with a menacing Tone , told him , he shou'd severely repent it , if he mov'd a Step farther towards that House , pointing at my Father 's  neither is the Lady  whom you go to seek , at home , she 's gone to visit a sick Person .
Return three Days hence , and it may be you will meet with better Success than you expect .
Whether my Uncle 's stern Looks frighted him , or that he really thought him the Devil , I ca n't tell  but at those last Words , he went back again over the Style , turn'd to give us another Look , and ran back the Way he came , as fast as his Legs cou'd carry him .


There is more , said my Uncle , in a guilty Conscience , than a Brace of Evidences .
'T is not impossible but this is the sure Means of your Mother 's getting rid of this troublesome Retainer  so I suppose there will be an annual Pension sav'd .
But what shall we do with this Woman ?
If she has any Grace left , the best way of shewing it will be , to hang herself out of the way  for , I must own , I can not find any other Method to give Peace to the Family .
If we shou'd conceal these horrible Crimes in Hopes of her Amendment , and she shou'd commit more , we are in some sort accessary .
But Heaven guide us for the best !
We must proceed as Things occurr .
When the Groom had taken our Horses , my Uncle ask'd him , if he knew where his Master was .
He answer'd , that he rid out presently after us , being  inform'd we were taking the Air , and that he took the same Road as we had done .
Sure , said my Uncle , softly to me , Providence , by its secret Workings , intends to reclaim this Woman  or , by its mysterious Darkness , will have her stumble into more Wickedness  for my Brother 's missing us must be almost a Miracle .
Pr ` ythee let 's go into the Summer-House , and think on these wretched Accidents over again .


As we went thro ' the Hall , I saw Betty at work , and letting my Uncle go before , I inform'd her , in brief , of the Day 's Affair .
She seem'd quite dead with my Relation .
For God 's sake !
said she , if you have any Value for your own Life , get out of her Power  for if she can be so wicked to do as you say , I fear she 'll arrive at the same Pitch she was at before .
I must own , continu'd she , my own Life is but of small Value , and I wou'd freely part with it to atone for my past Crimes , if it cou'd save my dear Master 's  but , methinks , I wou'd not have it made a Sacrifice to a revengeful Woman , who will be sure to rid her Hands of me , because she remembers I know her former wicked Intention .


Well , Betty , said I , rest contented , you are provided for , if you can like my Uncle 's Service   for I have prevail'd upon him to accept you for his Housekeeper  therefore , whenever you think fit , you may leave my Lady , and be receiv'd there , without any other Recommendation .
She was very much rejoic'd at the agreeable News , telling me , such good Fortune was far beyond her Hopes  yet nothing , she told me , cou'd make her easy , till I was entirely out of my Mother-in-law 's Reach .
Well , Betty , I return'd , I hope every thing will be determin'd in a few Days , and so follow'd my Uncle .


When I came into the Summer-House to him , he ask'd me why I staid ?
When I inform'd him , he did not seem pleas'd .
It had not been much matter ( said he ) Billy , whether Betty had been let into the Secret so soon  but however , it ca n't be help'd  I must own she knows enough already to be trusted with every thing .
We canvass'd the Matter over several times , but cou'd make very little of it  and before we cou'd come to any Resolution , Betty interrupted us , by bringing a Letter directed to my Uncle , which she said , the Messenger that brought it told her , it required no Answer .
Pr ` ythee , Billy , said my Uncle , read it , for I have no Secrets shall be hid from you .
As soon as I had cast my Eyes on the Directions ,  I told him it was my Mother-in-law 's Hand .
Odso !
said he , this is an Honour indeed !
for I never was favour'd so far before .
But let us hear what her Ladyship can say for herself .
May be it 's a Letter of leave to dispose of her sweet Person  or rather , now I think o n't , to be careful of her dear Wigmore .
But read it , that we may be acquainted with her Commands .


SIR ,


WHAT shall I say , to gain Credit that what I write to you is sincere ?
If the ripping out my false Heart wou'd do it , it shou'd be done this Moment .
What you have ( guided by Fate ) seen to-day , I must confess is not my only Crime .
But whatever I have been guilty of , shall be remember'd only with a sincere Repentance .
Do not imbitter our Lives , by discovering to my too indulgent Husband , the Faults of his wicked Wife .
If you knew with what Horror my Soul is fill'd ( not for the Fear of Punishment , but for what my unthinking Heart has dene ) even you wou'd pity me .
Consider the rarer Virtue is in Forgiveness , 't is that which distinguishes us from Brutes .
Do you stand in the Place of my Husband  think no more of what 's past  and upon the Assurance of a hearty Repentance ,  I will never have a Thought of my former Guilt , but to bewail my Fall from Virtue .
Tho ' you are no great Admirer of the Female Sex , I am assur'd you have Humanity .
I shall expect no Answer , but come home in the Evening , as usual , where , if I find all discover'd , I sha n't in my Heart blame you  but I will , to get rid of my Shame , put an End to the Life of


Your affectionate Sister , J. V .


That Word , Affectionate , at last , said my Uncle , puts me out of Conceit with all the rest .
However , we 'll comply , and beg the Hand of Heaven to guide us .
While we were debating , my Father came in .
I thought , said he , you were both run away , you disappear'd so suddenly .
Pray , which way went you ?
And how was it possible for me to miss you ?
We only rid into the Copse after a Hare , reply'd my Uncle , that a Countryman inform'd us he saw there , but the Greyhound lost her .


We took several Turns in the Garden , and I cou'd not look upon my Father without the Tears coming into my Eyes .
How different ,  thought I , is this Woman from my dear Mother !
And how unhappy has a second Marriage made the Family !
My Father took Notice of my Melancholy , asking if I was out of Order ?
But my Uncle made him an Answer  for the Question came so much unlook'd for , that I cou'd not tell what to say .
Billy , said he , I believe is out of Humour , because I hinder'd his going to pore over his Books , for he thinks every Hour lost out of such Company .
I made him no Answer , which confirm'd what my Uncle said .
I hope , Billy , return'd my Father , has read enough not to take any thing Ill his Uncle says .
My Uncle finding he cou'd not make me dissipate that Discontent that sat on my Countenance , turn'd the Discourse , and by that brought me out of my Confusion .
Our uneasy Conversation was broke by the Ringing of the Bell for Dinner , where I was forc'd to eat against my Stomach , for fear my Father shou'd take more Notice of me .


When we had din'd , my Father went to take a Nap , as usual , which gave my Uncle and me an Opportunity of waiting , without Observation , for Mr. Wigmore , with his Letter .
About Three in the Afternoon , we saw him approach us , in the same Disguise , he had on  in the Morning .
We went out to meet him , that we might not be observ'd by the Servants of the House .
When he was within hearing , my Uncle bid him turn back , and we wou'd follow to the Copse .


When we came there , said Mr. Wigmore , This Place strengthens the Memory of my Crimes I have already repented of , and shall to my dying Breath .
Here , Sir , is the Letter I promis'd in the Morning , and whatever Fault you find with it , I 'll do my Endeavour to mend it .
My Uncle took the Letter , and gave it me to read , which was as follows :


MADAM ,


IF my Life wou'd call back past Years , I wou'd freely render it for that Satisfaction , to die an Innocent .
Heaven sees our Guilt , and if we do not repent , I fear will severely punish us .
All the Hours I have to come , I shall remember our past Crimes with Horror  and I do not in the least doubt , but you will do so too , when you reflect what it is to defile the Marriage-Bed , even with a Thought .
Do not imagine Fear obliges me to write to you in this manner .
No , it is the Result of my Thoughts , from an unquiet Conscience .
I do not say it is easy for  me to part with you for ever  therefore , as I am assur'd our guilty Commerce ought to have an End , I intend to-morrow to imbark for another Climate , where I shall have Leisure to reflect on my past Follies , those , I confess , are very numerous : But my Capital Sin was , my Tenderness for you , and that I fear , will press in sometimes , in a manner not pleasing to virtuous Men  which Character , for the future , Heaven assist me to maintain !
So , wishing you an eternal Farewell , I beg you to think on the Advice of your sincere Friend in Virtue ,


T. WIGMORE .


Well , said my Uncle , as there is , I hope , Truth in it , there 's no Want of Rhetoric .
But how must this be deliver'd to the good Gentlewoman now ?
It will not be at all proper for either my Nephew , or me , to have a Hand i n't , for that may raise Suspicions .
Suppose , reply'd Mr. Wigmore , we shou'd give it Mrs. Betty : With all my Heart , said my Uncle , if Billy approves o n't .
I must own ( I reply'd ) that is the safest Method we can take  but , as the Case stands , Betty must know the Contents , or she will not deliver it .
We agreed it shou'd be so , and took our Leaves of Mr. Wigmore , with Thoughts of  never seeing him more .
I must confess , I cou'd not look upon him without the utmost Horror , tho ' his Guilt was not near of so black a Dye as my Mother-in-law 's .
And I had such a Conflict between Reason and Rage , that I had often Thoughts , young as I was , to call him to a more strict Account  but the Hopes of his going abroad , laid asleep my Resentment .
I thought I made but an odd Figure in tamely listening to these Interviews  and told my Uncle afterwards what I had suffer'd .
'T is well , Boy , said he , smiling , he that conquers his Passions , overcomes his greatest Enemy .
Even Scipio cou'd do no more .


When we came home , we were told my Father was still asleep .
I therefore went to find out Betty , to give her the Letter , and proper Instructions  first acquainting her with the Contents .
This , Betty , may work upon her .
I pray Heaven it may ( says Betty ) for if she still continues her ill Life , there 's no farther Hopes , we must discover all to your Father , to prevent her Ill Designs for the future .
While I was talking with Betty , my Uncle came to us , and , in a merry manner , told her , he shou'd soon have Occasion for her  nay , he wou'd be sure to manage it ,  that her Mistress shou'd give her Consent .
But , said my Uncle , I think I ought to limit your Power , for my last Lady had something too much .
However , I 'll take your Word , and William 's Bond , for the Performance of Articles .
But , to think of more serious Matters , continu'd my Uncle , I wish my Brother cou'd be got out of the way , when his good Lady arrives , that we may have a little more Freedom of Conversation  for I am not yet fully determin'd what to do with her .
Sir , said I , I know the ready way to send him abroad  only tell him , in such a Place is a Covy of Partridges , and he and his Man will soon leave us  neither is it a Falshood , for the other Morning , as I was going to meet the old Woman , a Covy sprung up almost under my Feet .
Be it so then , said my Uncle  and here he comes , get him out of the way as fast as you can .
I then went to my Father , and inform'd him of what I knew  who immediately call'd for his Man , his Dog , and his Gun , and out he went , first asking us if we wou'd accompany him , but my Uncle excus'd himself , and me too .


He had not been gone above half a Hour , but my Mother-in-law came in , with a Countenance full of penitential Sorrow .
As soon  as ever she had an Opportunity , she fell at my Uncle 's Feet , and with her Face sprinkled with Tears , and a broken Voice , interrupted with Sighs , spoke to my Uncle after this manner .


How shall I look up ?
or what shall I do to gain Credit for what I am going to say ?
It is but justice to suspect the Sincerity of my Words , after what your Eyes have seen .
But be assur'd , from this Day , I will take my Date of Virtue .
While I have Life , never will I wrong my worthy Husband , even with a Thought .
What a gaping Ruin have I avoided , if you will be prevail'd upon by Repentance , to believe me !
And to gain more Credit from you , I am oblig'd to let you know , that even Adultery is not my greatest Sin .
I have , since you saw me last , weigh'd well my past Crimes , and think there is not such another wicked Woman breathing .
But Heaven , I hope , has in its infinite Stock of Mercy , Forgiveness in store for a sincere Repentance .
If my Words can not gain Credit , let your Sword blot out with my Blood , my former Wickedness !
I know I have deserv'd Death , and shall with Satisfaction resign my self to your Punishment  if you can conceal my Crimes , you may term it Accident , or  whatever you think fit , for I am even weary of this World , made burdensome to me by the Weight of Sin I have laid upon myself , and wou'd freely make an End of this wretched Being with my own Hands , but that I consider , I shou'd commit a Crime never to be repented of  and take away all Hopes of Salvation , even in the very Act .
Tho ' I doubt not but Sorrow , in a few Days , will end my Crimes with my Life , and the sooner that Day comes , the sooner I shall be rid of a terrible Load of Reflexion , even worse than Death itself .
Here Tears choak'd her Words , and she sunk to the Ground , quite overwhelm'd with Sorrow .


Well , Madam , said my Uncle , raising her , if all this Grief is not real , you are an excellent Counterfeit : But I am willing to believe you sincere in your Confession .
And , for my own Part , I 'll strive to forget all that 's past , or think of it as a Dream .
But you must pardon me , if I am more careful for the future , in observing your Actions  for if you shou'd make an ill Use of my Credulity , I shou'd , in some sort , be guilty .
Sir , said my Mother-in-law , Words are too poor to speak my Thanks , but you shall find my Sincerity by my Actions .
If in the least of all  my future ones , you find me erring , I shall expect no Admonition from you , but to be deliver'd up to the Hands of Justice .
And that you may have it in your Power to call me to an Account when you please , I shall succinctly tell you which way I deserve the worst of Deaths .
She then related what you have read already , concerning her first Husband 's Death , but solemnly protested , the Poison was given him by Mistake  for tho ' she procur'd it for that Intent , yet she had repented of her wicked Design  and it being put into the Closet by Mistake , among some Cordials , the Nurse gave it her Husband as such  for she was so far from believing that he came by his Death thro ' her Means , that she accus'd the Apothecary 's Man , and had follow'd the Accusation , if she had not found out the Mistake .
I must own , I had a guilty Commerce with the Apothecary , who left off making his Visits after my Husband 's unfortunate End .
This Proceeding exasperated me so far , that I often wish'd his Death  and the Devil , to back my Wishes , brought me acquainted with one Burleigh , who us'd to work in the Gardens , as Helper to the Gardener , tho ' otherwise a Trooper .
He undertook the black Deed  and the Day he first knew my Mind ,  he put me past the Power to recall it , by making an End of the unfortunate Man  for even as soon as I parted with him , I repented of the Crime  and tho ' I sought him all the Day after , to prevent the Deed , I never set Eyes on him , till he came to tell me my Commands were obey'd .
The Concern I felt at the wicked News , cou'd hardly be express'd by Words  but the Wretch , taking hold of my Weakness , made me comply with every thing he desir'd , and even to this Day compels me to maintain him .


All the while she was relating her horrid Deeds , my Uncle seem'd perfectly Thunderstruck .
Who wou'd think , said he , one Woman cou'd be so wicked !
Sir , said she , that is not all .
Then she proceeded to tell us of her Designs against me  but that , said she , I have long since repented of , as my worst of Crimes .


Well , said my Uncle , I hope by this Confession , we shall find your future Sincerity .
But what do you propose to do with this Burleigh ?
It was with some Difficulty I prevented his coming here to-day .
Tho ' I am amaz'd to find you know any thing of him , said my Mother-in-law , yet I shou'd be much oblig'd to you for your Advice in this Affair .
 Well , said my Uncle , in Hopes of future Amendment , I have it in my Head to get rid of him , which shall be done to-morrow , if you 'll let me know where to find him .
This , Sir , said she , will double all my Obligations to you .
I 'll give you a Direction in Writing .
While she was writing the Direction , Betty brought her Mr. Wigmore 's Letter , which she took and read .
Well , said she , I take Heaven to have a Hand in my Conversion , for here 's another Convert , which very much pleases me , because I was troubled before how to make an End with him .
She then related what had past between 'em .
And all her Relations agreed so well with what we knew before , that we thought it a Crime in us , not to believe her Promises for her future Behaviour .


A little while after , Word was brought us my Father was come home .
How , said my Mother-in-law , shall I look upon that dear injur'd Face , without betraying my Guilt ?
When I was envelop'd in Sin , without Thought of Repentance , I cou'd form my Behaviour as I thought fit , without any Difficulty  but now , I can not tell how to appear before him , without the utmost Confusion .
Pray , said my Uncle , let this be the last Act of Dissembling ,  and hide from him the Combat in your Mind .
Time will bring you to the Tranquillity of Virtue again .


When my Father came to us , he seem'd very much pleas'd with his Diversion .
What , said he , you must be idling at home , while I am oblig'd to go abroad to procure you a Supper .
Well , I have got every Man his Bird .
'T is your Duty , reply'd my Uncle , to provide for your Family  tho ' Billy and I are , at present , Interlopers .
Heyday !
cry'd my Father , What 's the matter with Jane !
( meaning his Wife ) are your Patients got well upon your Hands , my Dear , that you have not an Opportunity of shewing your Art , you look so melancholy ?
I am not very well , my Dear , reply'd my Mother , in some Confusion .
I am sorry for that , return'd my Father .
But as you can cure other People , I hope you know what 's good for yourself .
Yes , Sir , said she , I have been troubled with it a great while  't is a Heaviness of Heart , but I have taken that I hope will cure it .
A Heaviness of Heart , reply'd my Father !
there 's nothing cures that Distemper like a Glass or two of good Wine  nay , I think it a general Cure for all Diseases , and the sooner you take the Remedy , the sooner you 'll get rid of your  Malady .
I think , said my Uncle , that Physic is good for us all , therefore let 's have it .
While the Wine was gone for , my Father seem'd to caress his Wife , which occasion'd her bursting into Tears .
Pray , said he , my Dear , tell me what is it disturbs you .
In Truth , Sir , said she , I am not very well , and beg leave I may go to Bed  perhaps Rest may help me .
So saying , she took leave of the Company , and retir'd .
When my Father had drank a Glass of Wine , he follow'd her to know how she did , and left my Uncle and me together .


Well , Billy , said he , what think you of Affairs ?
Do you believe she is sincere in her Protestations ?
Yes , really Sir , said I , if she does continue it .
I am confounded , return'd my Uncle , at what I have heard .
If she shou'd be as good as her Word , and let murdering Sorrow make an End of her , I must confess I shou'd be very easy , notwithstanding her Penitence .
However , we must find out Burleigh to-morrow , and get rid of him : And tho ' I am assur'd he deserves an Halter , yet I 'll give him a few Pieces to send him into another Part of the World , with all my Heart , and then , sure , she will be easy .
I am of your Opinion , Sir , said I  I fansy her Decline of  Years will prevent her seeking another Lover .
I do not know that , reply'd my Uncle , that itching Folly never considers Years  however , I believe we have nothing to fear from her  but if we shou'd be deceiv'd , I shou'd never forgive myself .
I must own , 't is but seldom Virtue succeeds Vice , yet such things have been , and therefore may happen again .
We have all the Prospect we can desire , in the Confession of her Guilt  for as she was ignorant of our Knowledge of it , she might have spar'd the Relation , if she had not intended for the future to amend her Life .
We had much Discourse concerning her , till interrupted by my Father , who told us , his Wife seem'd very much indispos'd , but he hop'd Rest wou'd restore her .
For my own Part , I freely declare , her Death wou'd certainly have griev'd me  but the Content I shou'd have found from the Family 's being intirely out of her Power , wou'd have soon wip'd away my Tears .


After Supper , I inform'd Betty of all Passages , whose Hopes and Fears agreed with mine , tho ' our Hopes , by far , over-balanc'd our Fears .


In the Morning , my Uncle told my Father , that he and I had a Visit to make , and  very possibly might be oblig'd to stay Dinner .
Accordingly , we took Horse , but in order to find out Burleigh , who liv'd in an obscure Village three Miles from my Father 's .
When we arriv'd , we cou'd perceive him running out of the Back-Door , at the first Sight of us  and I believe wou'd have got away from us , if his Over-haste had not often made him fall in the Stubble .
When we overtook him , my Uncle ask'd him , why he made such Haste from his best Friends ?
Why , to tell you the Truth , Sir , said he , I do n't care for conversing with the Devil , for I can hardly take you for any thing else .
Why , said my Uncle , were you not afraid of conversing with him , when you made away with Mr. - the Apothecary ?
for Murder is always instigated by the Devil .
At these Words , the Fellow fell a trembling , and cry'd out , I am a dead Man !
No , said my Uncle , tho ' Murder shou'd never be forgiven , and tho ' I am no Devil , yet I have sufficient Reasons to assist you in making your Escape  for if you stay Four and Twenty Hours , Justice will lay hold on you , and there will be no other Road to get away , but that of the Gallows .
In short , such a Person , naming my Mother-in-law , has discover'd it .
Now I wou'd save  both your Lives , which can not be done without you fly immediately .
Alas !
Sir , said Burleigh , whither shou'd I fly ?
I have no Money , or Friends , or I wou'd be gone with all my Heart .
For that , said my Uncle , I 'll take care .
Go and provide yourself with what Necessaries you have , and then follow me .
We were not long before we mounted , and pursu'd our Journey toward Bristol .


As we rid along , my Uncle ask'd him how he cou'd be so inhuman to murder a Man in cold Blood , and one , very probable , almost a Stranger to him ?
Why indeed , reply'd Burleigh , I had but little Knowledge of him  but , as to murdering him , I ca n't give it that Name , for I fairly fought with him  tho ' indeed that ca n't be proved , because I am only my own Witness .
What d' ye mean by fighting fairly , cry'd my Uncle  is taking a Man 's Life , without any Provocation , to be call'd fair ?
I ca n't directly argue the Point with you , Sir , return'd Burleigh  but when a Person has equal Arms to his Opposer , and the other fairly runs the risk of Death , I say it ca n't be call'd Murder , for he always rode with a Pair of Pistols , as I did the same  and I gave him fair Warning  told him , either he or I had breath'd our last Hour .
'T is  true , he was not very willing to fight , but he found it was to no purpose  and I must own , if he had not , I must of Necessity have kill'd him  but he fir'd both his Pistols , and miss'd me  and I , with one of mine , shot him thro ' the Throat .
After he fell from his Horse , I drag'd him into the neighbouring unfrequented Wood , ty'd his Horse to a Tree in the same Wood , and rid home with my own .
The same Day I got leave to be absent a few Days , return'd to the Wood , took the Horse I had left there , and sold him at Chester , with a Pretence I was bound for Ireland  so return'd home on Foot .
I must own , I was too hasty in executing my Lady 's Desire , for she never peremptorily bid me  but I was willing to get him out of the way , that I might have her all to my self .
I continu'd my Correspondence for three or four Years , and constantly receiv'd an annual Pension .
But when she was about marrying , she gave me three Years Allowance together , telling me at the same time , that what I then receiv'd was the utmost she cou'd do for me .
And , indeed , gave me good Advice .
But my Money was soon gone  therefore I apply'd myself to her again , and almost forc'd a Subsistence from  her , by threatning to declare what she has now done herself , like a silly Woman as she is .
I must own , I often threaten'd a young Gentleman , who I am assur'd keeps Company with her , of declaring something might endanger her Life  but I can assure you it was only to fright some Money out of her .


This Talk had brought us to the Town 's End .
We went directly to my Uncle 's Friend , and , by good Fortune , found him at home .
My Uncle , in private , declar'd to him the Cause of this unexpected Visit  and the Bargain was soon struck for the Disposal of my Friend Burleigh .
My Uncle at parting , gave him Twenty Guineas , for his own Use  but with a strict Charge to his Friend not to trust him out of his Sight .
And in three Days after we were inform'd , by Letter , that the Ship set sail on her Voyage to New York .


Now , said my Uncle , I hope we have laid an excellent Plan for raising your Mother 's Virtue  and I hope the Superstructure will answer the Basis .
I am in Heart convinc'd of it , I reply'd .
And indeed my Thoughts were now intirely bent on my lovely Isabella , and the Contemplation of her Perfections produc'd a careful Musing , which my Uncle  took notice of .
Why how now , William ?
said my Uncle , What are those wise Thoughts that have ty'd your Tongue up ?
I hope all Affairs at home are accommodated .
Come , let me know the Reason of your Rumination .
Sir , said I , my Mind was fixt upon the Company we left behind us in your Neighbourhood .
I hope , reply'd my Uncle , the fair Isabella is not stealing into your Heart ?
No , Sir , I return'd , I have kept her Image there from the first Moment I saw her Face , never to be defac'd by Years , or Misfortune .
Why how now !
Youth , cry'd my Uncle  is your Heart susceptible of Love so soon ?
But I thought as much by your Uneasiness to leave 'em at our last Visit : But come , we 'll make 'em another to-morrow  for I must own , I long to be at home too .
Indeed , Sir , said I , I freely confess , there lies my Loadstone , and turn which way I will , my Inclinations look that way .


Well , said my Uncle , I must own , I am not against your embarking on the Sea of Love , if I was sure you cou'd arrive at your desired Port , without meeting with Storms in your Voyage .
Have you had any Talk with your fair Mistress ?
Sir ( said I ) I will never conceal any thing from you , and therefore I  shall declare all my Proceedings .
I then told him the whole Progress of my amorous Affairs .
Well , return'd my Uncle , I do n't find you have any great Reason to despair .
Neither , Sir , said I , can I find any thing to beget a Hope , especially when I think of the implacable Aversion rooted in the Minds of the Mother and the Aunt , against Men and Matrimony .
Indeed , said my Uncle , they have both sufficient Reasons for that Aversion  the one , from the complicated Humours of an ill-natur'd Husband  and the other , from the Ill-usage of a Man unworthy the Name  which , to beguile the Time , I will relate  I mean , the Story of the Aunt , which I learnt from her own Mouth but the last time we were there .


When she had scarce seen Seventeen , she was courted by a Person remarkable for his good Make , and Address , with the Addition of a large Fortune , which in many People , serve only as instrumental to evil Actions .
This Man of the World , by the common Wiles , gain'd the Heart of the young Lady , and by his subtle Insinuations , prevail'd upon her to steal from her Relations .
His Pretence for it was , his Friends Aversion to the Match  for indeed his Estate might have commanded ,  as the World goes , a more ample Dowry with a Wife .
Blinded by Love , and his Hypocrisy , she comply'd with his Desire , and stole away from her Father .
When he had got her Person in his Custody , he endeavour'd to gain his Ends without giving the Priest any Trouble  but the Lady , tho ' much in Love , abhorr'd his base Intentions , and , by her Resentment , shew'd the Spark had nothing to hope for from that ungenerous Way .
He then got into her good Graces again , by declaring , his Attempt was only to try her  letting her know at the same time , how happy he shou'd be with a Woman of such an impregnable Virtue .
In a few Days after this Trial , he marry'd her , and in a Month after the Wedding , told her he wou'd have her go home to her Friends , for he expected his Wife out of the Country , who was of such a violent Temper , every thing was to be fear'd from her Rage .


The poor Lady was dumb thro ' Astonishment , and many times fancy'd he had a mind to try her Temper , and gave him to understand as much .
Well Madam ( said the base Wretch ) I am resolv'd to make the Matter as plain as I can to you .
Here , John !
( calling to one of his Servants ) this , Madam ,  said he , is the good Man that gave us a Commission to go to Bed together , and he is come to take his Leave of you , being to attend a Gentleman of my Acquaintance in his Travels , in the Quality of his Footman  and I believe he is so far from being a Churchman , that he never was in a Church in his Life .
I hope , said the Fellow , your Honour will pardon my contradicting you in that , for I have been many a Day in Twenty , one after another .
The poor Lady too soon found the Truth of her Misfortune  and her Rage and Despair , vented in the bitterest Reproaches , had no Effeft on the inhumane Brute .
But , instead of giving her any Comfort ( finding she made no Haste in leaving him ) left her in sole Possession of the Lodging he had taken for that Purpose , where she was forc'd to part with every thing she had of Value , to support her in common Necessaries of Life  and , if her careful Father had not found her out , was resolv'd to part with Life , to put an End to her Shame and Misfortunes .
The old Gentleman took her home  and , to comfort her , gave her his Word he wou'd forget her Unhappiness , being well assur'd of her honest Intentions .
And this is the Cause of the Aunt 's Aversion to Men and Matrimony .


 I shall own , Sir , said I , I ca n't well blame the Resolution she has taken .
I must declare , I wonder how such barbarous Notions can enter the Minds of Men !
and if there were not Instances of it every Day , I shou'd think such Relations Fables .
How is it possible that the Nature of Men shou'd be so very different !
Every kind of the Brute Creation are much the same  but Man sympathizes with every Degree of 'em  and are full as various .
A Man had better not be , than to be born with such Appetites  and the Dignity of his Figure only makes him the greater Monster .
I own ( reply'd my Uncle ) your good Sense , at so early an Age , gives me the utmost Contentment  and tho ' Philosophy may be learnt without practising , yet I believe I have nothing to fear from your Conduct .


It was late in the Evening before we came home  and we were inform'd by my Father , that his Wife 's Indisposition increa 'd .
My Father seem'd so very much concern'd , that he was not very inquisitive about the Journey we had made that Day .
We sympathiz'd with him .
However , my Uncle inform'd him , that we intended to be gone in the Morning early  and all his Intreaties cou'd not prevail upon him to stay longer .
Well then ,  said my Father , since you will go , I wou'd have you take Leave of my Wife to-night  which was agreed to .
A Message was sent to her , to know if it was proper to see us  and she sent Word she shou'd take it kindly .
When we came into the Room , my Uncle and I sat on each side her Bed , and neither of us spoke for some Moments .
At last , my Mother-in-law broke Silence .
Well , Sir , said she to my Uncle , has your Journey succeeded , and am I to number this Day 's Work among the many other Obligations I have to your Virtue ?
Madam , reply'd my Uncle , every thing has fell out , I hope , according to your Desire  for , I am fully persuaded , Burleigh will never come more to interrupt your growing Quiet .
He then related the Transactions of the Day to her .
Well then , said my Mother , my Mind 's at rest , and I hope Heaven will pardon me , as you have done  't is all I have now to do , to gain it , for I find I am not long to continue in this World , for the Wounds my Virtue , tho ' a Conqueror , has receiv'd , in the sharp Combat with overgrown Vice , I find will not be heal'd but by the Hand of Death  therefore , when you hear I am no more , bury my Failings with my Body , in my Grave , nor never  think of me , but as a sincere and humble Penitent .


The Behaviour of my Mother-in-law , brought Tears into my Eyes , which she observ'd with a Tenderness I had never perceiv'd in her before .
Dry thy Tears , my Child , said she  thy soft Disposition overwhelms me with Confusion .
If I survive , I beg you will look upon me as thy own Mother , for my Actions shall ever declare me so .
And if Death releases me from this troublesome World , remember me as such in every thing , but thy Grief .
I cou'd not return any Answer , my Heart was so overburden'd with Sorrow  which she perceiving , flung her Arms about my Neck , prest me to her Cheeks , and we mingled our Tears together .
We continu'd in this sorrowful Employment till my Father came in and interrupted us .
Come , said he , no more Grieving  by the Grace of God , a few Days will chase away this Indisposition  and then we 'll come and make my Brother a Visit .
I must own , I parted with her in the utmost Sorrow , for I found my Tenderness increase every Moment  and if the Thoughts of seeing my dear Isabella had not stole into my Memory , I shou'd have been inconsolable in this Parting : But every thing must give  way to Love .
We also took Leave of my Father over-night , that Ceremony might give us no Hindrance in the Morning .
When the Veil of Obscurity was drawn , to let in the chearful Beams of the Sun , my Uncle and I mounted , and pursu'd our Journey .
My Uncle , to make the Way less tedious , told me many pleasant Stories  which gave me so much Satisfaction , that we got home before I thought we were half way .


After Dinner , my Uncle ask'd me if I had Stomach enough to pay a Visit to the Ladies ?
I told him , nothing cou'd be more agreeable to me .
We were soon ready , and soon on Horseback .
When we arriv'd , we found a great many Female Visitors , and Isabella presiding over the Tea-Table , as usual : I observ'd a Blush in her Cheeks , when she first saw me  which I interpreted in my Favour at first , as Love 's a Flatterer .
Yet she took so little Notice of me , during the rest of the Day , that my Uneasiness was very great .
The Company staid Supper  and Isabella , to compleat my Discontent , took all Occasions to avoid me .
One Lady I took particular Notice of , a Woman about Thirty .
She seem'd to have a languishing Sweetness in her Countenance , that discover'd a Temper without  any Gall .
She often took notice of my Sadness , without the Heed of Isabella , or the rest of the Company .
I have heard , said she , many Commendations of this young Gentleman 's Understanding , which makes me imagine something extraordinary has put him out of Humour .
This Speech , I must own , put me into some Confusion  and I thought myself under the Necessity of making a Reply  but my Uncle gave me time to recover , by answering for me .
A Man , said he , must have a fine Time o n't , to give Proofs of his Understanding among so many Female Tatlers ( begging this Lady 's Pardon , bowing to the Stranger ) but yet I think Billy has made his plain , by holding his Tongue .
Women have not Souls capable of edifying by his Discourse .
And I am sure there is nothing learnt by their eternal Clacks , except it gives us an Idea of a Perpetual Motion .
We are sure of your good Word , reply'd the Aunt .
Yet I am as much concern'd as you are , if the young Gentleman has met with any thing to put him out of Humour .
Perhaps , reply'd the Stranger Lady , he had rather be in Company more suitable to his Years .
I think Isabella shou'd entertain him .
Really Madam , return'd Isabella , I am not of your Opinion  I have left  off Play-things for some time , therefore I imagine I shall be as dull Company for him , as he will be for me .
You are a little too free with the young Gentleman , return'd the Mother  and , in general , you are all too hard upon him .
I have done , Madam , reply'd Isabella , I shall say no more , and ask Pardon , if I have offended him .
Their Discourse was interrupted , by the strange Lady 's Husband 's Entrance , who came to fetch her home .
When she was gone , my Uncle ask'd who she was , for , to the best of his Remembrance , he had never seen her before .
There is something very extraordinary in that Lady 's Fortune , said the Aunt  and if it were not so late , Isabella shou'd read her Story , wrote by her Husband , which she has procur'd a Copy of from the Lady 's Original .
Why then reply'd my Uncle , with Isabella 's Leave , we 'll trespass upon the Time , 't is Moonlight , and we shall find our way home without a Candle .
I am ready to satisfy you , return'd Isabella , if I once receive my Mother 's Commands .
My Commands are at your Service , reply'd the Mother .
Upon that Isabella went out , and return'd immediately , with a Paper in her Hand .
This true Story , said she , is call'd , by the Person that wrote it ,


'  ELEANORA OR , THE WILLING CUCKOLD .


ELEANORA , was Daughter to a wealthy Citizen of London  but , having many Children , he cou'd not give her a Fortune equal to her Merit .
She had all the Advantage of Education , even for one of a higher Station  and there was nothing wanting , but Grandeur , to make her the finest Woman in the World .
A Physician , of good Practice , fell in Love with her , and declaring his Passion to her Father , gain'd his Consent to address his Daughter .
But , like an indulgent Parent , considering the Bargain he was driving was to last for Life , frankly told him , if he cou'd not gain his Daughter 's Heart , there was no Advantage to be expected from his Consent  for he valu'd the Repose of his Children beyond every thing else in this World .
The Doctor approv'd of his Sentiments ,  therefore endeavour'd to gain the Affection of the young Lady .
As he was a Man of a tolerable Person and handsome Address , he gain'd upon her to receive the Proposals of Marriage without any Reluctance .


The Nuptials were solemniz'd , and , in all Appearance , they bid fair for a very happy Couple .
Some Years pass'd with an uninterrupted Series of Contentment .
In the Summer-Season , when Business wou'd permit , he with his Family , wou'd retire into the Country .
In their rural Neighbourhood liv'd a Gentleman of a great Estate , who seeing Eleanora by Accident in her Garden , fell desperately in Love with her .
When the Gifts of Fortune are thrown upon an Undeserver , they only serve to incourage Baseness .


This Gentleman was resolv'd to enjoy the virtuous Lady on any Hazard  and his first Step was to get acquainted with the Husband , which was no very difficult Point to gain  it was easy to feign an Indisposition , and the Physician gains as much by the Sound , as the Diseas'd  imaginary Distempers out-number the real ones .
The Gentleman was liberal in his Fees to the Doctor  and the Doctor had Understanding enough in his Profession to know , that he receiv'd his Money for nothing   but that was his Curse , the Curse of Avarice .


The lovesick Gentleman took all Occasions to visit the Doctor at his own House , where he had many Opportunities of conversing with the Lady , and the Charms of her Understanding were as strong as those of her Person : But then , to freeze his Hopes , he found her one of an impregnable Virtue .
He had oft declar'd his Passion to her , and she as oft threaten'd to acquaint her Husband  but her Threats were of no Use , for he was too powerful , and too much in Love , to fear any thing but her Scorn .
When the Lady found no Usage wou'd make him forbear his Visits or Addresses , resolv'd never to appear when ever he came  but this only added Fuel to the amorous Fire , and render'd him the more impatient .


Burning in this unlawful Flame , he was resolv'd by Force to possess her , since every other way fail'd .
He found means to corrupt her Maid , for few Servants are Proof against Gold  and being inform'd by her , that the Doctor was oblig'd to attend a Nobleman , his Patient , to the Bath , he determin'd that very Night , with the Assistance of the treacherous Maid , to execute his villainous  Design .
In Eleanora 's Bed-chamber was a Closet , that open'd on the Inside with a Spring-Lock , into which the Gentleman was convey'd , disguis'd , by the Servant , who took the Key in her Pocket .
When the innocent Lady came to go to Bed , which she did early , in the Absence of the Husband , she inquir'd for the Key of her Closet , to go to her Devotion , as usual  but the Maid , after hunting a great while , told her she cou'd not find it  therefore must send for the Smith in the Morning .
The Gentleman has ofttimes declar'd since , that the Fervency of her Devotion had almost made him forgo his rash Attempt .
But Love prov'd too powerful for those pious Thoughts .
As she was undressing herself to go to Rest , her Husband return'd .
She express'd a great deal of Satisfaction for his sudden and unlook'd - for coming back  but it is easy to guess what the Gentleman in the Closet felt at so cruel a Disappointment  and he sometimes thought that Heaven had heard her Prayers , and prevented his wicked Intention .
The Doctor told his Wife , that he had met his Patient upon the Road , who came to Town on Purpose to be near him and his own Apothecary , for his Advice .
After some trivial Talk ,  he call'd for Supper  but the Maid , who stood upon Thorns , desired that he might go and sup in the Parlour , that she might have an Opportunity of conveying the baffled Lover out of the House : But the Doctor prov'd obstinate , and swore he wou'd sup there , and no Persuasions cou'd alter his Resolution .
Therefore Supper was brought up , and the Lover and the Maid wish'd him heartily choak'd .
Among other Discourse , the Doctor ask'd his Wife , Why she appear'd so strange to the Squire ?
meaning our closeted Lover .
You shou'd consider , my Dear , added he , he 's one of my best Patients , and in all Probability will continue so  for he , like my Lord , has no other Disease than what 's form'd by Fancy , which is a Companion certain for Life .
The Doctor said so much upon the Subject , that Eleanora at last confess'd his unlawful Solicitations .
And she further added , the Way to be freed from his wicked Addresses , was never to come into his Sight .
Ay , but my Dear , reply'd the Husband , if that be his Motive of visiting us , I shall lose my Patient , when he perceives the Deprivation of your Company .


Eleanora was something surpriz'd at his manner of Reasoning , imagining he would  resent it , as a Man of Honour ought .
The Husband perceiving her Confusion at his unexpected Answer , cry'd , No , no , my Dear , I am very well satisfy'd in your Virtue , and that no Temptation will be strong enough to overcome it .
Therefore I desire , whenever the Squire comes , you wou'd appear as you were wont , and only make a Jest of his Passion  I 'll warrant you , nothing that he can say will hurt your Features , or deaden your Complexion : Therefore , pr ` ythee , let him say what he will  as long as I am satisfy'd , you need not have any further Regard .
Eleanora was confounded with the Sentiments of her Husband , plainly telling him , that Avarice had blinded him , and the prattling World wou'd soon declare her guilty , if the Squire continu'd his Visits  and if your own Honour will not prompt you to put a Period to this dangerous Correspondence , I hope , said she , my Quiet will be of sufficient Force with you .
The Doctor still prov'd obstinate , and insisted upon her receiving the Squire with favourable Looks .
He being of an obstinate passionate Temper , she seem'd , at last , consenting to his Will , hoping Time wou'd , some way or other , put an End to such an Affair .


 The Gentleman in the Closet , tho ' uneasy at his Confinement , yet receiv'd some Consolation in the Sentiments of the Husband , and conceiv'd Hope even of succeeding in his Wishes , thro ' the Doctor 's Avarice , and bad Principles .
All his Uneasiness was , now , how to get away undiscover'd  his being near the Object of his Wishes , gave him no Contentment , when his Ideas gave her to the Arms of a dull insipid Husband .
The Closet where he was , look'd into the Garden , and being a Ground-Floor , he got out with little Difficulty  but , getting over the Garden-Wall , a Mastiff-Dog belonging to the House , seiz'd him by the Leg , and pull'd him down again  and having no Arms about him , but what were prepar'd for Love , it was with much Difficulty and Danger he escap'd the Mastiff 's Fury .


When he came home , he was oblig'd to send for a Surgeon , for the Dog had bit him in several Places , and a reasonable Person wou'd imagine the Smart of his Wounds might have cur'd the Pain in his Heart  but he was more in Love than ever .
The Cure of his Hurts kept him at home much longer than his impatient Soul wou'd permit , which retarded his Cure .
The Doctor visited him  every Day , and never without a Fee  and no doubt , in his Heart , he wish'd when he was cur'd of this Hurt , to meet with another such , the first time he went abroad .
Tho ' the Gentleman had form'd a Story , far from the Road of Truth , yet the Doctor told him , he did not doubt , but he met with the Accident in pursuing some Love Intrigue .


One Day , when they were together in the Squire 's Garden , pretty well warm'd with the Juice of the Grape , he spoke to him after this manner : Sir , I stand in very great need of your Advice , without prescribing to the Apothecary .
I am sick , I own , but my Disease lies in the Mind .
I have long languish'd for a beautiful Lady , that if I do not enjoy , I must seek for my Contentment in the Grave , for there is nothing else in this World , can give me Ease .
This Charmer is marry'd , and I believe strictly virtuous .
I shall conceal the Name , till I hear your Advice and Sentiments on this Occasion  but , by the way , before you speak , I am willing to give 500 l. to compleat the Business , and 20 l. every time I have the Enjoyment of the Lady .
The Doctor did not take a long time to consider the Proposal , but made him this Answer : Sir , were it my own Case , I  shou'd not long demur upon it , for , I can assure you , I shou'd take the Money  and tho ' it might seem strange in the Eyes of the World , yet , in my own private Opinion , there is no Crime i n't .
What the worse is a Woman for being enjoy'd by more than her Husband , especially with his Consent  for I believe there are but few guiltless without it , and commit the Sin , if it be one , without any Profit .


The Gentleman finding the Doctor pretty willing in such an Affair , told him the whole Truth , and that it was his Wife whose Eyes had wounded him .
To deal as freely with you , reply'd the Doctor , I imagin'd as much  for my Wife has been complaining to me of your criminal Addresses , as she calls 'em  and I find ( not as I have put it directly to her ) that there is no Hope in gaining her , knowingly , to consent  or perhaps if she were willing , I shou'd not be easily brought to treat about the Matter : But I suppose if it were so , I shou'd never have heard of the Affair .
Well then , said the Squire , since you are willing to assist me , I 'll give you my Word and Honour , every Article I have mention'd to you , shall be made good  and let us begin as soon as you please .
Hold ,  Sir , reply'd the Doctor , we are now driving a Bargain , I am well assur'd you wou'd not apply to me , if you cou'd get your Business done without me  therefore I am resolv'd you shall come to my Terms , or you shall never see my Wife more .
- First , you shall enter into Bonds , never to disclose the Secret to any Person : Next , you must make the 500 l. a 1000 l. for the first time  for how do I know but you may repent your Bargain , after Enjoyment ?
for I am convinc'd , Expectation exceeds Possession of our Wishes : And for the second time , 100 l. the third 50 l. and the fourth 20 l. and so to continue .


The Gentleman , eager as he was to possess the Lady , was surpris'd at his Proposal  but , as his Passion exceeded his Reason , soon agreed to the mention'd Articles .
But the Difficulty was , how to have 'em drawn with Secrecy  but the Doctor soon solv'd that , by telling him , he wou'd draw up the Bond himself , and the Squire 's Servants might sign it , without knowing the Contents .
The first 1000 l. should be brought in Specie  and so the rest , as they should become due .
The Gentleman was too much blinded with Love , to stop at any thing .
The next Day the Bond of Secrecy was sign'd , with the Penalty of  3000 l. and the Night after that , was agreed on for the first Time , when he shou'd take Possession of all he desir'd .
In the Interim , the Doctor had many Discourses with his Wife , upon the Levity of Women , and that the Crime of Adultery was only as People were pleas'd to form it to themselves .
The poor innocent Lady little imagin'd the base Design that was hatch'd against her , and only begg'd her Husband wou'd cease such Discourses , that but ill agreed with her Sentiments .


The better to carry on the Contrivance , the Squire had not made one Visit at the Doctor 's , since the Night he was confin'd in the Closet  and the poor Lady , far from Ill-Nature , was not displeas'd that he had any thing to hinder his troublesome Visits .
When the fatal Evening came , the Doctor took care in conveying the Gentleman with his 1000 l. into the Closet , unperceiv'd by any  and that his Wife shou'd not have an Occasion for any thing that was there , had order'd all her Female Geers out two Days before , with this Reason , That he shou'd want that Place intirely to himself , for some time .


Bed-time came , and the poor Victim was laid in Sheets , the Emblem of her Innocence ,  ready for the Sacrifice of unlawful Love .
The base-spirited Husband took an Occasion of putting out the Candle , and dismiss'd the Maid .
Upon the Instant , the expecting Lover took his Place , and the Doctor prudently and decently retir'd to his Closet .
I ca n't give the Reader his Thoughts of what was doing  but 't is reasonable to suppose , even the Possession of his Mammon , cou'd not quite banish some scurvy Ideas .
The Gentleman , after revelling several Hours in guilty Joys , retir'd into the Closet , as was agreed on , dress'd himself , and went home , with the Help of his Cuckold  who , to favour his Retreat , pretended he heard some Noise in the House .
Every thing thus succeeded as the Wretch desir'd  who , notwithstanding his Guilt , went to Bed , and slept as found as unpolluted Innocence .


The next Day he made a Visit to the Squire , where he applauded his own Wit , for his nice Conduct in the Affair : But his chief Reason of visiting the Lover , was to know if he design'd another Visit that Night  and was much rejoic'd to find the Gentleman as eager , as he was willing .
In short , the Gentleman went much oftner than his Fortune wou'd permit  and the Cuckold wore his Antlers all  over Gold .
But tho ' the Gentleman 's Love was not dead , yet the Edge was so far taken off , that he began to reason with himself , and therefore went not so often as the Doctor desired  he reproach'd him with his Decay of Passion for his Wife  and the Gentleman wanted to be upon better Terms .
In short , there had like to have been a Breach between 'em : For the Doctor wou'd not bate an Ace of his first Price , imagining it wou'd be undervaluing the Goods in Trade .
The Gentleman told him , tho ' he lov'd his Wife as much as ever , yet he shou'd be oblig'd to make less frequent Visits , or his Fortune wou'd be much impair'd .
The Husband was much chagrin'd at it , but made himself easy with this Reflexion , that if his Love continu'd , as he had no Reason to think the contrary , his Prudence wou'd give way to it .
The Lover imagin'd , if he cou'd disclose the Intrigue to the Lady , she wou'd , out of a just Resentment , continue the Correspondence more to his Advantage .
He therefore laid a Plot to get the Husband out , when he was expecting the happy Moment in the Closet .
Accordingly , at the Time , a Servant came with a Coach and Six , to bring the Doctor to my Lord - his Patient formerly , who was taken dangerously  and suddenly ill .
He had just time to step into the Closet , and to inform the Lover he shou'd be back in two Hours  therefore desired him to have Patience till that Time .
As he went out , he desir'd his Wife not to go to Bed , till he came back .


The Gentleman had taken care he shou'd not return so soon as he imagin'd , for he had given Directions to his Servants to turn him out upon a Common , Fifteen Miles from his own House , in the middle of a dark Night .
So there we shall leave him , to his Disappointment and inward Vexation  and go home to the Doctor 's House again .
His Wife sat up beyond the expected Time , and would have sat up much longer , if the Maid , to go to Bed herself , had not persuaded her , that my Lord might be in very great Danger , and consequently her Master oblig'd to attend him .
The Wife , upon these Persuasions , went into her Bed-Chamber , and dismiss'd her Female Attendant  but not being quite easy in her Mind , concerning her Brute of a Husband , sat down to read  which the Gentleman perceiving , imagin'd she wou'd be less surpris'd while there was Light , than if he shou'd make his Discovery in the Dark , therefore open'd the Door softly , and came  out of the Closet .
His first Appearance had so much affrighted her , that she had not Power to speak , or cry out .
Madam , said the Gentleman , do n't be surpriz'd at this unexpected and unseasonable Visitation  for , on my Honour , I mean you no Injury  and , to open your Eyes , and prepare you for what I shall say , I was conducted hither by your Husband .
He then proceeded , and acquainted her with every Circumstance of their Agreement .
The griev'd Lady had not Strength enough to hear it out , but fell in a Swoon upon the Bed where she sat .
The Gentleman was truly concern'd for this Accident , and us'd all the Means in his Power , to bring back her Senses again : But when her Understanding was restor'd , her Lamentations , Sighs , and Tears , were beyond Expression moving .
She seem'd resolv'd to receive no Consolation , but look'd upon him as the hateful Executioner of her Honour .
Madam , said the Gentleman , if I cou'd have imagin'd you wou'd have felt this Injury so sharply , I never wou'd have committed it  and I shall ever repent , to the last of my Life , the Sorrow I have given to a Woman of such impregnable Virtue .
But it is all owing to the Baseness of that Wretch , who is no longer  worthy to be call'd your Husband .
If you can bury the Remembrance of what is past , be assur'd , for the future , I shall be a Friend to your Virtue , and never once attempt any thing injurious to your Honour .
After Death ( reply'd the Lady , in Tears ) 't is too late for Physic , I am for ever miserable  and , to aggravate my Sorrows , I am even ty'd up from resenting , as I ought , this irreparable Injury  for tho ' the Baseness of my Husband might cancel every Matrimonial Tie , yet I have a Soul that tells me , all my Resentments will be to grieve in Silence , till Death releases me from all my Pain .


All the Gentleman 's Endeavours to sooth her Sorrows , prov'd vain  and he took his Leave of her , with a solemn Resolution never to have any Correspondence with the hateful Husband more  sincerely repenting for his Follies past , and in the utmost Grief it was no farther in his Power to redress her Injuries .


The next Day , about Noon , the Willing Cuckold return'd , loaden with Curses for the Trick put upon him  and tho ' his Wife endeavour'd to conceal her Sorrows , yet it was impossible  for her Tears stole from her Eyes , pursuing one another , and Sighs heav'd  in her Breast , as if every one intended to be her last Breath .
The Husband soon found the Meaning of 'em , and set himself , aukwardly , to comfort her  and , by degrees , came to understand the best part of their last Night 's melancholy Conversation .
But when he learnt the Gentleman had resolv'd to make no more Visits in that criminal manner , he was almost distracted at the Loss of so good a Customer , as he term'd him  fell out with the poor innocent Eleanora , and was outrageous out of all Bounds .
Sdeath !
said he , this is your Doings !
Pray , what the worse are you , for what is past ?
Have not I gain'd more by the Squire in one Month , than I have got in three Years by my Practice ?
But however , I have one Card more to play yet  and since he has resolv'd to make no more of his Visits , I 'll make him pay well for the last .
He then declar'd he wou'd have the Penalty of the Bond , which he had broke , by disclosing to her their Terms of Agreement , and if he wou'd not pay him willingly , the Law shou'd force him .


The poor Wife was quite overwhelm'd with this avaricious Declaration , and intreated her base Husband , as well as her Sorrows wou'd permit , that he wou'd desist in such a  mean Proceeding  but to no Purpose .
Nay , he farther told her , she must be his chief Evidence in the Cause .
And tho ' she declar'd she wou'd put an End to her Shame by Death , yet he still persisted , and went to the Gentleman the next Day , who , at his unreasonable Demand , gave him no other Answer , but a sound Bastinado  and the Cuckold was oblig'd to go home with more Pains in his Body , than ever he felt in his Conscience .
His Head being broke , and his Face bruis'd , he was oblig'd to stay at home some few Days , till his Hurts were heal'd .
But the poor Eleanora felt the Effects of his Ill-humour  yet , notwithstanding this hard Treatment , she cou'd never once think of hating him , but bore all with the utmost Patience .
She knew , by his Expressions , that he had resolv'd to go to Law upon a double Score , as well for the Assault , as Breach of Articles , whenever he was able to go abroad  therefore she prevail'd upon herself to send him the following Letter .


SIR ,


YOU know , I am already injur'd past Redress  and 't is my greatest Unhappiness , that I must sue in one who has been the chiefest  Instrument in my Undoing .
Nothing in this World can make me forget my Misfortunes  yet they will , in some part , sit lighter on my Mind , if you will make up the Quarrel between Mr. T - and yourself  otherwise , you will have a Life to answer for , having resolv'd on Death , if there is any farther Proceeding .
Whatever Charge you are at , you shall be repaid out of my yearly Allowance .
Your Compliance with this , will be the only way to gain Forgiveness from Heaven , and the wretched


ELEANORA .


The Gentleman , who had now conceiv'd a disinterested Friendship for her , was resolv'd to comply with her just Request , without expecting any Return , according to her Letter .
Thereupon he sent a Message to the sordid Wretch , that he was willing to come to an Accommodation , and in the End , got clear of him for 500 l .
But the Matter cou'd not be finish'd without Witnesses to general Releases  these having no other Concern than to make an End for their Friend the Squire , were not so choice of keeping the Secret , and as most Secrets are whisper'd about to the Enlargement of every thing , this Story lost nothing by the Carriage .


 At last Lady Fame trumpeted it about the whole Kingdom  'till the cornuted Doctor cou'd not peep abroad for the Scoffs of the Neighbours  and his Patients , in general , abhorring the Fact , sell from him  which struck so to his Heart , being wounded in the tenderest Part , Interest , that in less than a Year , his wretched Soul took its last Farewell of his vile Body .


The poor Eleanora ( who resided with her Father when the Story began to be publick ) cou'd not avoid grieving , out of her Sweetness of Temper , for a Wretch that did not deserve her least Regard  and beg'd her Father to seek out some Retirement for her in the Country , where she might end the rest of her Days in peaceful Contemplation , free from the Censure of the World .
Her Father had just procur'd her such a Place as she desired , when the Gentleman that had been the Cause of her Sorrows , put an End to 'em .
For , being , as much in Love with her Virtue , as her Beauty , made his Addresses to her  and , as that was the only Way to save her Credit , she consented to the Match , after her Year of Mourning was over , and they have liv'd ever since , a Pattern of conjugal Affection .


'  When Isabella had finish'd this short true Story , her Manner of Reading was approv'd by every one of the Company , but myself  for I must own , I had not recover'd Spirit enough even to open my Mouth  for I observ'd she cast her Eyes , by turns , on all the Company , but still avoided me .


They were sometimes descanting upon the Story , and every Person gave their Sentiments  but I was in no Humour to give mine .
Immediately after we parted , and as we rode home , Billy , said my Uncle , you seem'd very melancholy all the while you were at my Lady 's  you hardly took any Notice of those about you , and your dumb Civility when we parted , spoke your Mind full of some melancholy Thoughts , which I judge were concerning the young Isabella .
To deal ingenuously , Uncle ( I reply'd ) the Carriage of that amiable Creature almost distracts me , and I find Love strengthens with every Morning 's Sun  and tho ' I wou'd give all the World for her Esteem , yet her Behaviour to me to-day , raises in me a decent Pride , which Pride will make me shew my Resentments in refraining my Visits .


Pr ` ythee , Will , return'd my Uncle , do n't appear more a Man in this Boyish Passion ,  than thou dost in the rest of thy Actions .
I intend to part you and your Mistress , next Spring  therefore prepare your Mind accordingly , for you and your Tutor shall make the Tour of Europe , for three Years  and by that time you may even forget the Name of Isabella .
Nothing , Sir , said I , can make me forget her , or her Usage  tho ' her Scorn will touch me nearer than any thing can fall upon me in this World , after losing your Affection .
Pr ` ythee , have done with this Topic then , said my Uncle .
The remaining Part of this Summer , I intend you and I shall make a Journey over most of the celebrated Places in our own Country , that you may not be , as most of our young Travellers are , inquisitive after the Knowledge of foreign Climates , when you are a Stranger to your own .
Sir , the sooner you make this Journey ( I reply'd ) the better  and you cou'd not propose any thing I like so well .
Why then , said my Uncle , to-morrow we 'll be going , after Dinner  I suppose you have nothing material to hinder you .
Shou'd we not acquaint my Father and Mother with your Intention ?
said I. No , no matter , reply'd my Uncle , we 'll take no Leave of any one , but the Company we have just now left  neither  wou'd I do that , but as their House will stand in the way of our first Day 's Journey .
The Thoughts of seeing Isabella so soon , gave me some Satisfaction , tho ' mixt with a great deal of Anxiety .


The next Morning we set out  my Uncle altering his Resolution of dining at home , intending to dine at my Lady 's .
When we came there , we were inform'd the whole Family were gone to dine with the Husband of Eleanora .
This News , and Disappointment of not seeing Isabella , according to my Expectation , almost overcame my Spirits  but I bore it outwardly well enough  and my Uncle seem'd very well pleas'd with my Calmness of Temper  tho ' , alas !
he little guess'd the Perturbation of my Thoughts .
My Uncle intended the first Tour as far as Edinburgh , and accordingly pursu'd our Journey , with one Servant only .
My Uncle was such pleasant Company , that I had not Leisure to think of Isabella , till I went to Rest  and even the Fatigues of the Day wou'd hardly prevent my waking all Night .
Sometimes I imagin'd Isabella might have some tender Thoughts of me  especially when I call'd to mind her former Conversation with me , and that my sudden Absence might possibly create  her some Uneasiness .
But then , her late Behaviour to me , cancell'd those pleasing Hopes .
It is needless to describe the Towns we pass'd  but we arriv'd safe at Edinburgh , without any Accident , the once Regal Town of Scotland .


Edinburgh , Ag neda , or Edenburgum , was call'd , in the earlier Ages , Castrum Alatum .
It stands on a high Eminence  and the Plan of the City , as it lies , resembles the Skeleton of a Human Figure .
The Castle was reckon'd , before the Use of Cannon , impregnable  and is now of sufficient Strength to withstand a powerful Siege .
The Buildings are very strong , and large , compos'd of Free-Stone , and Mortar of a hard Cement , most of the Houses eight Stories high .
But as we have many Descriptions of Scotland , I shall take no farther Notice of this City  only it is not very convenient to walk the Streets by Night , without a Person before you , who cries as he passes along , Hand your Haund !
Haud your Haund !
otherwise you may chance to have upon your Heads something offensive to the Nose , as well as your Cloaths .
The Streets , in the Morning , are cover'd over with somewhat , that every one who walks till Ten of the Clock , may very well expect good Luck , according to our old English Saying .
 Before Noon , so many People walk the Streets , there is not the least remaining of that ill-custom'd Filth .


In many Parts of the Streets stands a Person , with a great Cloak to cover his Customers , with another Conveniency , crying , Wha wants me ?


After visiting several Places in Scotland , we return'd , viewing the noted Places in England , in our Way home .
Tho ' , I must own , Curiosity very often took up all my Thoughts , yet my Love was not in the least lessen'd  and the nearer I came to the Place of the Divine Isabella 's Abode , the more was the Increase of my Anxiety .
My Uncle had not once mention'd that Passion , thro ' our whole Journey , till the Morning of the Day that put an End to our first Tour .
Now , said my Uncle , I imagine you have some Thoughts of your young Mistress .
I intend to dine there to-day , but shall leave the Conduct of that Part of your Life to yourself , and say no more upon that Head .
But when you stand in need of my Advice , or Assistance , ask it , and you shall have it , because I am assur'd you will not ask any thing contrary to the Honour of a Gentleman .
I return'd suitable thanks for so kind a Condescension , and  chang'd the Subject , because I thought my Uncle seem'd pleas'd to have it so .


We came to my Lady 's about Twelve o ' Clock , and were told they were Dressing .
My Uncle , notwithstanding his Freedom , wou'd not interrupt 'em , but went to rest upon a Couch in the Parlour .
I not being so much fatigu'd , went into the Garden to indulge my Thoughts .
But what was my Surprise , when I found the lovely Isabella sitting by the Fountain , with a Book in her Hand , on which she seem'd very intent  her Back was towards me , so that I came within six Paces of her , before she saw me .
At the Noise I made in approaching her , she turn'd about , and upon seeing me , gave a Shriek , and put the Book hastily in her Pocket .
Madam , said I , if I had thought that my Presence cou'd have created in your Mind any Disturbance , I wou'd have sooner cut off these Limbs that brought me hither , than have occasion'd it .
Last time I saw you , has made me think my Sight distasteful to you  but if you will inform me , that I deserve to be thus punish'd , I have Courage enough to put an End to my Life , if it will be any Satisfaction to you .


 No , Sir , reply'd Isabella , I shou'd grieve to be the Death of any thing of the Brute Creation , much more any thing that bears a Human Form .
And I am so far from thinking there is any Bravery in putting an End to Life , that , beside the unrepented Crime , I think it a Poverty of Spirit , and want of Fortitude to bear the Ills of Life .
Both Brutus , and Cato , were , in my Opinion , proud and pusillanimous , and parted with Life , to rid 'em of their Fears .
I cou'd , Madam , I return'd , bear all the Ills of Life , but slighted Love .
Young Gentlemen , like you , reply'd Isabella , talking of Love , is like Fools talking Divinity  it will leave but little Impression on the Judicious  and I have formerly told you , this Topic is not proper for you to talk of , or me to hear .
Well , Madam , said I , if by covering the Flame of Love , I had any Hope Time wou'd kindle that innocent Fire in you , that Thought wou'd give me Ease  and whatever Climate this Body shou'd be in , my Soul wou'd be with you .
I doubt not , reply'd Isabella , but your Body and Soul were together in your short Travels , and this new Passion , Love , was laid by for Curiosity .
I will not deny , I return'd , but Knowledge is what my Mind is bent upon   but even the acquiring that , does but the more indear the Thoughts of you  and all of your Sex that I see , does but oblige me to make Comparisons , tho ' there is none when I think of you .


Well , Sir , reply'd the Fair One , we 'll leave this Discourse , that I may not provoke any more Compliments , and desire to know the Progress of your sudden Journey .
Sudden indeed , I reply'd , for my Uncle did not take a Night to consider o n't  but if you had felt one Particle of the Sorrow , if we may so divide it , that I felt , when we were disappointed of seeing you , in our first setting out , you wou'd have some Motion of Pity .
Must every thing , cry'd Isabella , smiling , administer to this youthful Folly ?
In me , I reply'd , 't is a Whirlpool , that swallows every thing that comes near it .
Well , no more Similies , nor no more Love , return'd Isabella , but the Account of your Journey .
Well , Madam , said I , you must be obey'd .
I then gave her a Description of every thing curious we had observ'd in our short Travels , with which she seem'd very much pleas'd .
I am convinc'd , said Isabella , that all young Gentlemen that travel , do not make the same Improvement  or rather , many do not improve  at all , but bring home greater Fools than they carry'd with 'em  I mean , those that go into foreign Countries , for I take yours to be no more than a Journey , as we call it .
But I believe , by this time , my Mother and Aunt are dress'd , therefore it will be very proper for me to wait on 'em .
Dear , Madam , said I , relieve my Torments , and say you do not despise me .
I shall say no more at this time , reply'd Isabella , than that I must wait on my Mother  therefore come along , and hold your Tongue .
Upon this I led her by the Hand , and had not an Opportunity of speaking to her in Return , because there were several Workmen in the Garden wou'd have heard our Discourse .
As we were hurrying along , the Wind blew her Petticoat upon my Spur , which , stooping to untangle hastily , I prick'd my Fingers with the Rowel , and they bled very much  searching my Pocket for a Handkerchief to wrap my Hand in , I remember'd that I had left it in my Hat in the Parlour , when we first came in .
Isabella , upon that , took hers out , and gave it me , and at the same time let fall a folded Paper , she drew out with the Handkerchief , unseen by her .
I took it up without Observation , by letting the Handkerchief fall upo n't , and  secretly convey'd it into my Pocket .
When I came in to my Uncle , he was fast asleep  upon which , I stole out again , not seeing the Ladies in the Parlour .
As , soon as I came to a convenient Place in the Garden , I took out the Paper I had found , and when I had open'd it , perceiv'd it was the Letter , and Song I had formerly sent her  and by being much worn in the Folds , I imagin'd with a pleasing Satisfaction she had often perus'd it for my Sake .
At the Bottom of the Letter , I found these Lines of the Poet :


In vain , all Arts the Love-sick Virgin tries , Affects to frown , and seems severely wise , In hopes to cheat the wary Lover 's Eyes .
If the dear Youth her Pity seems to move , And pleads with Tenderness the Cause of Love , Nature asserts her Empire in her Heart , And kindly takes the faithful Lover 's Part : By Love , her Self , and Nature , thus betray'd , No more she trusts in Pride 's Fantastick Aid , But bids her Eyes confess the yielding Maid .
Those Lines I remember'd very well in the celebrated Play of Tamerlane : But the following Verses , as I cou'd not charge my Memory with , I fancy'd were of her own Composition ,  and seem'd as an Answer to the others :


Too soon , alas !
I 've felt the tingling Dart , And Love-triumphant rides within my Heart : But , spite of pleading Love , and Nature 's Cause , That thro ' the World dispenses rigid Laws : The Flame shall be conceal'd within my Breast , Tho ' the sharp Pangs disturb my balmy Rest .
I 'll learn my Eyes ( those Tell-Tales of the Mind ) To look severe , tho ' my poor Heart is kind : My Tongue no Whisper of my Griefs shall tell , Ev'n Love shall teach me to dissemble well .
I had the Vanity to imagine , the last Lines very much concern'd me  which certainly wou'd have made me lose my Senses with Joy , if a Doubt had not arose , that some other might be meant .
The Thought of that kept the Balance even with Hope , and sometimes seem'd to weigh heavier .


I was upon the Rack of Thought , when a Servant came to acquaint me the Ladies were dress'd , and in the Parlour .
After the ordinary Salutations , the Mother and Aunt began to rally my Uncle , for going his Journey without taking Leave of 'em .
Why really , reply'd my Uncle , I think it the best  way to avoid Impertinence , for I hate your formal Parting .
However , you are such eternal Gadders , there 's no finding you at home  for we did you the Honour to call upon you as we set out  and , that we may spare ourselves some Trouble , we shall now take our Leaves for one Month more  for we shall set out upon another Tour to morrow .
Why this is doing Business indeed , reply'd the Aunt !
You 'll fatigue the young Gentleman too much .
Fatigue !
return'd my Uncle  sure if I am able to bear it , he very well may .
But my chief Reason of this sudden Journeying is , to shew my Nephew some of his own Country , before he begins his Foreign Travels , that he may satisfy the Curiosity of any Person that wants to be inform'd , when he 's abroad .
Pray , when do you intend he shou'd begin his Foreign Travels , as you call 'em , said the Mother .
Ev'n as soon as he has finish'd his Home ones , return'd my Uncle .
At this , I observ'd Isabella 's Colour to change , and rising hastily , to hide her Concern , threw up the Sash , and look'd out of the Window , unobserv'd by any one but myself .
The Joy I felt was almost without Bounds , and I stood in need of the utmost Art to conceal it .
There were  several Discourses , pro and con , upon young Gentlemen 's Travelling  but my Mind was so full of the happy Extasy I had conceiv'd , that I took but little Notice of either .
Well , said my Uncle , what you Women say upon these Subjects , is but whipt Cream , all Froth , and nothing substantial .
But how must we employ ourselves till Dinner , for I ca n't walk ?
What think you of Ombre , or Quadrille , said the Aunt ?
With all my Heart , a Game at Ombre , reply'd my Uncle .
But that wo n't employ us all , said the Mother .
Isabella complain'd of a Pain in her Head , and therefore was unfit to make one  and for my Part , I declar'd I did not understand the Game .
So the Mother , the Aunt , and my Uncle , sat to it .
Isabella went up into her Chamber , and carry'd with her the Object of my Adoration .
When she was gone , I went into the Garden to feed upon Contemplation  and , in my own Imagination , thought myself the happiest Creature in the Universe .
But my Satisfaction did not last long , for , walking upon a Terras that overlook'd the Country , I saw a Coach and Six stop at the Gate .
There came out of it an elderly Gentleman , follow'd by a young one about Twenty , as I guess'd  and before I cou'd make any  Judgment of 'em , two Fellows that were at work under the Terras-Wall , who did not see me .
were observing the Coach .
Adso !
said one to the other , There 's young Lady 's Suitor , Sir Eustace , and his Father , com'd again .
I had not Power to stir , at this unexpected Knowledge , and remain'd a considerable time like one thunderstruck .
A thousand Resolutions crouded into my Mind , and all to the destroying of my Peace .
My Rival was hated with an immortal Hatred , before I knew him , and his or my Death was fix'd as irrevocable as Fate .
The Perturbation of my Fancy work'd so violently , that my Strength fail'd me , and I fell , almost Senseless , upon a Grass-Plat , where my feeble Limbs had unknowingly carry'd me .
When the Hurry of my confus'd Thoughts was over , they gave me absolute Despair .
I was assur'd an Hour before , she lov'd , and Hope had flatter'd me , that I was the happy He  but now I as surely thought , my Rival was the Object of her Wishes .
Why then , thought I , why shou'd I endeavour to destroy one , whom she wou'd wish shou'd live ?
that will not be the way to gain her , but rather make her loath me .
Death seem'd to me the only Friend  yet , thro ' a Principle  of my Faith , I cou'd not put an End to Life .
I only wish'd for Death , without the Thought of separating Soul and Body .


Long I lay in my Confusion of Thought  till at last I beheld the divine Isabella in the Garden , looking about , as for something she had lost , which I imagin'd to be the Paper I took up .
She was within two Paces of me before she saw me , she was so intent on what she was about  and when her Eyes encounter'd mine , she started back , as tho ' she had beheld something baneful to her .
Well , Madam , said I , must I ever be the Object of Horror to your Eyes ?
and must you always start at the Sight of me , as if you saw the Form of one rise from the Grave ?
A little Time will take this Bugbear from your Sight , I hope , for ever .
I know , I can never deserve your Love  and yet I can not bear to see you make another happy .
For Heaven 's sake !
cry'd Isabella , surpris'd , what is it moves you so ?
Why do you lie stretch'd on the Ground , and look as if some Distraction had seiz'd you ?
Come , give me your Hand , and let us walk  have a Question to ask you , which I expect to be truly resolv'd in .
Have you found any Paper of Writing , since you came into the Garden ?
There , Madam ,  said I  and wou'd to Heaven I had never seen it !
( giving her the Paper ) there , take it .
I must own , I can not blame you .
Love is not to be forc'd  't is a free-born Child of the Mind .
I only think the young Gentleman is compleatly bless'd .
I am sure , I shou'd be distracted with the mighty Joy , in such Return of Love .


Well , Sir , said Isabella , this Freedom I can forgive , because I see something extraordinary has ruffled your Temper .
I doubt not but you have read these Lines ( pointing to the Letter ) that were writ on the Blank Leaf  't is the Thought of a young Gentlewoman , a Neighbour of mine  I liking the Lines , transcrib d 'em .
I was under some Concern , I own , for the Loss of the Paper , because the Ballad that you sent me was along with it , and I promis'd her to copy it , and send it back this Evening .


I soon perceiv'd , by some Confusion in the Utterance of these Words , that what she said was to disguise the Truth , and that Thought stabb'd me to the Heart  tho ' her Civility to me , seem'd tender enough , yet I imagin'd that was only to blind me , and prevent any farther Enquiry .
While we both were in great Confusion of Thought , we perceiv'd  Sir Eustace coming down out of the Hall , into the Garden .
To let you see , your Suspicions are unjust , said Isabella , ( for I had inform'd her what I heard one of the Workmen say ) I 'll instantly avoid the Person we see coming .
With that she went into a private Walk , and opening a Door that led into another Garden , took me by the Hand , and pull'd me in after her , then shut to the Door again .
I must confess , this Proceeding began to revive Hope , that , 'till then , seem'd quite expir'd .
This Condescension , said I , does , indeed , something ease my Heart , but yet will not cure my Pain .
That young Gentleman , no doubt , comes here to make his Addresses to you , and coming thus publickly attended by that elderly Gentleman , which I suppose to be his Father , tells me he has the Approbation of your Mother and Aunt .


I will not deny , reply'd Isabella , but that Sir Eustace pretends to be my Lover , and my Mother and Aunt do not discountenance him .
But they have more Tenderness for me , than to force my Inclination .
And you more Duty , I reply'd , than to contradict 'em .
No Sir , return'd Isabella , I am satisfy'd they never will impose any one upon me for a Husband   or shou'd they endeavour it , tho ' Duty is very prevalent with me , yet in that one only Thing , I wou'd dare to disobey .


Well , Madam , my Destiny , I find , has mark'd me for unhappy , for Title and Riches must prevail .
I have told you before , reply'd Isabella , that Fortune I despise , and Title can no more make a Man Good and Virtuous , in my Opinion , than a good and virtuous Man can make a Title .
A King can give Honour , but not Honesty  yet , like the Sun , it shines upon Weeds that are often admir'd for their eminent Worthlesness .
Your Sentiments of Honour , divine Isabella , I reply'd , are so just , that inspires me to ask you one Question , and hope an Answer .
What is it , return'd Isabella , in some Confusion ?
Am I to hope , said I , or despair ?
I wou'd not have made the important Question so abruptly  but the Time of my Departure is so short , and my Unhappiness of not seeing you so often as my impatient Heart desires , will , I am assur'd from your Goodness , stand excus'd , whatever your Heart can say , for , or against me .
Why will you Press me , reply'd Isabella , now ?
I have ( I return'd ) told you my Reasons already .
Think , ere you answer me , for my whole Peace of  Mind depends upo n't  and if I am banish'd from your Presence now , with cold Despair , I am assur'd I can not survive it .
No Love was ever more pure than mine , or stronger .
A distant Hope of once possessing you , wou'd arm me for all Dangers  and I cou'd wait patiently an Age of Torments , if in the End I shou'd be blest with your consenting Love .
Do not surmise my Passion , youthful Folly  't is rooted in my Soul so deep , that no Storm of Fortune can ever shake its Foundation .
If you can not love , freely declare it , as you wou'd your Vows to Heaven  I shall only blame my Stars , not you  and take for ever from your Sight , an Object hateful to himself as well as you .


Hate , reply'd Isabella , is not in my Nature  and since you press me to declare myself , the Person you saw me fly from , never shall have my Heart  and be assur'd , if you remain ever constant , I shall , no doubt , in time , be willing to reward that Constancy .
This Declaration , continu'd Isabella , blushing , is much more than I so soon intended to let you know  and what Constructions you put upon it , keep it a Secret from the whole World : Let not your Uncle , whom I know you can hide nothing from , be acquainted  with the least Syllable .
This , from a Person of Isabella 's Character , was enough to raise me from the Dead .
I said all an impatient loving Heart cou'd suggest  and was so extravagant in my transporting Joy , that Isabella check'd me , telling me , I shou'd certainly discover something extraordinary had happen'd to me , if I had not a Heed to my Eyes and Tongue .
Before we parted , she open'd all her Soul to me , telling me , her Passion did not seem so violent as mine , but more lasting .


In short , never was a Man more happy than I thought myself .
However , Prudence oblig'd us to part , tho ' I cou'd have liv'd for ever in her Company .
She gave me the Key , to let me thro ' the same Way we came in , while she went another Way  first commanding me not to shew the least Resentment to the young Nobleman , if we shou'd meet .
I reply'd , I knew so well the Nature of his Disease , that , if he truly lov'd her , he had now a Title to my Pity .
We left each other , with a Promise to meet in the Afternoon again , in the same Place , if an Opportunity offer'd .


When I had parted with the divine Isabella , I went up the Walk with the utmost  Contentment in my Heart  tho ' I endeavour'd to conceal it in my Countenance as much as possible .
Upon the Terras I met Sir Eustace , whom I saluted , and pass'd him  he return'd it indeed , but with too much Pride , as I thought .
However , I pass'd on , and took no farther Notice of him .
When I came into the Parlour , I found the old Gentleman , with the two Ladies and my Uncle , playing at Quadrille , and Isabella reading in the Window .
Immediately after , Sir Eustace came in , and finding Isabella , exprest abundance of of fulsome Joy at the Sight of her .
I must own , I was oblig'd to make use of all my Philosophy , to keep my Temper , and shou'd very hardly have done it , if Isabella had not rally'd him with so much Wit , as in the end , gave me a malicious Satisfaction .
I observ'd , all the Company seem'd as well pleas'd , only the Gentleman that came with him  but he being something deaf , cou'd not understand every thing that was said .


When Dinner was serv'd in , Sir Eustace plac'd himself next Isabella , and was continually helping her to such Quantities , that wou'd have serv'd her a Week .
I observe , Sir , said Isabella , you wou'd have me eat for  the whole Family  or , if you imagin'd every body in Company had as good a Stomach as you suppose me to have , by your loading my Plate , they might rise ready for another Dinner .
However , I am oblig'd to you .
You mistake the Gentleman , reply'd my Uncle , he 's a young Cannibal , he only fats you as we do Chickens , in hope of feeding upon you .
Sir Eustace took what my Uncle said , as a very good Jest , and laugh'd heartily  saying , if he shou'd feed upon her , she wou'd go very much against his Stomach .
At the End of his ridiculous Jest , he laugh'd so immoderately , with his Mouth full , that he sputter'd it in my Face .
I wou'd the Gentleman , said I , had taken an Opportunity of laughing when his Mouth was empty , I shou'd have been the more oblig'd to him .
Harkye , young Gentleman , reply'd Sir Eustace , you were told before I was a Cannibal , and I can assure you , I often eat Youngsters that are too forward .
Really , Sir , said I , very calmly , I ca n't see that prodigious Stomach in your Countenance , or any thing there , wou'd make me afraid to meet you any where fasting .


The Company laugh'd to see his Uneasiness at my Reply , but he gave me no Answer .
 Isabella , I observ'd , seem'd much concern'd at what I said , and , with a Look with her Eyes , told me , I shou'd carry the Jest no farther .
Well , Sir , said I , without jesting , I mean no Harm  if you make any farther Constructions on my Words , but as a Jest , you go beyond my Meaning .
This mollifying Speech seem'd to raise his Anger more .
A Jest has often cost the Maker his Life , reply'd Sir Eustace , and such young Gentlemen as you , shou'd remember the Smart of the Rod , and curb their Tongues for fear of a Whipping .
Sir , said I , I presume your voracious Cannibal 's Stomach is not quite appeas'd , therefore I 'll take a Walk in the Garden , for fear you shou'd fall foul on me in an improper Place  saying this , I arose , and taking my Hat and Sword out of the Window , went into the Garden .


The whole Company arose to stop the Baron , who offer'd to follow me .
My Uncle began to be very much disturb'd , upon my Account  and , as he told me afterwards , did intend to follow me .
But , thinking to oblige me , he desired the Mother to send Isabella after me .
When she came up to me , she began to reproach me with my Conduct , telling me , if I had any Hope or Desire to gain her Heart ,  I must conceal my Passion from all the World , and this Proceeding will betray the Secret  if not on your Side , said she , tenderly , I fear my Concern will .
Those Words have Force enough to restore me to my Senses , were I in the Grave , said I  and after this Confession , that makes me the happiest of Mortals , even Blows shall not make me draw my Sword , if you desire it .
No , said Isabella , I know what Men of Honour shou'd bear  and I shou'd despise the Wretch for being a Coward .
Yet , Madam , I reply'd , Cowardice can no more be help'd , than the Tincture of a Skin  't is rooted in the Nature , and known Cowards , like Fools , shou'd be pity'd .
Certainly , no Man wou'd be a Coward if he cou'd help it , reply'd Isabella  but when I say I shou'd despise a Coward , I imagine to myself , the Man that has true Courage , has every other noble Qualification , that will make him deserving  as on the contrary , a Coward Soul inherits every weak Failing , and is as incapable of doing a worthy Action , as the Man of Spirit is of doing a mean one .
I shall ever submit my Actions , to you , Madam , said I. Then , said Isabella , immediately return , and be reconcil'd to the hot Spark within , whom the more I know ,  the more I despise  and I fansy that Declaration wo n't displease you  but I 'll have no Reply now .
Nothing more but this , said I , you promis'd me a Meeting in the Afternoon , which I fear will be a difficult thing to bring to pass .
Do you start Difficulties , reply'd Isabella ?
Never fear , I warrant we 'll bring it about .
The same River that runs thro ' your Garden , runs thro ' the Bottom of ours , therefore I 'll propose Fishing .
We 'll go first , and the Man shall take us two over to an Island in the River , and return .
My Mother does not care to go into a Boat , and the rest of the Company , I suppose , out of Complainsance , will stay with her .
But I fear , Madam , the young Spark will come to interrupt us , said I. Why that 's all we have to fear , reply'd Isabella  but as soon as he comes , we 'll return  and that , I hope , will give you some Satisfaction .
Do but consider my Temper , and you 'll find this is enough to make you easy .
This I can do , without Suspicion from any one  for none of my Family suspects either you or me to be in Love .
There have so many Accidents odly concurr'd today , that I will no longer conceal it from you .
First , your sudden Departure , then this Rival , and the disagreeable Quarrel .
 Tho ' your Rival is the main Motive , join'd with your Foreign Tour , which I understand by your Uncle , is for three Years .
But I 'll say no more now , in the Afternoon we shall have a better Opportunity .
As soon as I came into the Dining-Room , Sir Eustace met me , with a constrain'd Smile , and told me , he was sorry any Uneasiness had been created by Words utter'd without Thought , and shou'd , for the future , be willing to have more Acquaintance with me .
I shou'd have consider'd indeed , there is some Difference in our Years , said he  therefore I own myself the Criminal , and ask Pardon for what 's past .
Years , said my Uncle , do not always imply Age or Understanding  for some at Fifteen have the Discretion of Thirty  and Fifty-Five , in a good Constitution , is an abler Man than Five and Thirty  I mean , continu'd my Uncle , smiling , some Men are younger at Sixty , than others at Thirty .
That is a Compliment , reply'd the Aunt , we may very reasonably suppose , design'd for yourself .
However , let 's have no more of 'em  we 'll make an End of our Dinner , and drink a Cup of Oblivion , and then all will be well again .
Meaning Tea , I suppose , reply'd my Uncle , where every Cup is broaching new Scandal ,  and we shall have so much Noise , and so little understood , that it will put me in mind of the Confusion of Babel .


I found the Company were not rightly in Humour , yet I perceiv'd , with some Satisfaction , that I was not the Occasion  even the old Gentleman that came with Sir Eustace , appear'd concern'd for his Behaviour .
After we were risen from Table , the Company divided into Parties , all but my Uncle , who went to take his usual Afternoon 's Nap .
The deaf old Gentleman singled me out , and led me into the Garden .
Said he , I have the Misfortune of having but an ill Hearing , yet I heard enough to know my Son was much in Fault .
Youth , Fortune , and Title , make him too presuming .
I have , with the best Advice I am capable of giving him , endeavour'd to soften his too turbulent Temper  but , I fear , 't is rooted too deeply in his Nature , ever to be eras'd .
Honour shou'd be tack'd to Nobility  yet , I find Mankind so deprav'd in their Nature , that the more Power they have , the greater Propensity they have to do Evil , which shews , to the Judicious , Riches and Titles ill plac'd .
But as Nobility can be no more inherited than Virtue , so , in my Opinion , he is noble that has noble Inclinations .
 I shou'd not talk to one so little advanc'd in Years , in this manner , as I do to you , if I had not been inform'd by my Lady , of a ripe Understanding in so early an Age .
I expect no Reply in the Complimental Way  I only beg you wou'd forgive my Son , and , for the future , know me for your Friend .
I shou'd desire your Conversation , but my Infirmity will not admit of it , therefore I shall take my Leave of you .
Upon this he went from me , and left me full of Regard for his right Way of Thinking .


While I was musing upon what he said to me , Isabella came down the Walks , follow'd by a Servant with Fishing-Tackle .
Come , Sir , said she , as she past me , you are to teach me how to catch Fish , for as yet , I am but a mere Bungler .
With all my Heart , Madam , I reply'd .
When the Servant had put us over to the Island , Isabella said to him , John , I desire you wou'd bring over no Strangers .
No , no , Madam , John reply'd  if you 'll be pleas'd to tell me when I shall wait on you , to bring you back , I 'll lock the Boat on the other side , and be out of the way till then .
Do , said Isabella , and fetch us about an Hour hence .
When John was gone , I fell at the Fair One 's Feet , and gave her  Thanks for this surprising Condescension .
What Words , divine Isabella , said I , shall I use to express my Gratitude !
but there are none that will speak the least Part of what my Mind feels  you have rais'd me from the Bottom of Despair , to the Summit of Joy  and when my Heart forgets this Goodness , may I be for ever miserable !
Your Protestations I believe , return'd the divine Isabella , raising me from the Earth , and I will freely declare , if you ever shou'd prove false , the Knowledge will break my Heart .
I was going once more to fall at her Feet , but was interrupted in my exalted Bliss , by a Noise we heard at the Boat .


Sir Eustace missing us in the Garden , and being inform'd by the Aunt where we were gone , follow'd us .
But John had made the Boat too fast for him to undo , without his Assistance .
But in the Bustle he made to unloose it , he tumbled into the Water , and by that time I came to the Water-side , he was sunk to the Bottom .
All other Passions flew immediately from my Breast , but Pity , and when I saw the Danger he was in , I threw myself into the Water , and , by good Fortune , caught hold of a Shoulder-Knot he wore , and brought him to the Island , without  any Appearance of Life .
When I had dragg'd him on Shore , with the Assistance of Isabella , I held him up by the Heels against a Tree , where he disgorg'd the Water he had swallow'd , and fetching two or three Groans , he came to himself  tho ' so faint , he cou'd not stand  and for want of proper Remedies , we were in Fear he might not survive the Accident , for we were too far from the House to make 'em hear us .
I therefore pull'd off my Coat and Waistcoat , and swam across the River to the Garden , and inform'd the Family of the Accident  but John was no where to be found .
The Difficulty we had to get the Boat loose , took up so much time , that Sir Eustace was almost perish'd with Cold , ere we cou'd bring him Assistance  and Isabella 's Fear had almost put her in the same Condition .
It was with much Difficulty , by pouring Cordials into his Mouth , that we brought him once more to his Senses .
He was put to bed  but the Fright , and the Water he drank , threw him into a high Fever .
The Hurry of my Spirits , and being so long in my wet Cloaths , gave me a great deal of Disorder  and , having no other Cloaths to shift me ( for my Uncle 's Servants were gone home with our Equipage ) I was  oblig'd to go to Bed too , but had the Satisfaction of being laid in Isabella 's Bed  and , what heighten'd that Satisfaction , I was strip'd of my wet Shirt , and , by the Mother 's Order , had one of Isabella 's Shifts put on me .
The Joy took away all Thoughts of my Disorder  but it cou'd not hinder a strong Fever seizing me , to the utmost Concern of all the Family .
The Father of the Nobleman express'd more Concern for me , than his Son , giving me all the Encomiums due to the most consummate Virtue  that maugre the Distaste I might have justly conceiv'd against his Son , I had hazarded my own Life to preserve his .
I must own , the Action gave me a great deal of Satisfaction , and the Praises , tho ' no Addition to Pride ( for that 's a Failing I hope I shall ever be a Stranger to ) yet pleas'd me , because I had done what many of my Age wou'd have neglected , or refus'd .


The following Day , my Fever abated , but Sir Eustace seem'd worse and worse .
I was griev'd I cou'd not have an Opportunity of seeing the Divine Isabella alone , during my short Illness .
But I had the Happiness of receiving a Letter from her , which she put into my Hand unobserv'd by any one .
But the Joy I felt in reading the following  Lines , had more Force than any of the Doctor 's Prescriptions towards my Cure .


WHAT shall I say , to describe the Anxiety of my Mind for your Illness ?
My Heart , unguarded now from all the Niceties of my Sex , freely declares itself yours .
But yet , let us both be careful .
I wou'd not have our Passions whisper'd in a Desart  tho ' perhaps , thro ' the Knowledge of your Virtues , it might not meet with many Obstacles .
My Mother and Aunt , I am assur'd , contemn the Addresses of your Rival , even as much as I do .
However , once more , I beg you to be cautious  conceal our Loves even from your good Uncle  and be assur'd , the two Persons under our Roof , are the entire Joy and Contempt of ever yours ,


ISABELLA .


P. S .
At our next Meeting , I shall declare more .


I wish'd my Indisposition had continu'd longer , that I might have had the Satisfaction of being under the same Roof with my dear Isabella .
But my Health return'd , and I was oblig'd to go home to my Uncle 's , without conversing in private with her .
However  the Contentment of my Mind appear'd in my Face , and my Uncle several times took Notice of it , yet I conceal'd , according to her Desire , even from him , the Reason of it .


When we had been at home a Week , my Uncle told me we shou'd make another Tour the next Day  and I gather'd by his Discourse , that we shou'd not make any more Visits to Isabella 's Mother , till we came back , which wou'd not be in six Weeks .
The Heart-breaking I felt , almost kill'd me .
I did not doubt , but I cou'd have gain'd Leave to make a Visit alone  but I knew I must then have discover'd more than Isabella wou'd like .
I cast about , several Hours , how to send her a Letter without Suspicion  but , to my Mortification , cou'd not pitch upon an Expedient .
But while I was perplexing my Brain to no Purpose , I had the unexpected Joy of seeing her Coach stop at the Door  and before I cou'd recover myself from the pleasing Confusion , she enter'd , with her Mother and Aunt .
But understanding my Uncle was in the Garden , the Mother and Aunt went to him , and left the divine Isabella alone with me in the Parlour .
The sudden Surprize had ty'd my Tongue fast , and it was  some time ere I cou'd speak a Word .
All I cou'd do , was to fall at her Feet with the utmost Transport of Joy , which was increas'd by her raising me , and putting her Lily Hand round my Neck , pressing my Head close to her Bosom .
I spoke at last , but such wild incoherent Speeches , that gave her more Satisfaction , she told me , than if I had utter'd Volumes of regular Nonsense , vulgarly call'd , Love .
But when I told her of our intended Journey the next Day , her amiable Countenance was overclouded with Sorrow , and ere we cou'd recover ourselves , my Uncle , her Mother and Aunt came out of the Garden  but before they enter'd the Room where we were , Isabella told me she had provided a Place where we might send Letters to each other , without any Suspicion  she wou'd seek for an Opportunity after Dinner to inform me , and if that shou'd not happen , she wou'd contrive to let me know by a Line before to-morrow Morning .


After Dinner , Isabella and I were engag |'d , much against our Inclination , to make up a Set at Quadrille  and , to add to our Mortification , we were oblig'd to part without any further Opportunity of Converse .
However , I was forc'd to keep up a chearful  Countenance , that my Uncle might not suspect the Chagrin I felt .
The Night prov'd as disagreeable a one to me , as the Evening  and I cou'd not get any Rest , till it was almost time to rise .
As I was dressing myself , my Servant told me there was a Boy at the Door , had brought me a Present of a Brace of Partridges  I order'd him to come in  when I ask'd him from whence they came , he told me he had a Note in his Pocket wou'd inform me .
As soon as I receiv'd it , I soon knew the dear Character to be Isabella 's .
When I had dismiss'd the Boy , I open'd the Note , and found the Contents as follows :


SIR ,


WHEN I left you Yesterday , I carry'd Discontent home with me , which never left me till Sleep ( which was slow in coming to my Aid ) drove it away .
Whenever you have any Time hangs heavy on your Hands , you may write an Account of your Home-Travels , and direct 'em to Mrs. Jane Stubbs , at - The poor Woman has the Misfortune of wanting the Use of Letters , and always brings 'em to me to read  therefore whatever comes to her Hands , will be sure to come to mine .
I shall say no more ( my Time being short ) but this , I care not  how much Trouble the good Woman gives me  so that you may write to her as soon as you please , who will bring it to one who is entirely


Yours , c..


The Pleasure this little Note gave me , was partly taken from me , in that I did not detain the Boy to send an Answer .
Yet , upon second Thoughts , I imagin'd it wou'd be safer to carry one myself .
I was soon determin'd , wrote one , and went to the House , and was there before the Boy , who , I suppose , might loiter by the way .
This Woman was a Tenant of the divine Isabella 's , and had formerly been her Nurse  she cou'd not be said to love her Mistress , but rather doated on her .
This Creature was the Picture of Honesty  and she was so well assur'd of her young Lady 's Conduct , she made no Scruple to tell me , the Letters I wou'd honour her with , shou'd faithfully be convey'd to the proper Hands .
Why then to begin , said I , there 's one , I do n't care how soon it was where it shou'd be .
I do n't think it proper till after Dinner , reply'd the good Woman  for tho ' I am ever welcome at my young Landlady 's Mother 's , yet , as I have not been come long from thence , I think it will not  be quite so well to go so soon .
I agreed with her in that Particular , and took my Leave : first making her a handsome Present  for tho ' those sort of People may continue uncorruptively honest , yet it is as well , when it is made their Interest to be so .


The next Day my Uncle resolv'd we shou'd make a Visit to my Father and Mother , and I was of the Opinion it wou'd be highly proper , as well as a Desire I had to see how the Family went on .
When we arriv'd there , we found every thing according to our Wishes .
There was such a Harmony between my Father and my Mother , that my Father told my Uncle , smiling , his Wife 's late Illness had mended her Temper prodigiously , and he wou'd not have her be indispos'd in the same manner again , for ever so much  for if , said he , she shou'd , and be better in proportion , she wou'd be too good for him , and only fit for Heaven .
We found every thing so much to our Liking , that we took our Leave of 'em with a great deal of Satisfaction  and my Uncle told me , as we were going home , that Miracles were not ceas'd , for there was an ill Woman mended .


The next Day we set out on our intended Progress , and met with nothing extraordinary  in our Course  only one Thing I thought was odd enough .
In a small Village , near the Sea-Coast in Sussex , as we were at Church on a Sunday , with a full Congregation , a Man came to the Church-Door , and cry'd out , A Wreck !
A Wreck !
The Congregation immediately unbuckled their Devotions , and were crouding out as fast as they cou'd , tho ' the Parson had not gone thro ' half his Sermon .
When the good Man found they were going to leave him to finish his Sermon by himself , he call'd to 'em with an audible Voice , desiring his Audience to hear one Word before they went : Upon his earnest Entreaty , most of 'em turn'd about to hear the one Word .
When the Parson found they seem'd willing to hear him , he cry'd out , Pray , good Folks , let us start fair !
and upon that , prest to the Door with all the Expedition he cou'd , and , in a few Minutes , my Uncle and I might have robb'd the Church , for there was not a Soul to hinder us .
The Oddity of the Thing very much surpriz'd us , tho ' it often made us merry afterwards .
Well , Will , said my Uncle ( when the Church was empty ) we may as well say our Prayers at home , as stay here by ourselves .
What , Sir , said I , have you no Curiosity to see the Proceeding of this wild  Congregation ?
Why , I can not say but I have , reply'd my Uncle  let us get our Horses and follow 'em .
When we came to the Gentleman 's where we lay , a Friend of my Uncle 's , we found the House as empty as the Church  for they were all gone upon the same Design , and my Tutor , with our Servants along with 'em , as we suppos'd .
So we were forc'd to be our own Grooms , and follow'd 'em .
We cou'd not well miss our Way , for we saw People from all Quarters running before us .
When we came within Sight of the Sea , we cou'd perceive several Vessels labouring to keep from the Shore , with all their Art and Industry  for the Wind was very high , and blew right ashore , as the Sailors term it .
But what Horror had I in my Mind , to see in what Anxiety the Wretches on Shore were , for fear they shou'd escape , and save themselves .
At last , one of 'em bulg'd upon the Rocks , and split in Pieces , at which Sight the Barbarians ( for I can term 'em no less ) gave a Shout , and threw one another down for Eagerness , who shou'd be foremost , not the least regarding the poor unfortunate Wretches plung'd in the Waves .
But my Uncle and I , with my Tutor , and our Servants ( that were there before us ) gave  'em all the Assistance we cou'd , and with much Trouble , and some Hazard , sav'd Five out of Eight that were in the Vessel  tho ' with many a hearty Curse for our Pains  for it seems they cou'd not make the Vessel a Wreck , if there were any of the Crew alive .
However , the inhuman Brutes fell to securing every thing as fast as ever they cou'd , while we carry'd the poor Shipwreck'd Wretches to the next Village , to give 'em some Refreshment .
The Vessel was a Frenchman , laden with Wine , which they brought to exchange for Corn , the common Custom of all the Sea-Coast contiguous to France  which may prove a pernicious Custom , if the Produce of Grain shou'd ever fail us in England .


We took our Leaves that Evening of my Uncle 's Friend , who , in my Opinion , seem'd very glad to be rid of us , for he was as busy about the Wreck , as any of the rest .
A few Miles farther , a Dutch Vessel was cast away , and all the unhappy Sailors drown'd .
Our Road lying through the same Place three Days afterwards , several People had sold Part of a new Fount of Letter , of the Greek Alphabet , at a Penny per Pound , as waste Metal , when perhaps the Purchaser had paid  fifty times more for it .
What Brutes are these Wretches !
Had they been their own Countrymen , it had been the same .
What Horror must it be to the poor Sailors , when having weather'd many a Storm , and perhaps escap'd from their Enemies , to come in Sight of their native Country , and perish for want of timely Assistance from their Countrymen , who wish for nothing more than their Deaths .
What can the worst of the Savage Kind do more ?
Nay , I have been inform'd , that to make a Vessel a Wreck , they have often murder'd the poor Sailors that have been struggling for Life , lifting their Hands in vain for Succour , to those that have prov'd their Murderers .
We ought not to condemn the Heathenish Indians , that serve the Europeans in the same manner , who do it from the Love of Liberty , who imagine ( and not unjustly ) that the Europeans come to enslave 'em .
These Reflexions cast a Melancholy upon our whole Company for some time after , and the Diversity of new Objects cou'd hardly wipe away the Thoughts of the other .
When my Uncle ask'd a Farmer in that Neighbourhood , how he cou'd be so inhuman to feed on the Loss of his Fellow-Creatures ?
he answer'd , if it were not  now and then for such a lucky Hit , he shou'd never be able to pay his Landlord his Rent  besides , Custom had made it natural to him , and he cou'd not call that a Crime , so generally follow'd by all his Neighbours .
All we cou'd say , cou'd not make him think of leaving off so profitable a Perquisite , as he was pleas'd to term it .
Which put me in mind of those excellent Verses of Waller 's .


Bold were the Men who on the Ocean first Spread their new Sails , when Shipwreck was the worst  More Dangers now from Man alone we find , Than from the Rocks , the Billows , or the Wind .
Some few Days after , my good Tutor was attack'd with a violent Fever , which we imagin'd he had got by endeavouring to save the poor shipwreck'd People , tho ' we were all as much wet with the Billows of the Sea , as he was .
This Accident stopt us at St. Edmund 's - Bury in Suffolk , several Days , and tho ' my Uncle spar'd no Cost for his Recovery , yet the good Man expir'd , to the great Grief of us all .
We bury'd him decently , tho ' privately , not without wetting his Grave  with my Tears , for he was a Person that deserv'd , and had a great Share in my Friendship .


After his Funeral , we set ourselves forward for Home  and for my own Part , with a heavy Heart  and my Uncle seem'd very much griev'd , because he ever express'd a great deal of Satisfaction in trusting to him the Conduct of my Youth in my Tour of Europe .
Yet the Imagination of my Travels being retarded for some time , gave me some Pleasure , because I shou'd have the Happiness of seeing my dear Isabella longer .
When we came home , Betty inform'd me my Mother-in-law had made her a Visit , and express'd such a Horror at my former Treatment , that they did nothing but weep all Day .
She made her several Presents , and seem'd very much pleas'd at her Settlement in my Uncle 's Family .
But the Idea of my charming Isabella took up all my Thoughts , and fatigu'd as I was , I sent her the following Letter , as soon as I dismounted .


MY FAIREST ,


THE Thoughts of You , took from me all the Satisfaction I shou'd have receiv'd from the Variety of Objects that oppos'd my  View .
Every thing I saw , put me in mind of you .
The Roses and Lilies , were Remembrancers of your amiable Face  the Down of Swans , of the Whiteness and Softness of your Skin  when I heard the Warbling of the Nightingale , it put me in mind of your Voice  the Dove , of your soft Disposition  and the soaring Lark , of that compleat Beauty that surmounts all other Women 's , as that surmounts the Soaring of all other Birds .
When I think of your Perfections , my Mind is fill'd with a thousand Inquietudes , for such wondrous Charms are far above the Possession of any Mortal .
What wou'd I give to read the Book of Fate , to see if my happy Stars had allotted me the Possession of so much Beauty !
But if the eternal Volume were disclos'd to me , and I had the Liberty of reading my Destiny , and shou'd find we were not pair'd above , my Woes wou'd be of short Duration , for Death wou'd soon put an End to my hated Life .
What shall I say to express my Passion ?
The Sun , the Moon , the Day , and Night , all put me in mind of you  and the Griefs I feel at our near Separation , almost rend my Heart asunder .
The three Years I am to be absent from my Love , to me , will far exceed the Age of Nestor .
The very Imagination disturbs me Day and Night ,  for every Hour is spent in thinking of the divine Isabella .


When gloomy Night o'erspreads the Earth , And all retire to downy Rest , My Sorrows feel a second Birth , And dismal Thoughts disturb my Breast .
Yet ev'ry Thought is still on thee , Thou Image of the Queen of Love !
Ev'n halting Age wou'd fly to see Those Charms that wou'd a Hermit move .
When I behold the Silver Light , With dusky Spots upon her Face , I know my Fair One shines more bright , And think the Moon usurps thy Place .
What Dangers wou'd I face for thee !
( Whose pointed Eyes have pierc'd my Heart ) Thy Captive never wou'd be free , But hug with Joy the pleasing Dart .
Forgive me , dear Isabella , in pretending to Poetry  but be assur'd , the Inspiration comes from you  and tho ' the Numbers fall short of your all-conquering Charms , receive 'em as a Tribute from my Love .
How many Ages more will it be ere I behold thy Face ?
I am but a  worthless Flower , that must perish , if depriv'd of thy all-chearing Beams .
I hope my hated Rival has not renew'd his Addresses .
It is the Fears of Love that make me dread even my Isabella shou'd be look'd upon by other Eyes than mine , who wishes the End of Life , if I shou'd view that Day , when I shall cease to subscribe myself eternally


Yours , c..


The next Morning I receiv'd an Answer to mine  which gave me more Joy , than a Mariner receives after escaping a dangerous Tempest , and no Hope left for Safety .


IT is in vain to hide my Heart from one that has it in his Possession .
Use it with the Tenderness it deserves , for taking Shelter in your Breast .
Be assur'd of my Constancy , for nothing shall ever make me change my Love .
I am almost asham'd to commit my Weakness to Writing , but almighty Love will have it so .
I thank you for your Poetry  and , be it good , or bad , I have sent you some Trash of my own  but find no Fault with it , for you are the Apollo that has inspir'd me .
However , destroy it , when you have read ` it , as I wou'd have you  destroy all Thoughts of Jealousy of him you call your Rival .


If I within the Heavens shou'd be , Instead of Cynthia 's lucid Rays , I 'd borrow all my Light from thee , And rule the Nights , as thou the Days .
Shou'd there a Flow ' r be plac'd for me , To nourish , as it blooming grew , Sweet William shou'd that Flower be , For I wou'd shine on none but you .
I almost repent of being so open , as Murderers do when the Deed is done , and Punishment appears in view .
But it is done , and past Recall , as is the Heart of your ever constant


ISABELLA .


P. S. I had clos'd this Letter , but unseal'd it again , to let you know that your Uncle has just sent a Footman to my Mother , to tell her he intends to dine with us to-morrow  but if he comes alone , I ca n't , for my Soul , say , he will be heartily welcome .


As we were going the next Day to dine at Isabella 's Mother 's , my Uncle receiv'd a Letter from a distant Relation , which he gave me to read :


 SIR ,


UNderstanding Mr. Meredith , my young Cousin 's Tutor , is dead , I take the Liberty to recommend a young Gentleman to you , who , I dare prowise , will answer every thing you desire from such a Person .
He shall wait on you to-morrow .
I choose to give you this early Notice  for fear you shou'd provide yourself .
He understands the dead Languages , as well as the modish Living .
Mistake me not , I mean all the European Tongues , but Low Dutch , and Muscovite , which , I presume , you will have but little Occasion for .


Your affectionate Kinsman , N. L .


After I had read the Letter , my Uncle told me , it was from a Person he cou'd very well confide in , and his Recommendation was sufficient to him  however , Billy , said my Uncle , you shall see the Gentleman , for this is your Affair : If you ca n't like him , I wo n't force him upon you , no more than I wou'd do a Wife .
Well , Sir , said I , tomorrow will decide that  tho ' I am apt to  believe I shall like him as well as you do .
I am glad to find he is not a Man in Years  for they are generally so ill-natur'd , the Precepts they teach us favour too much of Severity .
And very often , reply'd my Uncle , Youth borders too much upon Levity .
However , I have told you , more than once , that I shall leave you to your own Discretion .


When we came to the House , we found the Company together in the Parlour , and the Cloth laid ready for Dinner .
I am glad you 're come , said Isabella 's Mother , for we are oblig'd to dine very early , because , after Dinner , we are to make a formal Visit to a Neighbour Lady , but we shall leave Isabella to entertain you .
You may imagine , I felt no little Joy , when I understood Isabella was to be left behind  and the Freedom of my Humour had almost betray'd my Contentment , for I was rally'd both by the Mother and Aunt .
Nay , my Uncle cou'd not help having a Fling at me .
Why , good Ladies , said my Uncle , do n't be too hard upon my Nephew  do you imagine a young Lad past Fifteen , cares a Fig for Womens Company looking hard towards Forty .
No , no , it 's very seldom Youth and Age can agree , except  Youth is very sober indeed  or Age is not tinctur'd with its old Distemper , Peevishness , with a Hatred of all Mirth .
Ay , but ( I reply'd ) we find nothing of that in this good Company  there 's none here forgets they were once young .
Very true , return'd the Mother , your Uncle , I believe , imagines he is as young now , as he was thirty Years ago .
Pray speak for yourself , Madam , return'd my Uncle , you are as unwilling as I am , to be reckon'd in the Catalogue of Old .
Why sure , reply'd the Aunt , my Sister has not quite so many Years over her Head , as your Worship !
No , nor so much Experience neither , return'd my Uncle .
Dinner coming in , ended this Dispute .
And after it was over , the Mother and Aunt went to their several Chambers to dress  and my Uncle went to sleep in the Summer-House  so I was left alone with the divine Isabella .
We said all our young Hearts conceiv'd , and I thought myself the happiest of Mortals .
But when I touch'd upon my Absence for so long a time , she begg'd we might do something to divert that terrible Thought  for if she gave herself leave to look into her Breast , she was assur'd , such a Torrent of Tears wou'd follow , that her Sorrow wou'd be taken Notice  of by the Company , and perhaps the Cause of Grief surmis'd , if not in reality found out .
Therefore , said she , to divert the Thought , let us play a Party at Picquet .
My Uncle , Madam , I reply'd , will not forgo his Afternoon 's Nap , for any thing , therefore we must play by ourselves .
Before we had play'd out one Game , the Ladies came down , and the Coach being ready , drove away to their Visit .


When they were gone , I cou'd not refrain opening my whole Soul to Isabella , who felt the Pangs of Parting as sharp as myself , and her lovely Face was all bedew'd with Tears .
We were so long in this tender Scene of Parting , that my Uncle had finish'd his Sleep , and was coming towards us .
Isabella at the Sight of him , was oblig'd to retire to hide her Tears  and I was forc'd to have Recourse to Otway 's Orphan , to have a Pretence for the Gloom that was settled upon my Countenance .
Why how now , young Man , said my Uncle , when he enter'd , what all alone , and melancholy ?
Yes , Sir , said I , I never can read the last Act of this Play , without being sensibly touch'd with the Catastrophe .
Pr ` ythee read Comedies then , said my Uncle , for I will not have you sad .
 Sir , said I , I ca n't find many Comedies fit to read  for those that are good , I have read so often , I 'm as well acquainted with them as the Authors , or Actors in them .
What 's become of the young Lady , said my Uncle , have you not Rhetorick enough to keep her here ?
So it seems , Sir , said I , for she is retir'd .
Well then , said my Uncle , since we are alone , and the Time short we shall be together , let me give you a little Advice before we part  for it is not an Improbability , when we part , we may part for ever .
I find , Sir , said I , you intend to increase my Melancholy , for if I thought that , by my Consent , we wou'd never part .
Never the nearer Death for talking of it , neither , return'd my Uncle .
But what I am going to say to you , I wou'd have you often think on , to strengthen your Mind in Virtue .


When you have chang'd your Climate , do n't change your Nature , but always think England your native Country  and not like some young Gentlemen that I know , who return with a Contempt for their own Country , with their Understandings like a Fool 's Coat , patch'd all over , and nothing of the Ground seen .
Never stay long at a Place  for even Rome , with the Help of Books  which describe their Antiquities , may be seen in three Months , as well as so many Years .
Converse with elder People than your self , for their Knowledge will increase yours  and do not , as I know some of our Countrymen do , because they are brought up in the Protestant Religion , avoid all Conversation with the Clergy abroad  for when I travell'd , I found among all their Holy Bodies , Men of the profoundest Learning and Judgment , who never attempted to make me a Proselyte , or gave me any Uneasiness about my Religion .
I wou'd have you go into all Companies , but take care of being too particular .
Make no Intimates , but as many Friends as you can .
The French have too much Levity , the Spaniards too much Moroseness , the Italians too much Jealousy , and addicted to overmuch Pleasure without Mirth  the Germans , tho ' learned , love the Juice of the Grape too well  and the Dutch are all Men of Business  tho ' there is no general Rule without an Exception .
Always live soberly  for as you will be frequently changing Place , a spare Diet will best agree with your Constitution , and will learn you never to be disappointed , If Heaven shou'd afflict you with Sickness , take my Method .
 Send for the most eminent of the Profession , tell him your Stay in that Place is but short , and agree with him for such a Sum when you are thoroughly cur'd .
This Management , will make it his Interest to set you upon your Legs as fast as he can .
You must hire a Native Servant at every Place you intend to make any Stay at .
Give him good Wages , but trust him not  let him know as little of your Affairs as possible  and keep him ignorant of your next Station , and the Time you intend to set forth  for some of 'em , I have prov'd , are Confederates with Robbers , and are as inquisitive after Foreigners , as some Foreigners are after new Fashions .
The Variety of Dress ( I mean Fashions ) is what I abhor  yet you must put yourself in the Garb of every Place you make any Stay at .
It will not only prevent your being gaz'd at , but will ingratiate you with the Natives , when you take their Habit upon you .
Hear much , and speak little .
Be not too intimate with the Feminine Gender  for an Intimacy there , too often creates Discontent and Trouble .
Be very cautious in making Acquaintance with your own Countrymen , for most of 'em now-a-Days enter into Society , to enter into all the fashionable Vices of the Places  they go thro ' .
Be like the industrious Bee , suck Honey from every Flower , and contemn the gaudy Weeds that bloom and flourish to no Use .
Avoid all Quarrels  but if you shou'd unhappily fall into one , behave your self with Courage and Resolution  and if you shou'd succeed , do n't let your Sword hang the looser in its Scabbard .
A Man of true Spirit will be as cautious how he draws his Sword , as he wou'd be of treading in the Dark over Heaps of Ruins .
Be cau [ ... ] ious of every one you deal with , for in many Places they make it a common Practice to overreach Foreigners  and the fairer their Looks , often the fouler their Hearts .
Whenever you come to have your Equipage examin'd by Officers of the Customs , make a handsome Present beforehand , which will either prevent their giving you any Trouble , or at least will prevent their tumbling your Things , which often proves of more Damage , than the Present you make 'em comes to .
When you go by Sea , as you must , to arrive at several Places of Italy , bargain with the Master of the Vessel before you imbark  but pay him not before you arrive at the End of your Voyage  nor then , till all your Things are brought to your Lodgings , to answer your  Bill of Parcels  and be sure you have two drawn at the same time , one for the Master , and the other for yourself .
When you are to imbark , if you can , get a Recommendation from the last Place you leave  or , if you can not , enquire out some Englishman ( for there is no fear of finding 'em at all the noted Places ) and beg he wou'd recommend you to some Native of the Place , where you may reside  for I have often made it my Observation , to have more Respect shewn me , when I took up my Quarters at one of the Natives , than when I did at one of my own Countrymen 's .
Tho ' it is possible I may get you several recommendatory Letters .
One I am sure of , from the worthy Person that we receiv'd a Letter from this Morning concerning your new Tutor  he was Envoy at Florence two Years , and has a good Acquaintance in several Courts of Europe .
Now , said my Uncle , giving me a Paper , here is written the Heads of what I have been speaking , which I wou'd have you read over once a Week .
And I desire I may hear from you all Opportunities , with a succinct Account of every thing worth Notice you see abroad .
It will serve to kill some Part of your Time that may hang heavy on your Hands .
Besides , it will be acceptable to me .


 We had several other Discourses on the same Subject  but we were interrupted by the Arrival of the Mother and Aunt .
They got into a Chat , no way agreeable to me , of their Visit , which gave me an Opportunity of looking after my dear Isabella , who I had observ'd some time before , to go into the Garden .
I found her in a by Summer-House , bathing her lovely Cheeks in Tears .
When she saw me , she strove to dry her Eyes , but freely confess'd , the Thoughts of Parting had rais'd that Sorrow in her .
She told me , various Objects and Climates might alter my young Heart , and wipe her out from thence .
It was with much Persuasion I cou'd settle her Mind to talk of any thing else  and tho ' it gave me unconceivable Transports to see the Strength of her Love , yet it was necessary we shou'd have some time to settle our future Correspondence by Letter .
When that was finish'd , I took my solemn leave of her , not without shedding Tears at our tender Separation .
But poor Isabella 's Grief quite overcame her , she fainted in my Arms .
The tender Proof of her Heart , however , gave me some Uneasiness , left we shou'd be discover'd , for it was some time before she came to herself .
When we had compos'd ourselves  as well as we cou'd , we were troubled to find a Means or Pretence for Isabella 's Tears , for there was no concealing her Grief from the Company within .
At last she told me , she wou'd make 'em believe a Bee had stung her Hand .


We went , with some Confusion , into the Parlour where they were sitting .
Isabella was soon discover'd to have been weeping .
When she was ask'd the Cause , she told 'em , as she went to pluck a Rose , a Bee , conceal'd , had stung her .
I thought you had more Philosophy , reply'd my Uncle , young Lady , than to shed Tears for Pain .
Truly , Sir , said she , I shall never be so much a Stoick , to think Pain is all Fancy , for I am sure I feel it still .
Well , reply'd my Uncle , you find , young Lady , the sweetest thing sometimes conceals a Sting .
However , your Pain will not hold , you long , there is a Balm to cure it  Honey , and a little Time , will soon ease you , I warrant you .
A while after , my Uncle order'd me to take my last Leave of the good Company , which I did , with ten thousand Pangs .
But as I prest my Lips to those of my dear Isabella 's , I found 'em tremble so much , that I fear'd a Discovery  yet she bore it outwardly very well  but did not come out to  see us to the Coach , tho ' no one took Notice of it but myself .
'T was well the Dusk of Evening was approaching , for the Concern in my Countenance was not to be conceal'd  however , I compos'd myself as well as I cou'd before we came home .


The next Morning , the Gentleman that was to be my Tutor , arriv'd  and I must confess , I took an Affection to him at first Sight .
His Countenance pleas'd me , as well as his Behaviour  and my Uncle seem'd as well pleas'd as myself .
He was not above Five and Twenty , and tho ' young enough for a Tutor , yet we found him old in Experience and Understanding , and answer'd fully the Character the Letter gave my Uncle of him .
My Uncle was so well assur'd of his Abilities , that he resolv'd we shou'd begin our Journey in two Days .
In the mean time I wrote several Letters to my dear Isabella , and receiv'd Answers so tender and passionate , that my Heart felt all the Joy it cou'd desire  but that Joy was lost in the dismal Thoughts of being separated from all my Soul held dear , so long .


At length the Day came we were to set out .
My dear Uncle wou'd accompany me to Dover , where we arriv'd .
But the Weather proving a little boisterous , he wou'd not let  me imbark before it was settled , tho ' the Vessels set Sail , as not regarding it  however , as it was his Tenderness and Good-Nature , I comply'd with his Desire , tho ' there was no apparent Danger .


The Sight of the Cliffs of Dover , put me in mind of those Lines in King Lear , of our inimitable Shakespear :


- How fearful And dizzy 't is , to cast one 's Eyes below !
The Crows , and Choughs , that wing the midway Air , Shew scarce so big as Beetles .
Half way down Hangs one that gathers Samphire , dreadful Trade !
The Fishermen that walk upon the Beech , Appear like Mice .
And you tall anchoring Bark Seems lessen'd to her Boat  her Boat , a Buoy Almost too small for Sight .
The murmuring Surge , That on th ' unnumber'd idle Pebbles b [ ... ] ats , Can not be heard so high .
I 'll look no more , Lest my Brain turn , and the Disorder makes me Fall headlong down .
The next Day , the Weather prov'd so calm , that the Sea look'd like polish'd Glass  or , as the Sailors say , so smooth , you might throw Dice upo n't  therefore my Uncle , after mingling our Tears , gave me leave to embark , with my Tutor and one Servant  and we left the British Shore behind .


End of the First Volume .
Notes * .
Carinthia is a Province of Germany , upon the Borders of Italy : Whenever the Ducal Coronet is vacant , the Person who is to be install'd , is seated in a Chair of great Antiquity , made like two great Chairs put Back to Back , with two Seats  in one the intended Duke sits , in the other a Boor of the Country , who is to offer two Oxen to the Duke , one the leanest , the other the fattest that can be got  but the Duke is to return the fat one to the Boor , which is to intimate he is to improve his Country or Dukedom ( for sometimes it is the Emperor of Germany who is chose Duke of Carinthia ) from the Poverty of the lean Ox , to that of the fat One .
When that Part of the Ceremony is over , the Boor , or Countryman , rises up , comes to the Duke , who is fitting with his Face to the East , and gives him a gentle Box on the Ear  after that , he puts on his Feet a Pair of Shoes fill'd with the Earth of the Country , and that concludes the Installment  tho ' the last Part of the Ceremony they omit when a Proxy is install'd , which often happens when the Title is conferr'd on the Emperor , or some other Potentate .
* .
Valerius Maximus , in his Account of Dreams , gives this particular one .
Two Arcadians , Friends to each other , travelling together , came to the City of Megara in the Province of Achaia , formerly a Dependant on the Athenians .
One of 'em went to lodge at a Friend 's House , the other at a Public Inn .
The Person that lay at his Friend 's , in his Sleep , fansy'd he heard his Companion call out for Help from the Violence of his Landlord  which awak'd him , and stamp'd such an Impression on his Mind , that he rose and endeavour'd to find out the Inn .
But Fortune not allowing him that Happiness , he went to his Lodging , and address'd himself to Sleep again , laughing to himself , that a Dream shou'd so much disturb him .
When Sleep had once more taken Possession of his Faculties , he dreamt that his Friend came to his Bedside cover'd with Wounds , who told him , That since Fate had not permitted him to prevent his End , he hop'd he wou'd see his Death reveng'd .
My Body , said the Apparition , is now carrying in a Cart , cover'd with Rubbish , out of the Gate of the City , by the Inn-keeper , who murder'd me for my Money .
Arise !
and bring him to the Punishment he deserves .
The friendly Arcadian , at this Second Warning , arose , and taking Assistance with him , stopp'd the Inn-keeper with the Cart , where he found the bleeding Body of his Friend .
The Man confess'd his Guilt , and was executed accordingly .
* .
Macasar is a large Kingdom on the South Part of the Celebes , an Island in the Indian Sea .
Near three Centuries ago , they worshipp'd the Sun and Moon , as the most worthy Objects of their Adoration .
Two Macasarian Merchants , trading to Ternate , the chief of the Molucca Islands settled by the Portuguese , were so well pleas'd with the Integrity of the Priests , and the Tenets of the Christian Religion , that their chief Business was to make themselves perfect in it , which lik'd 'em so well , that they were soon Baptiz'd  and returning into their , own Country , prevail'd upon the King of Macasar to follow their Steps , which was soon done , with a great Number of the Inhabitants , that were Christen'd .
But the Priests that were sent by the Portuguese , to instruct 'em in the Christian Religion , miscarrying in their Voyage , the King began to have Doubts which none of the new Christians cou'd answer .
Some Mahometans being at the Court when these Doubts arose , recommended the Alcoran to him , and by their Reasons , began to stagger his new Faith : Yet still continuing a Friend to the Christian .
Religion , he resolv'd to put his Choice on this Hazard : He gave Commission to the Christians and Mahometans , to send for Teachers of both Religions , and the first that arriv'd , whether Christian or Mahometan , shou'd be allow'd the Establish'd Religion .
The Followers of Mahomet sent , without losing Time , to the Queen of Acihn , a Kingdom on the Island of Sumatra , one that follow'd the Laws of Mahomet  the Queen immediately dispatch'd several learned Bonzi 's , or Priests , who arriv'd before the Christians : And ever since , the People of Macasar have been zealous Mahometans .
* .
The Country of the Samorins reaches along the Sea-Coast of the East-Indies , from Ticori to Chitwa .
It is the Custom of that Country , for the Women to have twelve Husbands , if they think fit  yet they all agree very well , taking their Turns to cohabit with the Wife .
The Husband whose Turn it is , leaves his Arms at the Door of the Wife 's Chamber , which must not be remov'd on Pain of Death .
When the Wife is with Child , she names the Husband who is to father it , and he is to take care of its Education  but those Children do never inherit their Father 's Estate  that descends to the Male Issue of the Father 's Sister  but if she have no Issue , the Estate comes to the nearest Relation of the Father 's Grandmother .
* .
Richard , sirnam'd the Religious , Grandson to Rollo Duke of Normandy , was esteem'd a Prince of singular Piety .
Among many Monkish Stories of him , the following one seems to be calculated for those of large Faith .


A Monk of Normandy , given more to the Flesh than the Spirit , us'd to visit his Mistress by Night , for more Secrecy .
One very dark Evening , going to the Rendezvous , his Way lying over a Bridge , he fell in , and was drown'd .
When his Soul was descended into the Regions of the Dead , an Angel of Light , and another of Darkness , had many Strugglings about it  but not agreeing , they resolv'd to put it to the Decision of the pious Duke Richard .
The Angels pleaded like themselves before their Judge  who , wisely weighing the Matter , gave Sentence the Body shou'd have its Soul again , and plac'd near the Bridge where he fell from  if he fell in , the black Gentleman shou'd take him for his Perquisite .
The Sentence being put in Execution , the Priest had learnt more Wit , return'd to his Convent , and there defy'd the Devil , and all his Works .
This Affair was so quick in the Dispatch , that Duke Richard going to the Convent to see what was become of the Monk , found his Habit all wet with his Fall into the River .


WE arriv'd at Calais , after a pleasant Passage of Six Hours , and took up our Lodging at the Table-Royal  where we were detain'd four Days , with the false Report of the Death of the French King , Lewis XIV  for the Governor kept the Gates shut , and wou'd not permit any Foreigners to go out  of the City .
Calis , or Calais , is a very strong Town in the Province of Picardy  tho ' I think not strong enough to be call'd , as it is , one of the Keys of France .
It is , as near as I cou'd guess , a little bigger than Dover , but more populous .
It wou'd , I believe , be a very poor Place , if it were not for the Resort of Foreigners  and a Frenchman told me , that when they were at War with England , their White Bread immediately turn'd to Brown  intimating , their Riches did not come from their own Nation .


The Cause of my Stay here , gave me no small Joy  for a Letter came to my Hands from my dear Isabella , which was left at the Post-House of Dover , and brought me by the same Captain I came over with to Calais .
This prov'd a Consolation to me in all my Travels  for whenever I was melancholy , I had Recourse to that .
The Letter was as follows :


WHAT shall I say ?
I have not Expressions enough to paint out my Passion .
Thy Absence , and the farther thou goest from me , increase my Love and Anxiety .
I look on the all-seeing Sun , and bless his Beams ,  because it shines on thee .
I worship the Winds , as the Indians do the Devil , for fear their Rising shou'd be prejudicial to thee  and the Number of 'em , with their Names , almost equals the Roman Catholick Saints , yet I am oblig'd to revere 'em all in gross , as they do .
My Time is almost spent in reading the Accounts of Places where I suppose the Disposer of my Heart is to visit .
I have found the Road to Dover , and din'd with you in Imagination , tho ' Food is almost a Stranger to me .
I saw your Horses brought out , and pursu'd the Way with you to Dover .
I saw the Castle , the Pier , and view'd the fatal Vessel design'd to waft from me all my Peace of Mind .


I follow'd it as far as my poor Eyes cou'd see , and waited on the Beach , sighing to the Winds , till you arriv'd at Calais , as fatal to me for my Loss , as the Loss of That was to Queen Mary , the Sister to Queen Elizabeth , who , when she dy'd , told her Attendants , they might see Calais written on her Heart .
If Death shou'd end my Days , thy Image wou'd be found on mine .
To be a Day without seeing the Idol of my Soul , I have thought long  but Oh !
to be absent for three times three hundred and sixty five Days , nay , perhaps for ever !
what Heart , like mine , can bear the Imagination ?
 But yet the Day will come  two tedious Days of the Time are gone already .
If Heav'n will be pleas'd to send you back , I shall be grown , by that time , well vers'd in Geography , for that shall be now my only Study  and I shall think it some Satisfaction in all my Griefs , to know the Situation , Climate , and Constitution of those Places my Love intends to visit .
I cou'd dwell on this melancholy Subject for ever , but must take Leave of the dearest Object to the disconsolate


ISABELLA .


When our Embargo was taken off , we took Post-Chaises , and arriv'd at Paris in three Days  from whence , in compliance to my Uncle , I sent him the following short Account of my Journey .


My dear Uncle ,


AFTER turning my Back to my Native Country ( tho ' my Mind was still there ) we arriv'd safe at Calais  from thence ( after being detain'd four Days by a false Report of the King 's Death ) we made three hard Days Journies to Paris .
From whence I shall send you this short Description , to let you see I intend to follow your Precepts exactly .
Paris , the Capital  of France , is situated upon an Island in the River Seine , which gives Name to a County , call'd , the Isle of France  tho ' it is possible it may stand upon more Ground than London , yet I take the latter to be better inhabited than the former .
Their publick Buildings far exceed ours in Number and Magnificence .
The Louvre much surpasses that of St. James 's or Whitehall before it was consum'd by Fire .
As to their Cathedral Church of Notre-Dame , I ca n't make any Comparison with that of St. Paul 's , till I see it finish'd  but I think this , a noble august Building , and the Magnificence of the Inside shews their Religion to be well drest , and gives a Lustre I am not able to describe .
The Archbishop of Paris seems to be seated with more Grandeur than an Eastern King .


Here 's Plenty of Wine , but no good Water that I cou'd meet with .
In the Chapel call'd The Holy Chapel , which is a fine Building , I was shew'd Part of the Crown of Thorns the Jews , in Derison , honour'd our Saviour with  and two of the Nails that fixt him to the Cross  but , I must own , my Faith was not quite strong enough to believe it , tho ' I thought it prudent to keep my Thoughts to myself .
The Monasteries are so numerous here , that one wou'd imagine the Laity were not the major Part  and most of the  Holy Buildings are fit to be Palaces for the greatest Princes .


The Earth , in one of their Churchyards , as I am told , will consume the Interr'd in eight Days .
The reverend Father Raimond , whom you commended me to , has been dead more than four Years : But his Brother , who has taken Orders since , who was also one of your Acquaintance , has done me many Services upon your Account .
Last Night he took me to the Jesuits-College , where a Play was perform'd with the utmost Magnificence , and the Number of the Chorus Dancers surpris'd me .
I counted forty-four in one Entry .
In short , Sir , Paris has many curious Objects to delight the Eye , and captivate the Senses .
I have sent you the Book of the Carrousels that were perform'd 1612 , when the double Marriages of the King and his Sister , with the Prince and Infanta of Spain were celebrated .
In the same Place King Henry II .
in one of those Tournaments , was kill'd by a Wound in the Eye .
I am inform'd by Monsieur Coypel the Ingraver , the Figure of every Person is exactly like whom it is design'd for .
I have also sent you the Statue of Lewis the Thirteenth , of the same Composition , in every degree , that stands in the middle of the Palace-Royal , and , in my Judgment , it wants  nothing but Bulk , to be as fine as the Original .
You will likewise find in the same Parcel all the Classics printed at the Louvre  tho ' I was oblig'd to Father Raimond for your Favourite Terence  the rest I procur'd of a Bookseller .
To-morrow , the good Father is to introduce me to Monsieur and Madam D'Acier , where I promise to myself much Satisfaction , if my want of Years will not make 'em look coldly upon me .
I gave Monsieur Audran the Present you sent him  and , in return , he has sent you a Set of his Battles , from Le Brun , of the first Impression , which , by the by , Uncle , seem'd as if you had sent ( as they say in Wales ) Apple-Sauce to fetch a Pig  for they are hardly to be valu'd .


After telling you , the Dirt of Paris , like an ill Reputation , is hard to be got off , I shall conclude my little Account of that City , with telling you , the Monastery of Val de Grace , is , I think , one of the finest Buildings in Paris , which one of their Poets has thought fit to commend in the following Lines .


Urbs orbi similis , toto celeberrima Mundo , Musarum sedes , Regina Lutetia , salve , Francigenae tu Metropolis pulcherrima Gentis : Hospitio Regum grato Regisque ministros , Excipis ,  reliquas das jura suprema per urbes .
 From Paris , I shall lead you to Versailles , a Royal Palace , four French Leagues West of this famous City .
I shall wave the Description of the Palace , and bring you into the Gardens , which I suppose are finish'd since you were in France .
When you are enter'd , the Bason of Syrene stands full in your way  and after that , twenty-two more fine Fountains , Water-Falls , and Cascades , that delight the Eye with an Exuberance of Variety .
From these , you pass into the Labyrinth , a Place you ca n't well get out of , without a silver Clue , and yet 't is the most delightful Place to lose one 's self in , in the Universe .
Aesop stands on one side of the Entrance , and Cupid on the other .
And the Fables of Aesop are represented in Water-Works within the Labyrinth  that is , 38 of them  which you must take in Order .
1 .
The Owl , and other Birds .
2 .
The Cock and Partridges .
3 .
The Cock and Fox .
4 .
The Cock and precious Stone , which I think ought to be the first , as in Aesop .
5 .
The Pendant Cat , with several Rats .
6 .
The Eagle and Fox .
7 .
The Jay and Peacocks .
8 .
The Dunghill-Cock and Turkey-Cock .
9 .
The Peacock and Magpy .
10 .
The Serpent , Anvil , and File .
11 .
The Old Monkey and Young Ones .
12 .
The Battle of the Beasts .
 13 .
The Hen and Chickens .
14 .
The Fox and Crane .
15 .
The Crane outwitting the Fox .
16 .
The Peacock and Nightingale .
17 .
The Parrot and Monkey .
18 .
The Monkey turn'd Judge .
19 .
The Rat and Frog .
20 .
The Hare and Tortoise .
21 .
The Wolf and Crane .
22 .
The Kite and other Birds .
23 .
The Monkey crown'd .
24 .
The Fox and Stag .
25 .
The Rats in Council .
26 .
The Monkey and young Cat with the Chesnuts .
27 .
The Fox and Grapes .
28 .
The Eagle , Coney , and Beetle .
29 .
The Wolf and Porcupine .
30 .
The Serpent with many Heads .
31 .
The Cat and young Cock .
32 .
The Kite and Pidgeons .
33 .
The Dolphin and Monkey .
34 .
The Fox and Crow .
35 .
The Monkey and Crane .
36 .
The Wolf in the Statuary 's Shop .
37 .
The Snake and Porcupine , 38 .
The Ducks and Spaniel .
And all these Fables are as well express'd , as if you saw 'em pencill'd by the finest Painter  the Sight , I must own , gave me a Profusion of Delight .


Nothing in the World can shew the Grandeur of the Monarch more , than this Palace and Gardens .
And the Nobility , to imitate their Prince , have built handsome Palaces near Versailles , so that this Place , that was , fifty Years ago , a barren Spot , is now become a great City   I mean , for the Multiplicity of the Buildings  tho ' every thing is excessive dear , from the great Concourse of Nobility that surround their Prince .
A French Gentleman that had been in England , told me , he wonder'd the Kings of England had not more magnificent Palaces , Gardens and Water-Works .
I reply'd , we had finer Water-Works than any they cou'd boast of .
Water-Works !
return'd the Frenchman  where ?
I reply'd , in the City of London , where every House had a Sufficiency of Water , convey'd from the Rivers by Pipes .
He confess'd indeed , that was a very great Work , and was certainly of more Use than theirs of Versailles .


When we return'd to Paris , Father Raimond carry'd me to a little Village call'd Mont Martire , or Mons Martyrum , where we din'd at the Abbey of Nuns of the Order of St. Bennet .
This Hill and Village took its Name of Mons Martyrum , from St. Denis the Protector of France , who was beheaded before the Image of Mercury , in the Pagans Time .
And the good People will have it , that the pious Saint walk'd three Mile with his Head under his Arm , and then let it drop  where since they have built a Town , after the Saint 's Name .
But I am apt to believe , their Heads that approve this  Story are no more a Burden to their Shoulders , than the good Saint 's was when he had it under his Arm .
Father Raimond , otherwise Bigot enough to his Religion , seems to laugh at such Traditional Stories .


The same Afternoon we made a Tour to the Town of St. Denis , where we view'd the Cathedral , which is very magnificent  tho ' the Repository of their Kings , to me , seem'd the chiefest Ornament .
The Inhabitants tell you , this Church was never ill us'd , either in the Norman or English Wars  tho ' most of the others in France , where the English or Normans came , suffer'd much .
The Abbot of this Place has more Power than many Archbishops , and owns no Superior but the King , being Suffragan to no Archbishop , And tho ' the Monarchs of France are crown'd at Rhemes , the Regalia is kept at St. Dennis , under the Care of the Abbot .
They also Boast of more Relicks than any other Place in the Universe  as , the Head of St. Denis , put in a silver Nightcap , with fine oriental Pearl round it  a Nail of our Saviour 's Cross  the Finger that St. Thomas put into our Saviour 's Side  an Arm of St. Simon  the Head of St. Bennet  an Englishman that was with me the same time we saw these Rarities , told me St. Bennet must be a very monstrous Saint , for he knew of one of  his Heads in Italy , and another in Spain  but his Companion salv'd that , by telling him , he shed his Heads , as Stags do their Horns .
I hope you 'll pardon this merry Account , since it is not my own .
Then there is a Cup that King Solomon us'd to drink out of  but my merry Enlishman affronted the Friar that shew'd us these Rarities , by asking him , if King Soloman drank it full always , for it was a very large one .
A Pot that was at the Wedding of Cana in Galilee , where our Saviour turn'd Water into Wine  Joan of Arc 's Sword , which I think is bigger than that of Edward the Third 's , in Henry the Seventh 's Chapel in Westminster-Abbey  Judas 's Lanthorn , that he bore when he betray'd our Saviour with a Kiss  and many more which we did not see  for when our English Companion ask'd the Friar , how often the Horns had been mended , he grew outrageous , and wou'd shew us no more  and Father Raimond was very much scandaliz'd in bringing such a Parcel of Hereticks to profane their Relicks , by looking on 'em .


I am much pleas'd with my Tutor  tho ' he seems very reserv'd in giving me any Account of his former Condition or Family .
Tho ' an Accident happen'd a few Days ago , that makes me imagine there 's something very extraordinary in  his Affairs .
An English young Gentleman , a Traveller , did me the Honour to make me a Visit some few Days ago  and my Tutor coming in , seem'd in the utmost Confusion at his Sight , and went out of the Room ( unperceiv'd by my Visitor ) with a great deal of Precipitation .
In a Day or two afterwards , when I inform'd him I was to dine with the same Person , he intreated me very earnestly to be excus'd  and told me , he had such Reasons for not seeing him , that if I was acquainted with 'em , I wou'd certainly pardon him in desiring not to be in his Company .
I fansy , when we are a little more familiar , he will be more free , and let me into this Affair .
I must confess , it puzzles me very much .
I shall not give you any farther Trouble now , my dear Uncle  but be pleas'd to give my Respects to the amiable Family we last visited  and give me Leave to subscribe myself ,


Your most affectionate Nephew , c..


P. S. I have wrote to my Father by the same Post .
I thought it wou'd not be wrong to let you know it , for fear you shou'd give yourself any Trouble in communicating to 'em the Contents of this  and I shall always proceed in the same Method in my Travels  tho ' I shou'd  be glad to hear from you how the Family goes on .


I was oblig'd to leave Paris sooner than I intended , upon receiving the following Letter :


SIR ,


I KNOW for certain your Life is in Danger , therefore wou'd advise you to quit the Place as soon and as secretly as you can .
A Gentleman of my Acquaintance imagines the Coldness of his Mistress proceeds from the Esteem she has for you .
I have in vain endeavour'd to convince him of the contrary .
Perhaps I should not be in so much Fear for you , if he had Generosity enough openly to resent his ill-grounded Hatred to you  but I know him to he a Person as void of Honour , as of Courage , therefore every thing is to be fear'd from him .
Take care of the Servant you have hir'd , for I have taken notice they are often together .
It is possible there may be no Harm in their Intimacy  however , I think Caution is necessary .
Therefore , if you please , I will borrow him for a few Days , and send him upon a Business that he may execute for me as well as an honest Man , if he shou'd prove a Villain .
I wou'd not have you stir out to-day ,  nor receive any Visits , if you can handsomely avoid it .
I 'll be with you in the Evening , and inform you farther .


Entirely yours , RAIMOND .


The receiving of this Letter very much surpriz'd me  for all the Time I remain'd in Paris , I had not made any Acquaintance with the Fair Sex  and , bating the Visit I made to Monsieur and Madam D'Acier , I had not been in the Company of any Females .
The Thoughts of leaving Paris very much rejoic'd my Tutor , who was never easy , upon the Account of that young Gentleman .
I communicated the Letter to him , who was as much surpriz'd as I was .
In the Evening Father Raimond came , and press'd me to be gone the next Day .
He inform'd me his Acquaintance had courted a young Lady , and shew'd him a Letter from the very Person , where she herself inform'd him of all he knew , and was as pressing for me to be gone , as the good Father .
Therefore I agreed to set out for Marseilles the next Day , in order to imbark for Italy , and my Baggage was to follow me .
I sent my French  Servant to the good Father , who took him home that Night  and the next Morning I pursu'd my Journey with my Tutor , and my English Servant , who might very well pass for a Frenchman , for he spoke that Language as well as English .
I was very much surpriz'd and vex'd at this Accident , for having got acquainted with several Persons of the Royal-Academy at Paris , I had the pleasing Hope of cultivating my Understanding by their Conversation  for Study , and the Thoughts of my lovely Isabella , fill'd up all my Time .


In our third Day 's Journey , near the Skirts of a Wood , we were attack'd by half a Dozen Robbers , who wou'd have certainly got the better of us , if , while we were engag'd with them , two French Gentlemen , with their Servants , had not arriv'd seasonably to our Rescue .
We left two dead upon the Place , and the other four made their Escape .
I return'd the French Gentlemen the Thanks they deserv'd for their Succour  for if they had not come to our Assistance , we must certainly have been murder'd  but , by the Providence of God , not one of us was wounded .
The Gentlemen were bound for Toulon , therefore I resolv'd to accompany them to that Place , which lay as convenient ( they inform'd me )  to embark for Italy , as Marseilles .
We thought it proper to push on , without taking any Notice of w [ ... ] happen'd to us , because it wou'd retard our Journey  tho ' we might have receiv'd a Reward for the Death of the two Thieves .
We all arriv'd safe at Toulon , without meeting any other Accident by the way  from whence I sent Orders to Marseilles for my Baggage to be brought from thence .
But the French Gentlemen leaving me the next Day , I thought it proper to go to Marseilles myself .
Toulon , the Telo Martius of the Romans , is a Bishoprick , and has a very fine Port , and very strongly fortify'd .
The two great Moles , of 700 Paces each , that almost cover the whole Port , has not been many Years finish'd by the present King , Lewis XIV .
tho ' begun by Henry IV .
When I arriv'd at Marseilles , which lies about 40 Miles from Toulon , I receiv'd a Packet of Letters from England , which the good Father Raimond took care to send , with another from Paris from an unknown Lady , that unravell'd the Meaning of my so suddenly leaving that City , the Letter was as follows :


 SIR ,


I AM in Love , and have long been belov'd by a Gentleman , that has taken it into his Head to be jealous of you , tho ' I never had the Honour of conversing with you .
I have seen you , I must confess , and had the Inadvertency to commend you before him , tho ' without any farther Thought  for the Person I mention has laid such Hold of my Heart , it can never get from him .
'T was I that us'd that Method with Father Raimond , to make you abandon Paris , which I hope you will forgive , for I shou'd never have brought to Temper the Heart of him whom I love more than myself , if you had continu'd here .
The Design upon your Life was all Fiction , for the Man whom I adore has too much Honour to deal so treacherously with any Person .
His only Fault is Jealousy , but that 's a Sign of his Passion for me .
As you came to Paris as a Traveller , I hope your sudden leaving it will not prove prejudicial to you .
And remember , the Women of France are not so fond of Variety , as many Foreigners imagine : Tho ' I believe you have too good Understanding to fall into that mean way of Thinking .
I am so much a Stranger to you , that I hardly know whether you are vers'd enough in our Language to read  an Epistle of this Nature , therefore it has given me some Trouble to have it translated into English  for which , I hope you will pardon one , who will ever have a good Opinion of your good Nature .
The Servant too is honest , and to reward him for the Loss of so good a Master , I have taken him into my Service , and I intend to make him amends .
I might have let you continue in Ignorance of this Adventure , but I cou'd not bear you shou'd have a hard Thought of the Person I esteem , tho ' an utter Stranger to you  and I shall think my self oblig'd ever to subscribe myself


Your humble Servant , c..


I must own , I was a little uneasy to be made such a Tool of .
However , I soon forgave the Lady , considering the Power of Love .


I was compell'd to wait a Fortnight for want of a Vessel to imbark in for Genoa , and therefore had Leisure enough to view this City .
Marseilles is a City of the greatest Antiquity in France .
It was founded by the Phoceans , a Colony from Athens , as Strabo tells me .
It is one of the finest Ports of France , and the safest , for it was never known any Vessel ever perish'd there by Storm .
It was a  flourishing City in the time of the Romans , who made Alliances with 'em , finding it not an easy Matter to overcome it .
By the Means of its Levant Trade , it is esteem'd the richest City in France  and its Situation upon the Mediterranean , makes it so advantageous for Trade , that it will ever prove so .
This City was free , till the Year 1481 , when it submitted to the King of France , with the rest of Provence .
It is so well Peopled , that it is difficult to walk the Streets , for the Multitude of Passengers backwards and forwards .
The publick Buildings are very magnificent .
Here the Gallies of the Crown are kept in admirable Order , under command of a strong Tier of Guns .
The Churches and Monasteries are numerous , and beautiful , and the Clergy here seem more open and facetious , than in any other Place I have seen in France .


I embark'd for Genoa in a Dutch Vessel bound for that Place  but in the Dusk of the Evening , which succeeded the first Day of our Voyage , we were pursu'd by a Corsair of Tunis .
The Fright and Confusion was very great , for our Vessel carry'd but Eight Guns , and Sixteen Men , besides Eight Passengers .
The Master made many false Tacks ,  in hopes to lose him in the Night  but at the Dawn of Day , we discover'd him about two Leagues to Leeward of us , and the Wind ceasing with the Rising of the Sun , we had no Hopes to escape , for they made up to us with their Oars , which we were without .
However , both Sailors and Passengers resolv'd upon their Defence , and the rather , because we observ'd a Vessel under the French Shore , who , by her Working , seem'd to endeavour to come up to us  tho ' some of the most timorous wou'd have it another Rover of Barbary .
Notwithstanding , we made ready to receive 'em .
But the Wind freshning a little , we chose to make all the Sail we cou'd for the Port of Toulon , not above Seven Leagues distant from us .
But our Endeavours prov'd fruitless , for before Eight a Clock she came within Gun-shot of us , and ply'd us with her fore-chace Guns , tho ' without any Damage , for not one of the Shot enter'd our Ship  which they perceiving , left off firing , because it retarded their Course , and row'd hard to come along side of us , which they did in an Hour from their first Firing .
When they came within Haling , they bid us strike that Moment , or every Man ( when we were taken ) shou'd be flung overboard .
But we  gave 'em no other Answer , than with our great Guns , and small Arms , which I believe they did not expect .
But they return'd our Civility with Interest  and after plying it warmly on both Sides for half an Hour , they boarded us on our Forecastle  and those that understood their Language , declar'd we shou'd all fall a Sacrifice to their Revenge .
The Knowledge of that gave us fresh Resolution to fell our Lives as dear as we cou'd  but an accidental Shot taking away our Colours , the Rovers thought we had struck to 'em , which gave 'em some Pause .
But when they found we continu'd the Fight , even to Desperation , they fell on furiously again .
But a lucky Shot from us , flew into their Powder-Room , and blew up their Quarter within two Foot of the Water .
This gave us fresh Courage , and we clear'd the Deck of all that were alive on Board us .
They cut off their Grapples , and fell a Stern , but still ply'd us with their small and great Shot .
We made all the Sail we cou'd to get out of their way , and , by degrees , left 'em out of Gun-shot  but found our Ship shot thro ' in several Places between Wind and Water , and we were forc'd to lie by to stop our Leaks .
While we were endeavouring to find 'em out , it was a great Satisfaction  to me to see the other Ship we saw under the Shore , get up with the Corsair , and engage her  they fought furiously about half an Hour , but at last overcame her  yet that Satisfaction was allay'd , by my being inform'd our Leaks cou'd not be found  and the Water gain'd upon us , notwithstanding they labour'd hard at the Pump .
The Master immediately made a Signal of Distress , and the Ship and Prize came to our Assistance .
The Ship prov'd a Spanish Gard de Coste .
The Captain came on Board us , and very civilly offer'd me a Cabbin of his Lieutenant 's , who was kill'd in the Engagement with the Corsair .
I was much pleas'd with the Offer , and got my Things remov'd on Board .
The Captain 's Name was Don Juan de Fonseca  his Ship from Barcelona , of 30 Guns , where he was oblig'd to go to refit , for this was his second Engagement .
In the first , he had sunk a Rover of Barbary , who went to the Bottom , without saving one Human Creature .
Our Ship had made shift to stop her Leaks , but not so effectually as to pursue her Voyage  so , after a Consultation , the Master determin'd to [ put into Toulon to refit .
Therefore I resolv'd to accompany the Spanish Captain to Barcelona , having satisfy'd  the Dutchman for my Passage .
I had much ado to make him accept it , telling me I had done him more Service than that came to , in the Engagement .
Tho ' I , my Tutor , and Servant , had the good Fortune to escape without any Wound in our Bodies , yet several Shot had pierc'd our Cloaths .
The Stock of my Carbine was shot away , as I was charging it , without doing me any Hurt  and the Hat of my Tutor had part of the Brim shot away .
We lost but three Sailors in the desperate Engagement , and five wounded , two of which were Passengers .
Before Night , we parted with the Dutchman , and saw him , by the Help of a Telescope , enter the Harbour of Toulon , ere it was dark  and we pursu'd our Voyage for Barcelona , accompany'd with the Algerine Prize .


The Captain of the Spaniard lost nineteen Men in this last Engagement , and thirty-five in the former , besides thirty wounded in both , so that his Complement was so very much lessen'd , that if it had not been for the Help of the Galley-Slaves out of the Corsair ( who were most Spaniards ) he cou'd not have work'd his Ship .
The Captain of the Prize was a Flemish Renegade , who was intended  to be executed as soon as we arriv'd in Spain  but a Wound he received in the Groin prevented it , for he expir'd before we got into Harbour .
The rest were Moors , therefore intended for the Gallies of Spain  their Complement was 280 Men , when they first set out a Roving , but they had lost 27 in the Engagement with us , besides 11 that were blown up with their Powder  and 59 with the Spaniard .
Don Juan de Fonseca made me a Present of a very fine Turkish Scimitar , adorn'd with wrought Gold , which very much pleas'd me  and in Return , I made him , with a great many Intreaties , accept of a Gold Watch of Tompion 's make  but I had almost affronted him , when I offer'd to satisfy him for my Passage to Barcelona , where we arriv'd without any Impediment .
He did me the Honour to introduce me to the Governor , and said so many things in my Commendation , that made me asham'd to hear 'em .
But the Spaniards are noted for Hyperboles .
However , the Governor us'd me with a great deal of Civility , wondering a Person so young , shou'd begin his Travels so early  and order'd me an Apartment in the Castle  and in all the time I continu'd there , never press'd me to go to Mass , or once ask'd me  concerning my Religion , which I was very well pleas'd at  for he was assur'd I was a Protestant , by my Country .


Don Juan de Fonseca was hardly ever from me  and the Civilities I receiv'd from him , I shall never forget .
I found nothing of the stiff formal Spaniard in him , nor indeed among any I had the Fortune to converse with  so that I imagine the general Character of the Spaniards we receive in England , is not altogether true .
They are certainly cautious concerning their Women , yet not all out  so much as I expected , for I never was introduced into any Family , without seeing the Female Part of it  but they never stay long in Company  or indeed seldom look at any Strangers , but when they are spoke to , or just upon their Entrance into a Room , and when they take their Leave .


Barcelona ( the Roman Barcino ) is the Capital of the Province of Catalonia .
It was built by Barca the Carthaginian , from whom it takes its Name .
Though sometimes it was call'd by the Romans , Faventia Colonia , and Julia Augusta It was taken from the Moors of Spain by Lewis the Pious , Emperor of Germany .
It has two Rivers that wash the North and South Side , tho ' neither of them  of any great Note .
The Mole is a very fine one , tho ' the Harbour being so full of Sand , will not permit large Vessels Entrance .
The Buildings are very handsome , tho ' it does not exceed Marseilles in any thing  and for Trade , it falls very short .
I was advis'd by every Body to Winter at Barcelona , which I resolv'd to do to perfect myself in the Spanish Language .
Nothing extraordinary happen'd to me while I was there  tho ' Murders were committed almost every Night , which is reckon'd nothing there .
One Gentlewoman was murder'd by her Brother , as she came from her Devotion at the Cathedral Church .
This poor Lady , it seems , had an Intrigue with one of the Dons of the Place , and the Brother came as far as Toledo to punish the Stain of his Family , as he call'd it  and I never knew he was so much as imprison'd for it .
Another Person of Note was shot thro ' the Back , as he was making Water against a Wall : This Gentleman , it seems , had been too busy with another Man 's Wife , as the Rumour went , tho ' the Adventure was forgot the next Day .


The Death of one Gentleman gave me some Concern , having some Knowledge of him .
He was a Person of good Extraction ,  but his Family was fallen to Decay .
He made his Addresses to a beautiful Lady , and gain'd her Affection  but the Parents of the Lady got him a Post to the West-Indies , not out of Love , but to get him out of the way .
However , the enamour'd Couple corresponded together by Letter for two Years .
In the mean time , her Parents resolv'd to wed her , against her Will , to a rich Spaniard of Quality , that was in Love with her .
The young Lady sent Word to her Lover , of her unhappy Marriage that was approaching , and attempted to make her Escape , but was prevented by the Infidelity of her Confidant .
The Gentleman , understanding how Matters went , resign'd his Post in the Indies , and arriv'd at Barcelona ten Days after the fatal Marriage was consummated .
The News almost broke his Heart  and his Passion was so violent , that he cast many ways to get a Sight of his Mistress , and at last obtain'd it .
They had several Meetings at a Friend 's House of the Gentleman 's  but I was inform'd by a Person that knew the Affair , that all their Meetings were very innocent .
At last , they were discover'd by the new Husband , who hir'd several Bravos , that did their Work so well , the poor Gentleman was murder'd as he was  just entring the Door where his Mistress waited for him .
Some time after , the Husband met with the same Fate , as he came from visiting a new Mistress .
Some suppos'd the Wife had a Hand in the Murder  but it was never found out  and the Lady went into a Monastery .
Before I left Barcelona , I receiv'd a Letter from my dear Isabella , with several from my Uncle and Father  that of Isabella 's was as follows :


MY LIFE ,


I THOUGHT I never shou'd have heard from you more .
And tho ' I allow'd of the Difficulty of sending to England at all times , yet I began to have the utmost Uneasiness .
But now I know the Reason of it , my Fears are redoubled .
Your Tutor has wrote an Account to your Uncle , of your Engagement with a Corsair of Barbary , where he declares you were their Guardian-Angel .
Consider , my Love , you have two Lives to answer for , that of your own , and ( I hope ) of your Isabella 's  tho ' yours is far more dear to me , than my own .
If the Love you profess'd to me be not a Fiction , do not trust the Sea , but with the utmost Necessity .
You have prov'd it an unconstant Element already , and more Dangers attend it , than Storms  and Shipwrecks  you may go from Barcelona to Italy , if you please , by Land  for I am now grown a Mistress in Geography , and Love was my Teacher .
I thought that Face and Heart too tender to fight with any thing  therefore , as I am deceiv'd in that , I tremble to think you may deceive me in your Love .
No question but France , Spain , and Italy , have Beauties enough to put the strongest Faith to a dangerous Trial .
But if your Love shou'd cease , do n't put an end to Pity  keep it a Secret  for shou'd I once know you false , ` twill end the Life of your


ISABELLA .


P. S. I am concern'd to let you know , that I am persecuted afresh by him you have often call'd your Rival  but be assur'd , while I have my Faculties , you shall never have any Rival in my Heart , which is , and ever shall be entirely thine .


This Letter was the only Joy I receiv'd , all the while I was at Barcelona  tho ' I was disturb'd at the Account of my Rival 's renewing his Addresses .
The Governor ask'd me if I had not gain'd a Mistress , since my Arrival  and when I answer'd him in the Negative , he seem'd surpriz'd !
Sure , said  he , you must have a very insensible Heart , not to feel the Charms of Love in so warm a Climate , where it is almost the chief Business of the Nation .
But alas !
he knew little of my Soul , which felt the Pangs of Love in a much colder Climate than Spain .
I receiv'd so many Civilities from this Gentleman , that very much perplex'd me , because I had nothing extraordinary to make him a Return  and , to add to the Obligations I had to him , when I left Barcelona , he gave me Leave to redeem a Slave from the Galleys , which is esteem'd the greatest Honour can be done to any Stranger : Tho ' I did not take so much Time to examine the Demerits of the Criminals , as a Nobleman did  who , having the same Honour done him , ask'd all the Slaves the Crimes that brought them into that Condition  but every one of 'em , to the last Man , told him , they were either put in by Malice , or Mistake : But the last Man told him frankly , He cou'd not say but he was put in very justly , for taking a Purse in Tarragona , without the Consent of the Owner .
The Duke , upon this , gave him a Stroke with his Cane , You Rogue , said he , what do you here , among such a Parcel of honest innocent Fellows ?
Get about your Business !
The Person  I redeem'd , was both old , and unhealthy , and therefore I thought him the properest Person among 'em , that he might have the Satisfaction of ending the Remainder of his Days in Freedom .


I observ'd a gloomy Melancholy had seiz'd my Tutor , and tho ' I strove all I cou'd to divert him , yet I found it to no Purpose  neither cou'd I prevail upon him to know the Cause of his Sorrow  he only answer'd me , that it was his natural Disposition .
But I saw too much of him , not to know his Disease lay in the Mind  yet had Hope , Time , and the various Climates we shou'd visit , wou'd cure him  but hitherto his Malady increas'd .
One Day , when I was retir'd to my Closet , to write some Letters to England , he came into the Room , not knowing I was there , and for some time sigh'd and wept bitterly  at last , he broke out into something like the following Complaint .
Sure never wretched Mortal ever felt the Pains and Disappointments that I have undergone !
They are too great to bear !
All-seeing Heaven , that inflicts these Punishments upon us , creeping Things , sure will forgive us , if we seek a Remedy by Death , for nought but Death can cure my Misfortunes .
As he was going  on with his Complaints , I purposely made a Rumbling in my Closet , which he hearing , was going down Stairs  but I prevented him , by opening the Closet-Door , and call'd him back .
Well , Governor , said I , will you still persist in Grief , and yet tell me you have nothing troubles you ?
I am sorry you betray a want of Confidence in me , whom I would have you reckon among the Number of your Friends , and you may command every thing in my Power as such .
Sir , answer'd my Governor ( in much Confusion ) I am convinc'd of your Goodness to me , and therefore have , in a short Narrative , written the Account of my Misfortunes , which I intended for your Perusal after my Death  and , when you have consider'd 'em , I am well assur'd you will not blame me for cutting off my Cares with my Life .
I shall blame you for nothing , I reply'd , but your persisting in that melancholy Thought .
Consider the Task you have undertaken , that of returning me safe to my Uncle : Also remember , Time works many strange Cures of the Mind , as well as the Body .
In common Calamities , I own , reply'd my Tutor , Time is a very good Physician  but when the Malady is lodg'd in the Soul , and no Balm to heal it on  this side the Grave , Time only makes the Burden too heavy to be born .
However , I own there is a Duty incumbent upon me , on your Account , and I will lay aside my Resolution of Dying , till you have perus'd this fatal Account of my unfortunate Life , and then , I doubt not , but you will , out of Compassion , dismiss me to the peaceful Grave .
When he had done speaking , he put into my Hands the following Relation .


' THE HISTORY OF CLERIMONT .


MY Family is not of the meanest , tho ' I was born to suffer unheard-of Misfortunes , thro ' an unhappy Passion .
In my Youth , I was brought up in the Roman Persuasion  but being left to the Care of an Uncle , a Clergyman of the Protestant Religion ,  he soon wip'd away the Notions I had receiv'd from my Infancy , of the Roman Faith .
But as it little concerns my wretched Life to relate any thing farther of my Minority , I shall step at once into my melancholy Story .


After leaving the University , my Uncle took me to dwell with him , intending , as soon as possible , I shou'd take my Degrees , in order to procure me a Living  but in the mean time , Fate was at work .
Riding one Summer-Evening to take the Air , the Sun so powerfully shone upon me , that I was constrain'd to go to the Skirts of a Wood , for Shelter from his fiery Beams .
The Place being inviting , I got from my Horse , and laid me down upon the Grass , setting myself to read , and insensibly fell asleep  but was awak'd with the Neighing of a Horse in the neighbouring Wood , which I found was my own , that had slipt off his Bridle , and left me  taking the Bridle in my Hand , I went to catch him , but , being a Horse of Spirit , he led me from Place to Place , not suffering me to come near him .
I was so much fatigu'd in following him , that I was constrain'd once more to sit down , and let him graze in my Sight .
In a few Moments I heard the Neighing of another Horse , in the adjacent Thicket ,  which mine soon answer'd , and gallop'd that way the Noise proceeded from .
I was oblig'd once more to rise , and follow him , and at last came up with him , where I found him playing his Pranks with another Horse , and a Gentleman whipping him , to get 'em asunder  but with the Bustle , the other Horse got loose also , and away they ran together , kicking and biting each other , so that each of us fear'd the Loss of his Horse .
As I was going to follow 'em once more , I heard a Female Voice call to me , For Heaven 's sake , Sir ( said she ) if you 're a Man , succour a distress'd Woman , who is in danger of losing her Honour , and her Life .
Tho ' I did not set up for a Knight-Errant , Curiosity and Humanity made me turn back , where [ ... ] [ ... ] rceiv'd a Woman ty'd by her Hair to the Stump of a Tree , all bloody  the Sight very much surpriz'd me  but as I was going to release her , the Gentleman that was pursuing the other Horse , cry'd out to me , Villain !
if thou offerest to set her at Liberty , this Moment is thy last .
Turning about , I saw him within ten Paces , with his Sword drawn , running upon me  I had no Weapon , therefore thought it adviseable to desist , and expostulate with him  but he wou'd not hear Reason , nor tell me  the Meaning of this Adventure .
I was in a very great Dilemma , between his Threats , and the persuasive Rhetoric of the suffering Lady  but at last resolv'd , notwithstanding the apparent Danger , to release her , if possible  but as soon as he perceiv'd my Intention , he ran at me with his Sword , crying , Nay then , take thy Death first .
Having my Bridle in my Hand , I struck at him with a good Force , and , by good Providence , struck his Sword out of his Hand  and as he stoop'd to take it up , I repeated my Blow upon his Head , and the Bridle being a Curb , I stun'd him with the Stroke , so that he lay speechless , grovelling on the Earth , and I run to free the Lady .
But finding some Difficulty , and hot regarding the Man , he was got up  and running once more upon me with his Sword ( which I shou'd have secur'd ) wou'd infallibly have dispatch'd me , if the Lady had not cry'd out  yet I cou'd not avoid being run thro ' the Side , tho ' no more than a Flesh Wound  he then seiz'd me , and we struggled together a long time  but he being very strong , and I weak with my Wound , he got me down , and with the Fall , the Sword flew out of my Side .
I grasp'd him close about the Neck , so that he cou'd hardly breathe   but he must have made an End of me , if the Lady had not releas'd herself , with the Assistance I had given her before , who took up his Sword , and run him into the Leg , the Pain of which made him let go his Hold of me , and I got up again , snatch'd the Sword from him , which he had drawn out of his Leg , and struck him so forcibly over his Head , that I once more sent him breathless to the Ground .
I was just going to run the Sword into his Body , in my Heat of Passion  but I consider'd immediately , it wou'd look like an Action of Barbarity to stab a defenceless Man , therefore I desisted  and in a few Moments after , I fell speechless by him , with Loss of Blood  but was brought to my Senses by a violent Pain in my Leg , that the barbarous Wretch had given me , in wounding me several times with his Penknife , as I lay uncapable of Defence .


He did his utmost to reach my Breast , but he was so feeble with his Wounds , that he cou'd not get any farther .
I rose in a violent Passion , and wrench'd it from him , intending to put an End to his Life  but my feebler Strength cou'd not obey my Fury  therefore I seated myself as far from him as I cou'd , expecting my last Moments , for the Lady was  fled , and little Hopes of Succour appear'd , we being in a Wood above a Mile from any Road .
I had nothing now to do , but make my Peace with Heaven .
While I was meditating , I perceiv'd five Men with the Wretch 's Horse , coming towards us .
As soon as he perceiv'd 'em , he cry'd out , with all the Transport his Strength wou'd allow of , Now , Villain !
thy wretched Fate approaches .
Here , said he , to one of the Fellows , take that Villain , that has in this manner basely abus'd your Master , and hew him to Pieces .
Notwithstanding I thought Death was near , without any farther Violence , yet I was resolv'd to defend myself as well as I cou'd , therefore snatch'd up the Sword that lay near me , and put my Back against a Tree , for without that Support , I had not Strength to stand  the Villains , one and all , came furiously towards me , but I kept 'em some time from wounding me , by means of the Sword , thrusting the most eager of 'em into the Throat .
But finding my Strength failing me , I made one Effort before I fainted , and thrust my Sword into the Body of their Master , who was endeavouring to rise , falling upon him at the same time , for want of Strength .
That Moment , several Country Fellows came rushing  upon the Servants of the inhuman Villain , and drove 'em out of the Wood , wounding several of 'em  two of 'em came to me , and supported me , while another that was a Surgeon , examin'd my Wounds .
Have Courage , said he , Sir , your Hurts are not dangerous , tho ' your Loss of Blood makes you faint .
I thank'd 'em for their seasonable Assistance , which was surely sent from Heaven , for one Moment longer must have brought me inevitable Death .
Sir , said the Surgeon , the Lady whom you rescu'd , sent us to your Assistance , who will be here immediately to return you the Acknowledgments due for such a signal Service .


After my Wounds were dress'd , the Surgeon went to examine the Wretch that lay speechless , with his Sword in his Body  upon drawing it out , he gave two or three Groans , and open'd his Eyes , staring wildly about him for some time : When he found how Matters went , What , said he , does that Villain live still ?
Yes , I reply'd , Heaven guards the Good  and the Title of Villain properly belongs to thee , who wou'd oppress Virtue , and wrong the Innocent  and thy Treatment of her and me has been so barbarous , that if thy Crimes do not draw the  Punishment of Heaven upon thee , I will seek thee out , and endeavour to chastise thee in a manner , that shall shew thee I have not forgot I 'm a Gentleman  tho ' thou art of the Brute Creation , and only bearest the outward Form of Man .
I 'd give , reply'd the Brute , half my Estate , to have it in my Power to scourge thy Presumption .
He wou'd have said more , but the Probing of his Wounds made him faint .
Before they had made an end of Dressing him , the Lady arriv'd , attended with several Servants .
Thank Heaven , said she , the Preserver of my Life and Honour lives .
How shall I shew my grateful Acknowledgments ?
I reply'd , I had done nothing but what every honest Man wou'd have done , or ought to have done .


This Surgeon interrupted our Discourse , by informing the Lady , it wou'd be dangerous for me to talk much .
But I cou'd not avoid speaking with my Eyes , for I found my Heart insensibly leaving me .
The Charms of the Fair One were too powerful to be withstood , tho ' ruffled and disorder'd by this unlucky Accident .
After the Surgeon had dress'd the Wretch , the Cause of this Disaster , he ask'd the Lady what must be done with him .
Leave him , said she , to consort with his Fellow-Creatures ,  the Beasts of the Field , for Human Society will disown him .
Immediately after , the Countrymen return'd , bringing along with them three of the Servants they had taken , all of 'em very much wounded .
There , said the Lady , take your villainous Master , and shut him in some dark Cave , for 't is not sit he shou'd breathe common Air , with honest Men  and you ( continu'd she ) must be Brutes like him , to serve such a Monster .
The Servants made their Excuse , as well as they cou'd , urging their Master 's Commands , and promising , for the future , never to be Partners in his Crimes , if they continu'd with him .
Well , reply'd the Lady , learn to be honest , and Heaven will forgive you : Take the Wretch , your Master , and bear him where I may never see him more  perhaps he may also repent , since he finds his Punishment comes from Heaven .
The ablest of the Fellows got upon his Master 's Horse ( which was brought along with mine by the Countrymen ) and his Master was laid along before him , hardly sensible of what they did .
But I was so weak and faint , they were oblig'd to cut Boughs and make a Hurdle , on which I was laid , and carry'd to a fair House about two Miles from the Wood  yet , notwithstanding my Weakness , I found  a secret Pleasure in being under the same Roof with a Woman , that had intirely robb'd me of my Heart .


My Wounds made me keep my Chamber several Weeks  tho ' I had the Happiness of seeing my Fair One twice a Day , during my Illness  and my Passion increas'd with my Strength .
One Day , before I left my Chamber , I begg'd her to inform me how a Woman of her Condition , cou'd be brought into such a dangerous Adventure ?
Sir , said she , by base Treachery , which I will inform you in as few Words as possible .


This Wretch ( for I can not call him Gentleman , tho ' blind Fortune has bestow'd her Favours upon him in a lavish manner ) long courted me in vain  tho ' my Father , who is now abroad , prest me very much to accept him for a Husband , blinded by his vast Riches , yet my Heart disdain'd him .
When my Father went into Spain to settle his Affairs , I forbid him the House , and order'd the Servants , whenever he came to visit me , to shut the Doors against him .
This Treatment put him in such a Passion , that he broke my Windows , and endeavour'd to come in by Force , threatning to murder all my Family .
Such impudent Proceedings oblig'd me to have my Country  Neighbours in my House as a Guard from his insolent Fury  this was not only troublesome , but expensive .
However , tir'd with his Attempts to no Purpose , he left off his Persecution , and I began to recover my former Tranquillity .
Near four Months past , without my once hearing of him  and when I did , I was inform'd he was making his Addresses to a Lady on the other Side of the Country .
The News was infinitely pleasing to me , and I durst once more venture abroad , as usual .


One Day , my Woman that had been my Servant from my Infancy , begg'd I wou'd be Godmother to a Grandchild of hers , whose Parents liv'd in a Village about five Miles from my Dwelling .
I cou'd not refuse such a trifling Request , tho ' it was an Office I did not take any great Delight in .
When the Day came , I was oblig'd to go on Horseback , attended with one Man-Servant , and my Woman  for my Coachman was ill of a Fever .
When we came within a Quarter of a Mile of the Wood , where Heaven sent you to my Assistance , my Woman call'd to mind she had forgot some little Presents I had intended for the Mother and the Child  therefore she sent the Footman , in a Hurry , back  for 'em , while we propos'd to ride on softly , till he overtook us .
As we came within a few Yards of the Wood , my Horse gave a Start at something , and looking towards the Wood , I perceiv'd , to my dreadful Surprize , the Villain that brought me to the Distress you rescu'd me from .
He flew out of the Wood , and , on the Instant , seiz'd my Horse by the Bridle : Come , Madam , said he , we may now converse together , without scaling Walls to come at you .
Fear had so ty'd my Tongue , that I cou'd not give him any Answer  but when I found him leading my Horse to the Wood , I jump'd off , and ran towards the Plain as fast as my Fear wou'd permit  but to no Purpose , he soon overtook me , and bore me by Force into the Wood , maugre all my complaining Sighs .


When he had hurry'd me about a Furlong , I perceiv'd five or six of the Villain 's Servants  they immediately seiz'd me , and put me before him on Horseback , he ordering them at the same time to catch my Horse , and wait at a certain Place in the Wood , till he came to them .
The Barbarian then carry'd me to a more unfrequented Part of the Wood , where he proceeded to fill my Ears with his nauseous Courtship  but still threaten'd  to use Force , if I did not immediately comply .
I try'd by all the Persuasion I was Mistress of to prevent his horrid Purpose , telling him , Time might produce strange things  and if he wou'd forbear any Violence , I wou'd give him leave to visit me as usual .
No , no , Madam , that 's only a Wile ( reply'd the Monster ) to get out of my Power  but I 'll do the Deed , and then leave you to determine whether you will send for me , or no .
When I found Intreaties wou'd not prevail , I call'd Heaven and Earth to my Assistance , but to no Purpose .
He then proceeded to Violence , using the most horrid Imprecations that he would satiate his most abominable Lust , and then murder me to conceal the Deed .


I resisted as long as my weak Strength wou'd permit  but he at last overpower'd me so far , as to bind me to the Root of the Tree where you found me  and , no doubt , had fulfill'd his damnable Purpose , if your timely Assistance had not sav'd me .
When I found my Deliverer in such imminent Danger ( pursu'd the Lady ) I took up his Sword with an Intention to have kill'd the Villain  but using the Weapon with fearful Aukwardness , wounded him only in the Leg  and ,  perceiving you faint , ran out of the Wood to seek for Succour  by good Fortune , I met the Surgeon , and my Servant returning , who got together some of my Father 's Tenants , that were Hay-making in the Meads near the Wood .


As we came to your Succour , I saw my Woman lie upon the Ground , bleeding  I ran to her Assistance  but she cry'd , Good Madam , trouble not yourself with a Wretch that has basely betray'd you  but Heaven has punish'd me for my Perfidy , and all I ask is Forgiveness from That and you .
She inform'd me , that my intended Ravisher had given her 500 l. to betray me to him in the Manner I have related .
I ask'd her , how she came thus wounded ?
She answer'd me , by the Hand of Heaven  as she was waiting till [ ... ] he odious Deed was finish'd , a Horse came galloping out of the Wood , and running furiously upon the Beast she was on , the Creature , in a Fright , ran away with that Swiftness , she cou'd neither stop him , nor get from off his Back , till he threw her down  her Foot hanging in the Stirrup , she was dragg'd [ ... ] ill the Stirrup broke , and left her in the Conflition I found her in .
I was surpriz'd at this Treachery , because I little suspected it , tho '  it was obvious enough  yet the Hurry of my Spirits never gave me Leisure once to think upon any thing but your Safety .


The Surgeon , however , was about to dress her  but she push'd him from her , telling him , his Art was vain , for she was that Moment expiring  and accordingly , she breath'd her last , begging Forgiveness of me and Heaven .
Maugre the Resentment I had against her , I cou'd not help shedding a few Tears for her Loss .


The rest of my Story you are sufficiently acquainted with , since you hazarded your Life to save me from the Ravisher , who , as we are inform'd , is expired of his Wounds  and tho ' I am a Creature so far from wishing the Death of any one , that I wou'd give all I am worth to save an innocent Person 's Life  yet I ca n't help being pleas'd at his Death , since it frees me from the Apprehension of Suffering , from his Brutal Temper , which I am assur'd never will be chang'd .


To make my Tale as short as possible , I will freely declare to you , dear Sir , that I gain'd her Heart  tho ' she protested , she wou'd never wed till the Death of her Father , without his Consent  but that I almost despair'd of , considering the Disparity of our  Fortunes .
Besides , he was accounted the most penurious Wretch on Earth .
This gave a Damp to the Joy I receiv'd , when she gave me an Assurance of her Heart , tho ' she vow'd she would suffer a thousand Deaths , rather than give her Hand to any one , but her Deliverer , as she was pleas'd to call me .


During my Cure , no Man ever thought himself so happy as I did , belov'd , and ever in the Presence of her I lov'd , tho ' we conceal'd our Passions from all the World .
But my Wounds being heal'd , Decency requir'd I shou'd be gone , tho ' our Separation was equal to the Pangs of Death .
All our Consolation was in our Intercourse of Letters , and sometimes meeting as by Accident .


A few Days after our Parting , the Father to my Fair One arriv'd from Spain .
She sent me a Note , wherein she advis'd me to make him a Visit , and endeavour to insinuate myself into his Favour .
I waited on him accordingly , but was very much surpris'd at my Reception  instead of giving me Thanks for the timely Assistance I gave his Daughter , he seem'd very much out of Humour with me  and in an odd , stiff , formal manner , told me , The World had been censorious upon his Daughter on my Account , and therefore  desired I wou'd never enter his Doors again .
I found , to my Grief , there was nothing to be done with him , in favour of my Love  therefore took my Leave , with a Heart full of the greatest Sorrow .
Yet , notwithstanding the Danger , we continu'd our Correspondence tho ' with a thousand Fears .


I kept nothing a Secret from my good Uncle , who persuaded me to forget my Passion  but that was the only Thing I cou'd not obey him in .
The Knowledge of it , gave him a great deal of Uneasiness  tho ' he was so just , to pity me , and hop'd Time might work a Cure .


One Day , as I was going in Disguise to the Place where I was to receive a Letter from my Love , I saw in the Road , a Country Fellow grovelling in the Dust  when I came up to him , he inform'd me , with a great deal of Pain , that his Horse had thrown him , and , with the Violence of his Fall , had broke his Leg .
He intreated me to give him some Assistance .
Tho ' my Time was short for my own Affair , Compassion wou'd not suffer me to leave a Man in such Distress and Anguish  therefore I caught his Horse that was grazing near , and mounting him , led him to a neighbouring Village , where I procur'd a skilful  Surgeon to attend him  but before I took my Leave , he begg'd to speak with me in private .
When every body had left the Room , Friend , said he ( for I was drest in a Country Habit ) I have one Favour more to beg of you , which is , to take that Letter  carry it as directed , and for your Pains there 's half a Crown  but you must do it with all Secrecy .
Tell the Person you give it to , of my unfortunate Condition , and , upon Return with the Answer , I shall reward you , by giving you another Half Crown , with many Thanks for the Favour .
As a Crown was a very extraordinary Reward , for one in my Habit , to go half a Mile , I durst not , for fear of some Discovery , refuse it  therefore took the Letter , with Promise of a quick Return  neither was it out of my way , for it was directed to a Person that kept a Publick-House , in the Road where I was to pass .


As I pursuing my little Journey , I call'd to mind the Person to whom the Letter was directed , who had formerly been a Servant to the Father of my Mistress  for she once propos'd a Meeting at his House , but better considering , we found a Place more convenient , and less to be suspected .
I therefore began to be jealous of some ill Design ,  which possess'd my Fancy so strong , that I resolv'd to open the Seal in such a manner , that the Arms ( which further'd my Suspicion ) shou'd not be defac'd , if the Contents were innocent of any ill Intent .
The first Public-House I came at , I went in , and open'd my Letter , where I found to this Effect :


SAM ,


I SEND the Bearer to you , to consult how we shall get that scornful Minx into my Custody .
The Vessel , and all things are in Readiness , and the false Report I have caus'd to be spread of my Death , will favour my Design .
I have likewise sent three trusty Rogues to dispatch that Fellow who rescu'd her out of my Hands before  for I must have my Revenge , as well as Love , satisfy'd .
'T is but within these few Days , I learnt where he liv'd .
To-morrow Night I shall come in Disguise , the back Way , to your House , and bring the other 500 l. with me : Take care of Privacy in my Reception , and send your Things to my Retreat , that I may put 'em on Board .
I hope you have overcome that Scruple of parting with your Wife , which so much possess'd you when I last saw you .
Be sure to keep thy Tongue within thy Teeth , for if Women are big with a Secret , they are in Pain till  they are delivered .
I 'll assure you you may rely on Tom the Bearer  therefore conceal nothing from him .
I send you this Letter as his Credentials , because you never saw him before , as my Ambassador .
He is faithful , for I have try'd him .


Yours , c..


You may judge my Surprize , when I had read this villainous Writing , and found my Mistress , as well as mysel [ ... ] , in such imminent Danger .
My Thoughts were in such Confusion and Disorder , that I cou'd not determine with myself how I shou [ ... ] d proceed in this Affair .
At last I resolv'd to deliver the Letter as directed , to see what farther Inlet I cou'd receive in the dangerous Affair .
I therefore made the best of my way to the House , where I fortunately met the Man alone .
He chang'd Colour in the reading of it , several times , examining the Seal very circumspectly ( but that he shou'd have done before he open'd it ) tho ' the nicest Observer , even he that sent it , cou'd not have discover'd the Letter had been open'd .
However , I cou'd find by his odd Questions , he was not over-well satisfy'd with the Bearer , observing my Face , as if he wou'd look me thro '  I began to suspect he might find me  out in my Disguise , not being well assur'd but he might have seen me when I was brought wounded from the Wood , senseless .
However , at last , he began to be a little better compos'd .
He took some pains to persuade me to drink something , but I inform'd him I had Business a little further , therefore was oblig'd to return immediately .
He then made me promise to call as I came back  telling me , he would go along with me to the Person that sent me , to which I agreed , and went on to meet my dear Mistress .


When I told her the Story of the Letter , she cou'd hardly give Credit to it , believing her intended Ravisher had been in the Regions of Death : But at last , being convinc'd he was still living , she resolv'd not to stir abroad , for fear he shou'd put his wicked Designs in Practice  desiring I wou'd do the same , tho ' I had not inform'd her of my Danger .
The Grief we felt at Parting , almost overcame us , and it was with some Difficulty I cou'd bring my Countenance to dissemble my Sorrow , when I call'd upon the Innkeeper .


After staying some time , we set out together  but I cou'd plainly perceive his Mind was very much disturb'd .
In crossing a Meadow , we observ'd a Kite had pounc'd a poor  Pidgeon , and flew up into a Tree in our way as we pass'd .
I ran as fast as I cou'd , and with Stones frighted him from his Prey .
The Pidgeon , not quite dead , flutter'd about the Tree , and at last fell at our Feet , which I took up .
Thus it is , said I , in the World , Power , Rapine , Violence , and Lust , which stop at nothing to compass their wicked Desires , tho ' they prey upon Innocence and Virtue , yet they often meet with their Reward in this World , as well as the next .
That Kite that left the innocent Pidgeon in that Condition , has every one for its Enemy  while the poor Pidgeon is pity'd .
But Birds are instigated by Nature , to what they do  the Kite was compell'd by Hunger and Necessity to seek his Prey  but vicious Man preys upon his Fellow-Creature out of Wantonness or Revenge .
Your Reflexion , reply'd the Innkeeper , seems something above your Condition , and I will freely declare , very much surprises me  therefore beg the Favour to be answer'd one Question , sincerely .
I told him I wou'd .
Why then , said he , do you know any thing of the Person that gave you the Letter , or any thing relating to the Contents ?
Or do you know the Gentleman who sent that Messenger ?
Tho ' , I must own , I abhor an  Untruth , yet I thought it wou'd not be convenient to declare what I knew  therefore answer'd in the Negative .
The Man was some time before he spoke , looking stedfastly upon me all the while .
At last he broke Silence , to this Purpose : Friend , I know not your Condition , yet do verily believe you are not what you seem  but be that as it may , I have in this short Acquaintance , such a strong Opinion of your Wisdom and Integrity , by your Countenance and Discourse , that I shall discover a very important Secret to you , upon this Condition , that you will never disclose it , give me your Advice , and not endeavour to prejudice me .
I reply'd , his Confidence in me , oblig'd me to be his Friend .
Come then , said he , let us go out of this Path , for Hedges and Ditches may have Ears , as well as Walls , as the Saying is .


When we came to a convenient Place , we sat down , and he related to me all the Passages of what I knew before , concerning the Family of my Mistress , and my own Adventure  how the Wretch who sent him the Letter , had prevail'd upon him to betray the young Lady , his former Mistress , for 500 l. into his Hands , and fly with him into the West-Indies , where he had a large Estate , and  shou'd be shrouded from the Law .
Now , I must own , the Money has a prevailing Power , and my Poverty pleads for the Gentleman  besides , I have a Wife , that has of late given me Proof how much she strives to send me to Heaven , by adorning my Brows .
But yet I have a Conscience for my Monitor , that every Moment tells me , I am about a wicked Deed .
And this Letter I have receiv'd , which you was the Bearer of , has stagger'd my Resolution  for I find , by the Contents , an innocent Gentleman is to be murder'd , for doing a noble and a generous Action  therefore , the first thing I shall desire of you , before you give me your Advice , is , to promise me you will go to such a Place ( naming my Uncle 's House ) and inform the young Gentleman , his Nephew , of the Danger he is in  for tho ' I have no Knowledge of him , yet I know his Uncle to be a Person who is an Honour to the Habit he wears , and has the Goodwill of every Body .
When I had read the Letter , I affected to be very much astonish'd at such a Design , in a Kingdom famous for the Goodness of its Laws , where such Crimes are punish'd with Death , and told him the Danger he run , in such a vile Proceeding  the Usage he must expect from such a Villain , when he  had him once in his Power , and the Reward might be taken from him , nay , perhaps Death might be his Payment , from such a barbarous Wretch , that he might have the fewer to maintain .


He allow'd all I said for Oracles , yet he was still hankering after the 500 l .
It wou'd be a Piece of Justice , cry'd the Innkeeper , even to bite him of it .
I can not deny but it wou'd , I reply'd , but I think that impracticable .
I wish we cou'd contrive , reply'd he , to let him run away with my Wife , I then shou'd get 500 l. and be rid of a base Woman that has made me a Cuckold .
The Letter seems to intimate ( said I ) that you had some Scruples in parting with her .
That 's true , reply'd the Innkeeper , for when he first mov'd me about this wicked Business , I had only a Jealousy of her Falshood  but since I have prov'd it , I despise her as much as I lov'd her  yet I have even conceal'd my Knowledge of her Falshood , tho ' I was an Eye-witness of it .
I began to inquire further into the Affair , and found he had Reason enough to get rid of his Wife  therefore we spent some Time in Conference about bringing this Affair to bear , but cou'd not think of any probable Means .
Come , cry'd the  Innkeeper , , since we ca n't think to any Purpose , let me intreat you to go and prevent the young Gentleman 's Fate .
The young Gentleman , said I , is safe enough , for to let you into a Secret , in return of yours , I am the very Person , in this Disguise .


The Innkeeper was Thunder-struck , at what I told him , and seem'd willing to be rid of his Companion  but I brought him to himself by good Words , and some Money which I gave him , as I told him , for his Intention to save my Life .
I own , said he , it seems a Mark of Providence , in my meeting with you , and therefore I abhor myself for my wicked Intention , and shall never set my Mind at rest , till I have gain'd Forgiveness from Heaven and you .
We were interrupted in our farther Discourse , by a Person that cross'd the Meadow with a Fishing-Rod in his Hand  tho ' he was so intent to get over the Hedge , to the River that ran near it , that he saw us not .
That is , said the Innkeeper , the Villain that has seduc'd my Wife !
my Blood rises at him  I have a good mind to run after him , and push him into the River .
Hold , said I , why did not you shew your Resentment , when you caught him in the Act , and revenge yourself ?
Because , said he , my  Blood was froze with Horror , and I had not the Power to stir .
Well then , I reply'd , let him alone now , for I have something in my Head that may be of Service to you , not only to get rid of your Wife , but to fecure the 500 l. too .
Did your Wife ever receive any Letters from him , to your Knowledge ?
I believe not , reply'd the Innkeeper , for when he comes a Fishing , he generally lies at our House  so that they have Opportunities enough , of Conversation , without writing to each other .
Why then , said I , contain your self a little  go to the Angler , and tell him your Wife has betray'd herself to you , and forbid him your House .
Or if you do n't like that Method , take any other to prevent his coming to your Habitation  but do n't use any indirect Means .
Well , reply'd my Host , I 'll take your Advice about the Calmness of my Mind  tho ' I sha n't proceed in the other Affair , quite according to your Direction , for I think , after owning myself a Cuckold to my Cuckold-maker , nothing shou'd follow but his Destruction .


I staid about half an Hour , inly ruminating upon my unhappy Condition , before he return'd .
I have do n't , cry'd my Host , I believe he wo n't come to my House in haste .
 I hope you have not murder'd him , said I ?
No , no , I proceeded in another manner .
By reading a Letter he carelesly dropt once , I found he ow'd a considerable Sum of Money to a certain Person in London , who threaten'd to trouble him .
Remembring the Person 's Name , I went up to him as he was Fishing , and told him , I was glad I had met with him , for there were Officers to arrest him at our House , at the Suit of such-a-one .
He seem'd surpris'd , as not doubting the Truth  and begg'd I wou'd stand his Friend in his Concealment  therefore I have sent him to a Cousin of mine , that keeps an Inn about Ten Miles off , with a Promise to come and inform him when the Officers are gone .
You have done well , said I  and now I 'll inform you of my Design .


You shall write a Letter , in answer to that I brought you  where you shall mention , that you shall have the Lady in your Possession , ready for him to take her away to-morrow .
The Letter I will indite for you , which you shall transcribe .
And then I 'll write another , as from the Angler to your Wife , to tell her that you have discover'd your Jealousy to him , and forbid him your House  but that , if she consent to fly with  him to-morrow Night , he will come , attended with some Friends , and bring her to a Place of Safety .
Very well , reply'd my Companion , I understand you  and so put my Wife upon the Gentleman , instead of the Lady !
a rare Contrivance , if it succeeds .
Come , said I , let us go to a House , and write the Letters , that we may lose no Time .
I wrote to the Villain , that does not deserve the Name of Man , in this manner :


SIR ,


I Receiv'd yours , and have succeeded to my Wish .
I have found , by an extraordinary Accident , that your Mistress is in Love with the Person who rescu'd her from you in the Wood , and she is to come to-morrow Night , to be conducted to him by some of his Friends , from my House .
Therefore you must not speak a Word , when you take her away , till we are safe on Board .
Come early , for fear we shou'd meet with those Persons she expects  tho ' I hope your Emissaries will prevent him , by cutting his Throat .
And do n't forget my Reward , for I am not Heroe enough to venture my Life for nothing .
Be assur'd , if I have the Money , the Woman is yours .


 Ay , marry , cry'd mine Host , as he was writing it , this will do .
What I wrote to his Wife , you have as follows :


MY DEAR ,


THE Cuckold , your Husband , met me today , as I was angling , and forbid me the House , having discover'd our Intimacy one Night , in the Arbour in the Garden  therefore , if you will fly with me to-morrow Night , I will send some trusty Servants to conduct you to my own Habitation , where you shall command my House as your own  and if we can , by any Contrivance , dispose of your Hornify'd Spouse , it shall be your own Fault , if you are not my lawful Wife .
Take no care of what you leave behind you , for I will provide every thing for you , rich , and of the best .
Send your Answer by the Bearer , whom I can trust  but send it in Writing , seal'd with the Seal I gave you ( those Words were put in at my Host 's Request , to strengthen the Contents ) and be ready  but do n't speak a Word , till you see me , for one of the Persons I have employ'd to conduct you , imagines it is a rich Heiress I have stole , one that he knows , and if you speak , will discover you by your Voice .
Rest contented , and be happy in the Embraces of your constant


L. M .


 Right still , cry'd my Host .
But who will be the Bearer ?
I told him , I wou'd carry it myself  while he went on to the maim'd Fellow that brought the Letter , and sent him away , hurt as he was , to his Master .
We agreed to part , but I promis'd him I would come after him , and consult farther .


When I arriv'd at my Host 's , I found his Wife trick'd up like a Dutchess  and , to give her her Due , she seem'd an agreeable Woman .
She took the Letter , with some Confusion , which something alarm'd me , for fear she might know his Hand .
She went into another Room , and return'd immediately with a Bottle of Wine , and a cold Chicken , and put Half a Guinea into my Hand .
Friend , said she , if my Husband shou'd come and catch you , and suspect , there 's Money to pay your Reckoning  if not , it is to pay you for your Trouble .
I thank'd her as much like a Countryman , as I cou'd .
Upon which she went out , and staid some time .
When she return'd , she gave me a Letter .
Give that , said she , with my humble Service to the Person that sent you , and tell him , It 's very well .


When I had got my Commission , I made what Haste I cou'd to my Landlord , and  found him helping up the Countryman upon his Horse , and the Surgeon cursing and swearing at the Folly of the Fellow , to get on Horseback in that Condition .
However , go he must , the Fellow said , if he dy'd by the Way .
But the Man of the House sent one to attend him to his Master 's , and we staid till the Fellow return'd , which he did in three Hours , telling his Master , he had conducted him safe home .
In the mean time we examin'd the Letter I brought from my generous Landlay  which was to this Effect  That she wou'd fly to the World 's End with him , and live upon Roots and Water , to enjoy his sweet Company , and leave that despicable Wretch her Husband , whom she loath'd as much as she lov'd him , c..
A brave Wife , by my Troth !
cry'd my Landlord .


When I gave him the Half-Guinea she made me a Present of , he said , it was well there were not real Bailiffs at his House for Mr. Angler  for his Wife , by her extraordinary Bounty to the Letter-Carrier , wou'd certainly pay her Lover 's Debts , if she cou'd any way raise the Money .
My Thoughts now began to return homeward  but my Companion told me , he wou'd not leave me , till he saw me safe at my Uncle 's , for fear the  Wretches shou'd discover me .
I thank'd him , and accepted of his Company , because I was to shift my Disguise by the way , and consequently might be murder'd in going from thence to my Uncle 's , for he knew not of my Transformation  neither shou'd I have gone home till our Designs had been accomplish'd , if it had not been that my Uncle wou'd have been frighten'd at my Absence .
Therefore we agreed to go both together , and my Landlord to lodge in the Neighbourhood of my Uncle , and both return the next Day to wait the Issue of our Project .


When we came to the House where I was to dress , the Person told me , there were three Men had been with him , to know where my Uncle liv'd  and ask'd several Questions concerning me  but , said he , I did not like their Turn of Discourse , therefore gave 'em no Intelligence , so they proceeded on their way .
I told him , he had acted wisely , for they were Wretches that had a Design upon my Life .
If so , said he , looking out , be upon your Guard , for here they come , up the Lane .
I had not pull'd off my Disguise , therefore ventur'd out of the Door , keeping my Hand upon a Brace of Pocket-Pistols I always carry'd about me , since my Rencounter with that  Wretch  one of 'em rid up to me , and ask'd me , if I had seen Mr. Such-a-one ?
naming my Name .
Mr. Clerimont !
said I , speaking in a Country Manner , yes , he 'll be here presently  I wait for him , by his own Order .
I am glad o n't , reply'd the Fellow , for I have some earnest Business to communicate to him , and was inform'd at his Uncle 's , that he had not been at home since Morning  therefore , with your Leave , we 'll wait here till he comes .
With all my Heart , said I  if you please , you may alight , and put up your Horses .
No , reply'd the Fellow , our Horses are hot , therefore we 'll ride softly up and down to cool 'em  and when he arrives , if you 'll come and acquaint us , I 'll give thee something .
Thank ye , Master , said I  I 'll be sure to do it .
Upon this they rode off .
I watch'd 'em some time , and found they were very busy in Consultation .
In the mean time , I instructed the Man of the House to go to the Constable , and bring a sufficient Force along with him .
But before he went out , they all three return'd , and alighting from their Horses , they desir'd I wou'd put 'em into the Stable , for they were now cool  telling me , they would accept of my Offer , and wait there till Mr. Clerimont came .
Well , Gentlemen , said I , for his sake ,  you shall be welcome to what the House affords .
Come , sit down .
The Fellows seem'd a little shy  however , they sat down at last , and began to be very free with the Liquor we gave 'em  and we ply'd 'em so close , that in two Hours , we did not want the Constable 's Assistance to secure 'em , for they were all three drunk to a Degree .


When the Constable came , I order'd him to keep out of Sight , till I sent for him .
I began then to examine the soberest of 'em , asking him , what Business he had with Mr. Clerimont ?
Not , said I , but if I look into your Hand , I need not ask the Question  for I am so skill'd in Palmistry , that I can tell things past , present , and to come  that is to say , in plain English , reply'd the Man , you are a Conjuror .
However , to try your Skill , there 's my Hand , do your best , and spare not .
This Hand , said I , has receiv'd in part , or will receive shortly , the Price of innocent Blood .
The Man , drunk as he was , seem'd to be in the utmost Confusion  yet endeavour'd to hide it , by pulling back his Hand .
It is in vain to conceal it from me , said I  you , and your Companions , are hir'd to murder that Clerimont you so earnestly enquire for , and the Constable  is now in the House to apprehend you .


This , spoke with a confident Air , made him turn pale  for his other two Companions were fast asleep .
But still , he put it off as a Jest , till I call'd in the Constable .
Here , Constable , said I , take these three Rogues into Custody , and see 'em well secur'd till to-morrow .
They came here with an Intention to murder me , I having sufficient Witnesses to prove it against them .
And are you that Clerimont ?
cry'd the Fellow I had been talking to .
Yes , said I .
Now let me know what is your Business with me .
Turn every body out of the Chamber , reply'd he , and I will convince you , we had no such Intention .
I told him , I thought it was impossible .
However , after searching 'em for Arms , and finding none , I order'd the Room to be clear'd .
Sir , said the Man , how you got your Intelligence , is a very great Mystery to me  but we three were certainly sent from such a Person to murder you , for the Reward of 100 l. a Man  and after we had made an end of you , we were to imbark with him for the West-Indies .
We receiv'd 20 l. a Man , as Earnest of the rest , but resolv'd not to commit so barbarous an Act upon the Innocent   therefore we intended to acquaint you with the real Truth , hoping you would cause the Report to be spread of your Murder , about your Neighbourhood , for a few Days , till we had receiv'd the Reward , and our Master had imbark'd .
I own , you may hardly find Faith to believe me  but it is Truth , as I hope for Heaven .
You may perceive we have no Arms about us  and if you please to examine our Pistols , at our Holsters , you will find they are as empty as my Master 's Heart is of Humanity .


I immediately sent to examine their Pistols , and found 'em uncharg'd , as he declar'd .
This Proof gain'd on my Belief .
Well , Sir , said the Man , I hope you think what I have said is Truth .
But the more to strengthen it , Pray awake my Companions , and examine them .
Now what Discourse we had together , was spoke so low , that if the other two Men had been awake , and sober , they cou'd not have understood us .
Therefore I caus'd 'em to be rous'd from their drousy Humour , while I went and put on my own Cloaths .
When I came in , I order'd the Person I had been talking with , to tell 'em he had seen me .
Well , and have you broke the Matter to him ?
said one of 'em .
Yes , he reply'd , and  I do intend to comply with his Request .
We are glad o n't ( return'd the other two ) then our Fourscore Pounds apiece is all snug .
I found , upon a further Examination , the Fellows were honest : Nay , one of 'em told me , it was not altogether the Lucre of the Money that prevail'd upon him , but to save an innocent Gentleman 's Life  for , said he , if we had not undertaken it , some others might , that wou'd have gone through with their Work .


The Difficulty I now labour'd under , was which way to cause the Report of my Death , without alarming my Uncle  therefore took this Method , which was approv'd of by the three Men .
I put on my Disguise once more , and gave 'em the Cloaths I put off , which we mangled and blooded in several Places , and order'd 'em to tell the Wretch who sent 'em , that they found me hunting in a Wood alone , and there murder'd me , and the Place being private , not likely for any one to find me immediately , they had stript me , and brought my Cloaths as a Proof that my Business was done effectually .
They all three gave me many Thanks , and promis'd me , in a few Days , to let me know their Success , for they were resolv'd to leave their  Master secretly , as soon as ever they had receiv'd their Reward , not caring to live any longer with such a barbarous Wretch .
Upon this , we parted , and my Host and I went to our Repose .
The next Morning , I dispatch'd mine Host to regulate Matters with my hated Rival , and design'd to follow .
I told my Uncle , I intended to go see a Relation about Twenty Miles off , and shou'd not return till the next Day  for I did not think it proper to acquaint him with the Motive of my Journey .
I went in my usual Disguise , but durst not go to the Landlord 's House , because his Wife wou'd know me for the Letter-Carrier  therefore chose to ride into a neighbouring Wood , till it was dark , where I entertain'd myself with a Book I brought along with me .
But I was very much surpriz'd , an Hour before Night , to see the Wretch , and two more along with him , enter the same Wood .
I began to have some dreadful Apprehension , for fear they shou'd find me out , therefore leading my Horse further into the Wood , and tying him fast , fetch'd a Round , and came almost at their Backs  yet tho ' I was so near 'em , they cou'd not come to me immediately , by reason of the Interposition of a thick Copse of Hazels ,  which kept me from their Sight .
Now my Revenge is satisfy'd ( cry'd the Villain ) my Heart feels lighter , and it looks like an Omen of future Contentment , in possessing that ungrateful Maid .
I must own , I do love her , and wou'd wait a Year with Patience , if at the end she wou'd reward my Love .


You were very patient ( reply'd another ) when , not long since , you attempted to ravish her , and no doubt , had do n't , if the Person who has paid his Life for his Presumption , had not prevented it .
'T is true , reply'd the Barbarian , the first Fire of my Passion , I own , was the Flame of Lust  but I now begin to fansy , if I cou'd gain her Heart , I shou'd revel in Bliss , for a whole Year at least , without being cloy'd .
But how tedious do the Moments pass , continu'd the Villain !
Oh , how I long for Night !
How will the trembling Slut be bit , when , instead of flying to the Man she loves , she 'll find herself in the Embraces of one she detests !
This Wood will once more be the Bawd to my Designs .
As soon as ever we have left the Shore , I 'll proceed to the Enjoyment of the scornful Dame .


I must own , this Declaration made me shudder  and I had once resolv'd to draw my  Pistols , and shoot the Villain thro ' the Head , if the Consideration of our Project had not hinder'd me .
I waited , with as much Impatience as my Rival did , till the Moment came of our Decampment .
As soon as they were mounted , I took Horse , and follow'd  but my Horse hearing other Horses before him , neigh'd several times , which caus'd my Leaders to stop  however , as there was but two , and I in my Disguise , I resolv'd to push on , and come up with 'em .
As I came even with the Wretch and his Companion , they ask'd me where I was going ?
I told 'em , to such an Inn  naming the Place where they were bound .
This Fellow , said the Ruffian , may hinder our Design , therefore we must prevent him  tho ' this was spoke in a Whisper , yet I heard it plain , and began to repent of my Forwardness in following them  I therefore put Spurs to my Horse to get out of their Reach .


Hold , hold !
cry'd the Master , not so fast , I want to speak with you  I have a Job for you to do , which I 'll pay you well for  't is only to go to the Harbour , which is not above three Miles off , and inquire for the Speedwell Galley , that lies moor'd to the Wharf  bid 'em immediately unmoor , and  prepare for Sailing , and send the Boat ashore to wait my Coming , which wo n't be above two Hours  if thou wilt do this , there 's a Crown  and if you 'll wait till I come , I 'll give thee another .
Thank you , Master , said I , with all my Heart , if your Worship will bespeak a Bed for me at the Inn , as you pass by .
Ay , that I will , reply'd the Wretch , and a good Supper beside .
I gave him Thanks , turn'd my Horse 's Head to go back again , and resolv'd to do as he desired  for then I shou'd see the End of our Project .


When I came to the Harbour , I found the Boat 's Crew ashore , waiting for their Master .
When I had executed my Commission , the Coxen cry'd , What , is the Devil in my Master ?
Does he think my Memory so short , that I shou'd forget his Orders in five Hours ?
I fansy so , said I , for he paid me well for my Journey  and yet but in part , for I am to stay till he returns , for the rest of my Reward .
I think the open Air is a little too cold , to stay i n't three or four Hours together  therefore , if you 'll go with me to an Alehouse , I 'll spend part of my Wages upon you .
A few Words struck up the Bargain , and away we went .


 When the Company were pretty well warm'd with their Liquor , I began to ask 'em a few Questions concerning their Master , intimating , that we had been in Treaty about my entring into his Service .
Why , reply'd the Coxen , you had better stand still , and walk Horses , as the Saying is .
I own he 's good at Promising , but the worst at Performing , I believe , in the whole Dominions of Great Britain .
How comes it to pass then , said I , that you 'll serve such a scurvy Master ?
Why you know , Master , reply'd the Coxen , we Sailors are very blunt honest Fellows , therefore , as I believe it is not in your Power to hurt me , I 'll tell you the Truth .
We are all marry'd , or have Settlements , upon his Plantations in the West-Indies , therefore 't is our Interests  and as he brought us out with him , we must wink at his Rogueries , that he may carry us to our own Plantations again  otherwise I 'd leave him this Instant  for I dare swear , he 's upon some ill Design this Moment .
In return to your Confidence of me , I reply'd , I can assure you 't is so  nay , and such an Action , that not only may endanger his Life , but the Lives of those that assist him i n't .
Upon this , all the Company began to look upon one another , with Countenances  full of Fear .
` Sblood !
if I thought that , cry'd one , the Devil might assist him , for me .
Some baudy Business , cry'd another , I suppose  I do n't care to hazard my Life for any Whore , but my own .
I 'd venture my Life , said another , in an Engagement , in hopes of Plunder  but I 'll see him d -'d before I 'll have any thing to do with his dirty Work .


In short , every Sailor had something to say upon the Occasion  and I found , by their Sentiments , they were all honest Fellows , or seem'd so  and the more they drank , the more they seem'd resolv'd to oppose him in any ill Design .
I let 'em into some part of the Story , in order that they shou'd stand the poor Wretch 's Friend , that by Mistake might be brought among 'em  for I did not doubt , but when he found out the Trick that was put upon him , his Brutality and Disappointment wou'd push him on to murder the Woman .
This was the only Motive that induc'd me to enter into Conversation with 'em  therefore , I intended to take my Leave , but was prevented by a loud Knocking at the Door .
Immediately after , enter'd the Wretch , swearing abominably at the Coxen , and Sailors , in not being at the Boat to wait his Coming .


 The Sailors began to grumble , and told him , they were not his Slaves , nor wou'd be us'd as such .
I do n't know where this Dispute wou'd have ended , if the three Fellows that were hired to murder me , had not follow'd their Master , and desir'd to speak with him in private .
What is it you want with me , you troublesome Vermin ?
cry'd the Brute .
You know what we want , reply'd one of them  and therefore we expect to be satisfy'd before you go on Board : You know very well , we were to have the Reward when our Business was finish'd  and not keeping your Word with us , makes us imagine you intend to forget the rest of the Money , if we do n't put you in mind of it .
You Villains , cry'd out their Master , if you mention one Word more of that Affair , look to yourselves !
you know , you good-for-nothing Rascals , that it is in my Power to hang you all  therefore no more Words , or an Halter shall be your Reward  you have been too well paid already .
A Halter our Reward !
cry'd the Fellow , and what shou'd be his Reward , that put us upon such an Action ?
Why , you Caitiffs , you know very well ( cry'd their Master ) I only order'd you to Bastinado the Rascal , not to murder him : And , you Clods !
 if I had Time to stay , I wou'd find out Means to help you to the Gallows .
Come , Rogues ( said he to the Sailors ) and fly to the Boat this Instant .
Better Words , cry'd the Sailors , or you shall to Sea by your self ?
Zounds !
we know you ca n't do without us , and therefore we 'll be better treated  and tho ' most of your Governors of Plantations are bad enough , yet there 's one gone to take your Place , that we may expect Justice from , without paying for ` t .
What the Devil !
I suppose there 's a Conspiracy in my Absence , reply'd the quondam Governor : Who has put Rebellion into your Heads ?
not you , my honest Friend , I hope ?
speaking to me .
The three Fellows not observing me before , seem'd very much surpriz'd at the Sight of me , and one of 'em cry'd out in a Transport , Good God !
Mr. Clermont , what brought you here ?
Ha !
Clermont , said the Wretch , is the Villain then living still ?
I own I was very much surpris'd at this Discovery , but was brought out of it by his furious Approach , with his drawn Hanger in his Hand  however , I had Presence of Mind to pull my Pistols out of my Pocket , and aim'd one at his Breast , telling him , if he offer'd to come one Step forwarder , I 'd shoot him dead at my Feet .


 The Sight of my Pistols made him stop short , and call to his Men to seize me  some of 'em , not thinking what they did , were going to obey his Orders .
Gentlemen , said I , hear me two Words , and I 'll deliver my self into your Hands : Upon saying this , they stopt , and I inform'd 'em , in short , of their Master 's implacable Hatred to me .
When they had heard my Story , they one and all cry'd out , they wou'd stand by me with their Lives .
Upon this , he sullenly sat down , and was some time before he open'd his Mouth .
A general Silence follow'd  but our Eyes were busy , looking at each other .
At last he open'd in this manner : Sir , can you forgive me for my past black Designs against your Life ?
I own , this Contrition , at this Exigence , looks like Falshood  but upon the Word of a Man of Honour , I repent from the Bottom of my Heart , of all my base Actions  when I look back on 'em , it is with Horror !
How amiable a Figure do you make , cloath'd in Innocence and Virtue !
And how like a Fiend of Hell do I look , cover'd with such hateful Crimes !
but Repentance , I hope , may wash my Stains away  and I shall think I am in the first Road to Virtue , if you 'll vouchsafe me your Pardon  and Friendship : My Servants , that I find have sav'd your innocent Life , shall receive the Reward they expected , for the Humanity that their Master wanted : My Seamen shall find me , for the future , such a Commander as they can wish for  and when we arrive in our own Country , their Reward [ ... ] shall exceed their Expectation .


Very well , reply'd the Coxen , half drunk , I have heard your Worship talk at this rate , before now .
Ay , ay , cry'd another , we know his Tongue is well hung , he promises as well as e'er a Gentleman in the Universe , and performs as ill .
I must confess ( said the intended Ravisher ) the Character my own Servants give me , is enough to startle a Stranger : But what other Motive , but Repentance can make me declare myself in this manner ?
I find myself a new Man , and only wonder at my former Self .
All the while this Dispute lasted , I was inly ruminating how I shou'd proceed .
I was in very great doubt of his Sincerity  for I observ'd , in all his Discourse , he turn'd his Eye very often upon the Door , as if he expected some of his Men from the Ship to take his Part  at least I thought so .
Beside , I wanted very much to confer with my Landlord , who I knew  wou'd accompany his Wife , tho ' unknown to her : therefore I told him , I would go out to recompose my Spirits , and return immediately again .
Very well , he reply'd , you are at your own Liberty , and it will be my utmost Wish , that when you come back , you will forgive one that will ever think it his highest Happiness to be esteem'd your Friend .
I made him no Reply , but went out , and found my Landlord , who was waiting at the Door , with four or five more , all in Disguise , and mask'd , attending his good Wife , who seem'd very impatient .
I told him what had happen'd  and ask'd him Advice how I should behave myself .
Damn him ( he reply'd ) do n't trust him , for if you do , he 'll certainly deceive you .
But , however , conceal yourself somewhere about the House , till I go in and feel his Pulse  for I must get rid of Madam , some how .


I consented to his going in , for I concluded it was the only way to try his Sincerity  for if he really repented , he would restore his pretended Lady to her Liberty .
Therefore I retired to wait the Event .
However , upon second Thoughts , I judg'd it the safest Course to get my Horse ready , for fear of things .
Just as I was leading him out of the Stable ,  I perceiv'd my Landlord and the Gentleman coming towards me , and , I must confess , did not know what to think of it  but they stopt , as soon as they were got out of hearing of the People about the Door .
Why it is a terrible Business , I own ( said my Landlord ) to be disappointed in your Revenge , for I 'll engage he 's two Miles off , by this time  for he mounted immediately , and flew away like Lightning .
Damn him !
reply'd my false Penitent , I wish his Horse may break his Neck .
Not impossible , cry'd my Landlord : But since he 's gone , let 's proceed to Business .
Your Men , you may depend o n't , will soon return to their Duty , now Mr. Clermont has left 'em .
Therefore , give me my Reward , and I wish you Luck , and a boon Voyage .
There it is ( putting a Purse in his Hand ) all in Gold .
I hope your Worship ( reply'd my Landlord ) has not put a Trick upon me ?
No , on my Word , return'd the Villain , you are the only one I intend not to deceive  and if you 'll send me Word you have murder'd Clermont , I 'll send thee the next Return after it , a hundred Hogsheads of the best Sugar in my Plantations .
My Thoughts were very much confus'd before , but in hearing this , I forgot all Patience ?
I drew a Pistol from my  Pocket , and running up , cry'd , No , Villain , Heaven has reserv'd me to punish such a mortal Devil as thou art .
I discharg'd my Pistol at his Head  and , seeing him fall , mounted my Horse , and flew away like Lightning , in earnest .
I rid six or seven Miles before my troubled Thoughts return'd to Reason  and then , when I began to think , I condemn'd myself for being so rash  and thought of the Crime I had committed , in killing a Wretch with all his Sins about him .


I did not go home that Night  neither should I have thought of reposing myself , if my Horse had not put me in mind of it , by seeming jaded  but being far from any House , I drove him into a Meadow , and sat under a Hedge till Break of Day .
When I got home , my good Uncle saw visibly the Discontent was increas'd in my Countenance  but I wou'd not wound his Peace farther , by telling him what had befallen me  I only feign'd some slight Indisposition , therefore staid at home three or four Days , but under terrible Inquietudes  and what increas'd my Apprehensions , I heard nothing from my Mistress for several Days beyond the usual Time .
The only Consolation was , that no Intelligence came concerning  the Death of the Wretch I suppos'd I had kill'd  for I was well assur'd , if I had been call'd to an Account for it , the fatal Inquiry wou'd have broke the Heart of my pious Uncle .


I was almost afraid to go to my Landlord 's ( as I call'd him ) tho ' I had no Reason to doubt his Honesty  and wonder'd I had not seen him in so many Days .
Therefore , after many Irresolutions , I ventur'd to visit him in my Disguise as usual .
When I came to his House , they told me he was ill of a Fever .
I ask'd a Countryman that was drinking at the Door , concerning him .
I do n't know , says the Countryman , the Man 's a Fool , I think  he takes it much in Dudgeon , that his Wife has made him a Cuckold  and you know , Sir , it 's many an honest Man 's Fortune .
Now I think , he has Reason to be out of his Wits with Joy , that he has got rid of a devilish Wife .
By this Fellow 's Discourse , I understood every thing had succeeded to his Wish  but I trembled to think in what manner , I fear'd he might have murder'd her , to break his Marriage Bonds , and was very uneasy to know the Truth .
While the Fellow and I were talking , a Maid-Servant came to me , and ask'd me , if I was not the Person  that brought a Letter to her Master some time ago ?
I was something surpris'd at the Question , and did not readily give her an Answer .
If you are the same Person , said she , ( perceiving I said nothing ) you need not be afraid  my Master only order'd me to bring you up Stairs , if you should come here at any time .
I follow'd her to her Master 's Chamber , without opening my Lips .
I found him on his Bed , and seemingly very weak .
When the Door was shut , he arose .


Well Sir , said he , my Ends are accomplish'd , tho ' in such a manner , that has given me very great Uneasiness  for , notwithstanding I had all the Reason in the World to despise my Wife , yet her deplorable End , tho ' it shews the Judgment of the Almighty upon wicked Persons , has cast me into such a dreadful Melancholy , that I believe I shall never shake it off .
When you , Sir , fired your Pistol at the base Villain that deserves the worst of Deaths , the Report frighted the Horse my Wife rode on , to such a Degree , that he ran away with her , and plunging into the Sea , threw her off .
We try'd all Means to save her , but she sunk to the Bottom , and we never more saw her .
It was suppos'd the Tide of Ebb carry'd her into the main Ocean .
 Well , but Landlord , said I , how did you proceed with the Men , after the Villain was kill'd ?
Alas , Sir !
reply'd my Landlord , you was not so lucky to make an end of him  for one of the Balls only graz'd upon the Top of his Forehead  and it is not improbable but the other might wound the Horse my Wife rode on , which made him so outrageous .


When the Wretch got up again , and found the Smallness of his Hurt , he was for pursuing you  but was prevented by the unfortunate Accident of my Wife .
He mourn'd very much the Loss of his Mistress , as he thought  and I own it was some good Luck to me , that she was not discover'd to be otherwise , for he is of such an implacable Temper , I do n't know how far his Revenge might have carry'd him  for after we had try'd in vain to find out the unfortunate Wretch , he was still upon a Project of making an end of you  but I wrought him into such a Belief that I wou'd certainly do it for him , that he gave me Twenty Guineas for the Job , as he call'd it .
His Men , indeed , grumbled much  but the three Servants that were hired to murder you , would not be prevail'd upon to go on Board , till he  had satisfy'd 'em according to his Promise .
He made many Excuses , telling 'em , he had not Money enough about him  at last , he gave 'em Twenty Guineas a-piece , and assur'd 'em he would give 'em the rest , when he had them on Board .
But , notwithstanding his fair Promises , when their Horses were embark'd , and every thing ready to go off with the Boat , the three Men were no where to be found .
They search'd in vain for some time , and were oblig'd to set Sail without them .
I suppose his Uneasiness was , for fear they shou'd discover his damnable Intrigues .


As soon as the Ship was out of Harbour , I got upon my Horse , and came home  but was very much surpris'd to find the Horse , that run away with my Wife into the Sea , and suppos'd to be drown'd , at home before me .
All this is what I wanted to declare to you , and wou'd have waited on you , but my Melancholy and Indisposition prevented me .


I told him he ought to consider , that a bad Wife was a good thing to get rid of  and , tho ' I was as much concern'd for the Manner of it , as he cou'd be , yet it was very probable , when the Villain had found out the  Trick that was put upon him , but his Brutality would have drove him to give her the same Death , or an Usage worse than Death .
I own it , reply'd my Landlord , and since it seems to be the Hand of Heaven , I ought to be satisfy'd  but even what I have gain'd by it , seems at present to give me very little Contentment  and I should have been willing to have forgiven her , if I thought she could have return'd to her Duty  but I hope Time will wipe off this Score of Melancholy .
However , if I can be of any Service to you in your Amour , you may freely command me .


I was very much rejoic'd at this kind Offer , and told him , it was the only thing he could oblige me in , since I knew he had the Liberty of going to the House of my Mistress , unsuspected  I therefore freely declar'd to him the whole Progress of my Love , and the Uneasiness I was in for not hearing from my Fair One .
Well , said he , notwithstanding my Weakness , if you 'll give me a Letter of Credence , I 'll promise you an Answer to-morrow  and I shall think I am doing a good Work , in endeavouring to join two Bodies , whose Souls are united in Heaven .
I was in such a Transport at his Manner of Speaking , that I embrac'd him with the Ardour  of a sincere Friend , as indeed , he always prov'd himself such a one to me  and I think sincerely , in such low-born Souls , such Honesty is almost a Miracle .
I sat my self down immediately to write to my dear Eliza .


IF you would know the Torment I endure , in not seeing or bearing from you , think a Person on the Rack , with his Torturers inflicting every Torment that mortal Life can bear , and that is but a faint Idea of what I suffer .
The Bearer of this , I am not asham'd of calling Friend , notwithstanding the Disparity of our Conditions .
Ease my tormented Soul with a Line from that Hand which only can relieve the Pain I undergo .
I have something to relate to my dear Eliza , of what has befallen me since I last saw those lovely Eyes , that is something surprising .
Do not thou keep me upon the Rack of Despair any longer , but contrive with the Bearer , to give me a Meeting once more , if you wou'd save the Life of


Yours eternally , CLERMONT .


 When I had finish'd my Epistle , I read it to my Landlord , who said so many things above his Station , that I was surpris'd at his manner of expressing himself .
He took my Letter , and assur'd me he would bring me some Answer , if he ventur'd his Life for it .
I took my Leave of him , and resolv'd to return the next Day , in hope of a favourable Answer .
When I offer'd to reward him for the Trouble he was undertaking , he absolutely refus'd it , and was almost angry with me for proposing any such thing .
No , said he , be assur'd I am no mercenary Messenger  and tho ' I have transacted an Affair with that Wretch , that looks like Guilt , I will never , while I live , harbour a mean Thought , but hope to convince you , that a Person without Birth or Education , can pursue Virtue , as well as those who have that Advantage of us .


I return'd the next Day before Noon , but my Landlord was not come back  the Disappointment gave me the utmost Uneasiness .
At last , he came , and gave me a Letter , which I knew by the Superscription , came from my adorable Eliza , tho ' wrote with a Pencil  the Contents were short , as follows :


 My dear CLERMONT ,


I am , and ever will be your


ELIZA .


My dear Friend , said I to my Landlord , I am infinitely oblig'd to you for the Pains you have taken  but am surpris'd , though pleas'd , at the Shortness of her Answer .
Sir , said my Landlord , I have a wonderful Story to relate to you , and I doubt not but ` twill surprize you , as it did me .
But first read that Letter which I receiv'd just now from one of the Servants that was hir'd to murder you .


Mr. CHEESEMAN ,


I WOU'D have you be on your Guard , Meeting the Coxen of my quondam Master 's Ship ( I own , I was much surpris'd to find him in England , whom I thought many Leagues off ) he inform'd me , that going out of the Harbour , the Morning that our Hurlyburly happen'd , the Tide being ebb'd more than they imagin'd , they struck upon a Sand-Bank , where they were oblig'd to wait for the next Tide of Flood to carry her off  during that Time , the Corpse of the Woman , whose Horse  carry'd her into the Sea , was found , which being taken up , prov'd to be your Wife , and , by several Letters in her Pocket , it was suppos'd that you , with the Confederacy of Mr. Clermont , had contriv'd to impose upon my Master  be it which way he will , he fansies so , and has vow'd bloody Revenge upon you both  therefore I send you this , by the Desire of the Coxen , that you may provide against one , whom no Law has Fetters strong enough to bind from doing Crimes too bad to name .
Take the Advice of


Your Humble Servant , RICHARD CROSS .


The Reading of this Letter , I must own , very much alarm'd me .
Now , said my Landlord , I will relate the History of my Journey .
When I came to Eliza 's Father 's House , whose Servant I was , and whose Tenant I am , I went with the Pretence of paying him his Rent , tho ' not due this Week  but guess my Surprize , when , as soon as I enter'd , I saw that execrable Villain , the Captain , walking in the Garden with my old Master .
I knew it was not my Business to be seen by him , tho ' I was then ignorant of  the Affair related in the Letter from Mr. Cross  therefore watching them , till they came into the House , I went into the Garden a back Way , to consider , as well as my troubled Thoughts would let me , what I should do .
The Respect I had for you , prevented my Returning without delivering your Letter , tho ' I knew I staid in the Mouth of Danger .
While I was beating my Brains to no Purpose , I saw my young Mistress Eliza come into the Garden , overwhelm'd with Sorrow .
I took my Opportunity to speak with her , and gave her your Letter , which she receiv'd with the utmost Joy .


She inform'd me that the Wretch , the Captain , had been there three Days , and her Father was so much rejoic'd to find him alive , that by report was thought dead , that he resolv'd to force her to be his Wife , in a few Days  but she bid me assure you , she would sooner lay violent Hands upon herself , than ever consent to give her Hand to such a Monster of Mankind .
We had not time for much Conversation , for that Moment her Father sent for her in  she only took the Opportunity of writing with my Pencil upon the blank Leaf of your Letter , that Line I brought you .
Immediately after , I saw 'em  all three come into the Garden , so thought it high time to make the best of my way .


During this short Relation , my Mind felt [ ... ] he utmost Inquietudes  all the Passions incident to Human Nature , took their turns within my Breast  but at length Revenge got the better , and I came to a firm Resolution of making a sure End of that barbarous Wretch , the Cause of all my Misfortunes .
I communicated my Thoughts to my Land [ ... ] ord , who very strongly dissuaded me from [ ... ] t , but to no purpose : When he found his Reasons had no Force upon me , he offer'd me his Assistance .
We were some time before we cou'd form a proper Method to accomplish my Design  but , at length , we fix'd upon sending him the following Letter .


SIR ,


I AM inform'd , for certain , that your Coxen , with the rest of your Men have resolv'd to run away with your Ship  and I am assur'd , nothing but your speedy Appearance can prevent [ ... ] em  every Person but myself is in the Conspiracy  and I am seemingly so , that I might have this Opportunity of letting you know their Villainy .
No matter for my Name , but you shall know me when you see me , by my wearing an  old gold-lac'd Hat , which no one on Board has but myself .
I would have you come alone , for I 'll take care to prevent their Design till I see you , if you are expeditious  for I have a secure Method , with your Assistance only , to put an end to their farther Villainy , without Danger .
Therefore , pray Sir , communicate this Affair to no one Person till I see you .


Your obedient Servant , c..


This Letter we convey'd to him the same Evening , and follow'd the Messenger , as imagining he might take Horse immediately .
I let my Landlord into my manner of Proceeding , and order'd him to retire , as soon as he shou'd see the Wretch appear , with an Injunction on him , if I shou'd be kill'd to bury me as privately as possible , and let my Uncle have a Letter I had wrote to him , wherein I had inform'd him of every thing that happen'd to the present Moment .


Our Letter had the desired Effect  for at the Dusk of the Evening , my Landlord acquainted me the Groom was getting his Horse ready , and he found he intended to go alone , according to the Purport of the Letter .
Therefore , full of the Spirit of Revenge , I rid on about two Miles before ,  where I waited for him upon an open Common that lay in his way .
I never gave myself Time to think , all this while , what might be the Consequence of such an Action .
In a Quarter of an Hour , I saw him enter the Common .
I rid up to him , and bid him stop .
At my manner of Proceeding , he took me for a Highwayman , for he told me very calmly , he had nothing about him worth my venturing my Life for .
No , Wretch , said I , I come for thy Blood , who has often endeavour'd to spill that of the unhappy Clerimont .
Clerimont !
cry'd he , in a Transport , the only Man I wish'd to have met with  and tho ' I have an Affair of Consequence upon my Hands , yet I will stay to put an end to thy detestable Life .
I had no time to ask him what Arms he carry'd , not intending to take any Advantage of him  for as soon as he had done speaking , he fir'd a Pistol at me  it was so well aim'd , that I heard the Balls whistle thro ' my Hair .
I was not long behind him , but return'd him one in Exchange , that shot his Horse stone dead  the sudden Fall of his Horse , prevented his getting clear of the Beast  therefore I alighted from mine , and disengag'd him from him .
Tho ' such impious Villains deserve no Humanity ,  said I , yet I can never forget I am a Gentleman .
He made me no Reply , but drawing his Hanger , ran furiously upon me , aiming a Blow at my Head , that would have ended all my Misfortunes , if I had not receiv'd it on my left Arm .
I found the Stroke had wounded me very much , therefore , before he cou'd redouble his Blow , I shot him thro ' the Head  he gave a Groan , fell down , and expir'd .


I had then lost all my Resentment , and ran to help him up  but I found the Top of his Skull shot away , and his Brains upon the Ground  for tho ' it was Night , the Moon was up , and I cou'd not help standing in a fixt Posture , to view the horrid Act ( as it was then represented to my Fancy ) my Hand had done .
But my friendly Landlord rous'd me from my Thoughts , that I might take care of my Safety , for he told me , he heard the Galloping of Horses in the Lane that led to the Common , the way we came  therefore we mounted our Horses , and rid away , he leading a full Speed , and I following , not know [ ... ] g well what I was doing , so full of Trou [ ... ] [ ... ] re my Thoughts .
After my Wound [ ... ] , I went home , and conceal'd no [ ... ] [ ... ] Uncle , who was under terrible  Apprehensions .
We learnt afterwards , the Horses we heard were the Father of my Mistress , and several Servants , who follow'd the unfortunate Wretch , as imagining some extraordinary Business , by the Change of his Countenance , when he read the Letter I sent him .
They took up the Body , and bury'd him privately in the Chapel , that very Night .
Searching him , they found the Letter that was the Cause of his sudden Departure  and tho ' I had disguis'd my Hand , yet my dear Eliza guess'd the Letter came from me , and that Imagination gave her insupportable Uneasiness .


The next Day her Father , with all his Servants , rid to the Port , to examine concerning the Affair  and Eliza , knowing they could not return till the next Day , sent to my Landlord to be inform'd concerning the Tragical Affair .
Before he went to her , he sent to give me Notice where he was going  tho ' a dreadful Melancholy had seiz'd me , and the Pain of my Wound was troublesome , I immediately put on my Disguise , and follow'd him to Eliza 's .
I met him returning , but prevail'd on him to go back with me , and , if possible , to procure me a Meeting with my dear Mistress .
He comply'd with my  Request , and my Landlord having related every Circumstance of my Affairs before , I receiv'd this Consolation from my Mistress , that she cou'd but barely blame me for my Conduct , in the Danger I expos'd my self to .


We parted with mutual Vows of Constancy , but with sad Presages of what befel us afterwards .


It was about this time your noble Uncle fixt his Eyes upon me for your Tutor  tho ' I must own I had no Inclinations that way  for I was yet fed with Hope , Fortune would still befriend me in my Love .


A full Month past on , without hearing any thing from my dear Eliza .
My Landlord was forbid ever entering the Doors of her cruel Father , and no Reason given for such Treatment , tho ' it was not hard to guess .
We understood Eliza was under the strictest Confinement .
I was almost distracted with this cruel Proceeding , but had no other Remedy than Patience .


One Day , as I was walking in our Courtyard , ruminating on my sad State , a Footman brought me a Letter  the Superscription I soon knew to be my dear Eliza 's  he told me it requir'd no Answer , and disappear'd in  a Moment .
I broke open the Seal with trembling Fingers , and , to my Astonishment , found what follows :


SIR ,


I SEND you This to tell you , that Fortune will have us intire Strangers to each other  therefore it is my only Request to you , that I may never see you more .


ELIZA .


I will omit to tell you the many different Passions I felt at the Perusal of this cruel Epistle  but I fixt a Resolution to see the Ingrateful , if it cost me my Life  for , before her Eyes , I intended to put an end to it , if I cou'd ever get a Sight of her .


Near her House , the Severn stream'd along , which you well know enrich'd the neighbouring Towns with her Water-Carriage .
I put myself in the Habit of a Bargeman , and , addressing myself to Eliza 's Father 's Gardener , told him , if he pleas'd to allow me my Provision , I would work with him till the Return of the Boat I belong'd to ( which is a thing very common in that Country , the Bargemen going to work at any Farming Affair , till their Boat is tow'd up with Horses ,  where there is a Tract for 'em  when there is no Tract , Men supply their Places . )
I was admitted , and the second Day saw Eliza , and made myself known to her , tho ' I had not the Opportunity of speaking to her .
She was confin'd in a Room two Pair of Stairs , next the Garden .
I thought , by the Signs she made me , she was still faithful , which I was confirm'd in the next Morning .
Busying myself as near to her as I cou'd , she threw a Handkerchief down , which I took up , unperceiv'd by any one  in it was the following Letter :


My dear CLERIMONT ,


THE Letter you receiv'd , my cruel Father dictated , and forc'd me ( with Threats of severest Vengeance on you ) to write .
Be assur'd , my Heart shall be ever yours  and if I can not reward your faithful Passion , I will resign my self into the Arms of Death , to avoid the Embraces of any Person living , but those of my dear Clerimont .
My Father is making all the Search imaginable after the Murderers , as he calls 'em , of his Friend  therefore be careful of yourself , and preserve your Life for her , who shall be ever your


ELIZA .


 P. S. I farther beg you will not hazard your self in this manner  tho ' it is the greatest Joy I can be capable of knowing , to see you  but I conjure you wou'd depend on my Conduct , and trust to Time to cure those Wounds of Absence .


This Letter made me shake Hands with Life again , which I had almost number'd among my greatest Enemies .
I immediately left my new Employment , and went home to my Uncle 's , who was ever pressing me to accept of that Office , which I now can call my only Consolation .
I found Means to let my adorable Eliza know his Solicitation on that Account , who also persuaded me to it , giving me her Faith to be ever constant .
But I believe I shou'd never be prevail'd upon to be so far from the Object of my Love , if Eliza 's Father had not resolv'd to prosecute me for killing that unfortunate Wretch  and my Uncle was inform'd he had suborn'd Witnesses to rob me of my Life  therefore ( after settling a Correspondence between my Uncle , my Landlord , and my lovely Eliza ) I bound my self to your Commands .
I have receiv'd several Letters from all three , which came in your Packets , that gave me an Account of the  Welfare of my Mistress  among other things letting me know , after my Absence , she had her full Liberty as before .
But when you have read this last Letter , I hope you will forgive me , if Death shou'd release me from that Duty which I paid you to my last Moments .


My dear Nephew ,


MY Hand trembles , not thro ' Age , but Concern , when I am forc'd to give you the melancholy Account of the Death of your Mistress Eliza : Her cruel Father wou'd force her to wed a Person , whose Courtship was hateful to her upon your Account  to prevent which , the Morning of her detested Nuptials , she took Poison , and expir'd at the Altar .
My dear Child , arm yourself with that divine Weapon , Patience  and with the Assistance of Heaven , combat those dreadful Ills that assail thee .
Man was born to suffer  and I think it no Crime for one of my Cloth to repeat a Line out of a Play , tho ' upon this sad Occasion :


- Who wou'd Fardles bear , To groan , and sweat under a weary Life  But that the Dread of something after Death , The undiscover'd Country from whose Bourn No Traveller returns , puzzles the Will :  And makes us rather bear those Ills we have , Than fly to others that we know not of .
But I hope , my dear Nephew will bear all with an Angel 's Patience , which is the hearty Wish of Your affectionate Uncle .


' I must own , I was very much affected with the Story  and the more , because it resembled my own Fortune .
The Reflexion gave me much Uneasiness .
I sent for him , and we mingled our Sighs and Tears together .


Now , pray Sir , said my Tutor , think , after the Load of Grief which is fix'd upon me , whether Death is not the only Friend that can shake it off .
I strove to comfort him , with the little Eloquence I was Master of , but bid him have Recourse to his Uncle 's last Letter , and that wou'd teach him , Life was not given us to dispose of as we pleas'd , that was a Sin never to be repented of .
And must I then bear this Load of Life ( he reply'd ) perhaps till grey Hairs appear upon my Head ?
No , no , Sorrow sure will do its Office .
Let Friendship , my dear Governor , said I , supply the Place of Love , and that , from me , you may intirely depend on .
He at last resolv'd  to suffer all , he told me , purely to oblige me .


I now began to be in terrible Anxieties on my own Account , for in my last Letters from my Uncle , he mention'd nothing of my dear Isabella .
I remember'd , with Grief of Mind , I had left behind me a very powerful Rival , endow'd with Wealth and Title , the Pride of the Female Sex  but then , I thought Isabella had none of her Sex 's Frailties , and I wou'd sooner believe the Legend of the wonderful Images of the Portugals , than think she cou'd prove false [ Note :


In the Church of Bouas ( a Village near the City of Oporto , in the Capital of the Province Entre Douro e Minho , in Portugal ) is plac'd a Crucifix bigger than the Life , averr'd to be wrought by Nicodemus .
It was cast up by the Sea , and when it was first found , wanted an Arm .
There were many curious Workmen employ'd to make the Image compleat  but as soon as the Arm was fix'd on , it immediately flew off again , to the Amazement of the Artists : In short , there were as many Arms made , as would have serv'd another Briareus , or a Chinese Idol , to no purpose .
But at last ( as the good Fathers are truly traditionally inform'd ) one was found floating on the Sea , and being apply'd to the Image , stuck so fast , without the Assistance of the Statuary , that it cou'd not be taken off again  and tho ' the Body and Arm were found at some Years Distance , it prov'd to be the true Arm .


At Santarem ( a Town in the Province of Estremadura in Portugal ) is another wonderful Image of our blessed Saviour , an Infant , that has outgrown several Niches made purposely for it  and tho ' first a Child , when erected , yet they protest it now is full six Foot high , and has almost out-grown the last Nich  and if it shou'd proceed in thriving at this Rate , it is to be fear'd the Roof of the Church must be remov'd , to make room for it .


] .
We imbark'd on Board of  one of the King of Spain 's Gallies for Genoa , in order to view some Part of Italy  for I found it impracticable to go by Land , as my lovely Isabella advis'd me in her Letter .
But before I left Spain , I sent my Uncle , my Father , and Mistress , an Account of every thing that befell me , and where I was bound next .
My poor Governor was still inconsolable , tho ' he strove to appear chearful , in Complaisance to me  but I found his Malady had struck him to the Soul , and I fear'd Death would lay his Icy Hands upon him  yet I had hope , Variety of Objects might help him sometimes to forget his Grief .
And indeed , his Fortune having something resembling my own , made me doubly suffer with him .
I had forgot to ask him who the Person was , we saw at Paris , that gave him so much Uneasiness  and when it came into my Memory ,  forbore to ask him , for fear I should recall his Sufferings up afresh  but when we arriv'd at Genoa , we found that young Nobleman there , where he avoided him as before .
He then inform'd me , it was a distant Relation of his , of the Roman Persuasion , that had often done him ill Offices upon the Account of his being a Protestant  and farther , to make him hate him , had begun to make his Addresses to his dear Eliza , purely in Contradiction to him .
Upon that Account , I resolv'd to make but a short Stay there .


The City of Genoa , no doubt , is very ancient .
Some will have Janus the Founder  tho ' I ca n't but think the Word Janua implies a Gate  and it was certainly , in the Time of the Romans , one of the Gates to Italy .
It was undoubtedly a City of great Power , when Rome flourish'd  for Livy tells me , Liguria ( Genoa being its Capital ) revolted against 'em , when Rome triumphed over Africa , Asia , and Greece  their Armies prest the Romans to that Degree , that they offer'd Vows to Jupiter Stator , to stop the Progress of the Ligurians  but at last , more by Policy than Force , it was made a Province of Italy .


 Of all the Countries in the Universe , Genoa seems the most abandon'd by Nature  but certainly the most assisted by Human Industry  for , notwithstanding the Barrenness of the Situation , among high Cliffs , and fruitless Mountains , one of the proudest Cities of Europe raises her aspiring Head .
There 's not one Foot of Earth in their noble Gardens , but stands 'em in as much as an Acre in Wales .
This proud City suffer'd much in the Reign of Lewis XIV .
by a hostile Fleet sent to punish the State for some Misdemeanors , which forc'd them to a disadvantageous Peace .
The Duke is invested with a Regal Crown , at his Inauguration  for the Island of Corsica being part of their Dominions , they give it the Title of a Kingdom .


At this City I receiv'd a Packet from England , brought me by a young Gentleman of the sweetest Countenance I ever saw  tho ' the Letters he gave me , almost distracted me .
That from my Uncle , was as follows :


My dear Child ,


DISPOSE thyself to hear the most uncomfortable News Fortune cou'd prepare for thee .
Thy dear Father is no more .
My Tears flow so fast , I can hardly write thee the  following Account .
That pernicious Woman , the Complication of all ill Women in one , has deceiv'd both thee and me .
Last Week , my dear Brother ( thy Father ) sent a Messenger to me , desiring me to come to him without Delay .
I found him almost expiring .
When I enter'd the Room where he lay , the first Object I perceiv'd , was the vile Woman 's Son John , stretch'd dead upon the Ground .
The Sight very much surprising me , thy Father , faintly , call'd me to come near : That , said he , is the first Part of the Punishment due to my cruel Murderess .
This Morning ( continu'd your Father ) that Wretch , my Wife , sent me my Tea , as usual , when she wou'd not favour me with her Company  and the unfortunate Boy , bringing an Excuse from his Mother , that she cou'd not Breakfast with me , I detain'd him to keep me Company .
It was not long before the Mother follow'd him , and inquired , in the utmost Confusion , whether he had drank any of the Tea ?
The Boy resolv'd her , he had drank two Dishes .
I found , by her extravagant Exclamations , there was something extraordinary in the Affair , and soon found we were both poison'd .
In my Rage , I drew my Sword , and made her partake of the same bitter Cup , more than once , then lock'd her in that Closet , where I have heard no Stirring  these three Hours  perhaps the Period of her wicked Life is come , for I find my own approaching .
Dear Brother , I have very little to say , the rugged Hand of Death has seiz'd me .
Pray keep this Story secret , if 't is possible  and be a Father to my dear Boy .
He wou'd have said more , but the Pangs of Death stop'd his Tongue , and his Eyes clos'd for ever .
The mournful Sight drove me into such a furious Passion , that I drew my Sword in order to sacrifice the Author of our Misfortune  but when I open'd the Closet-Door , there was not any Body to be found .
Searching about , I perceiv'd some Linnen ty'd to the Foot of your Father 's Escritore , which hung out of the Window  going to see how she had made her Escape , I perceived her Body lie breathless under the Window , upon the Ground , with her Brains on a large Stone , the only one , I believe , in the whole Garden .
The Linnen , I find , broke about a Foot below the Sash she went out at .
She has suffer'd by the Hand of Heaven , 't is true  but we have lost a Brother and a Father by her Wickedness , who impos'd upon our easy Natures .
Come , my dear Son ( for I now must call you so ) and comfort me for this irreparable Loss  nothing but your Sight can assuage my Grief .
Come , and take Possession of a Fortune that can over-balance  that of Isabella 's  let us mingle our Tears together , to moisten the Ashes of your good Father 's Grave .
But grieve not too much , my Child , for fear you should endanger that Life , which is intirely wrapt up in yours .
I have conceal'd our Misfortunes as much as possible , and the Coroner , my Friend , has brought in the Affair , Accidental Death  and the World is impos'd on in such a manner , that they imagine there was not any Design in the melancholy Story .
The Relation has so much dispirited me , that I have hardly Strength to subscribe myself


Thy dear Uncle and Father , c..


P. S. All thy Brothers are gone to Eternity before thy Father , except thy Brother Jonathan , whom we have not heard any News from these Seven Years , and we may reasonably suppose , he rests in Peace in the Grave .


This Letter put me out of Love with Life  and my good Governor gave me that Comfort , he had formerly receiv'd from me  but had it not been for the Consideration of my Uncle , and my divine Isabella , I believe I should have call'd Death to my Aid .
The Letter I receiv'd from her , gave me some Consolation  it was wrote in such a touching  manner for my Loss , with the Lamentation of her whole Family , and her Dependance on my Life and Love , that I resolv'd to live , if it was but to thank her for her Tenderness  tho ' I must own I felt the utmost Concern in the Loss of that consolative Epistle .
It was three whole Days , before I inquired for the young Gentleman that brought me the Packet .
But what was my Surprize , when my Governor brought him to see me , and at the same time told me , in that young Gentleman I beheld his amiable Eliza !
I forgot all my Sorrows at so unexpected a Rencounter , and my Heart overflow'd with an inexpressible Joy on the behalf of my Governor .
I cou'd hardly believe my Senses .
What , cry'd I , dead , and reviv'd again !
I must own , reply'd the charming Eliza , my Story is a little Romantic : But the Obligations my Lover has receiv'd from you , shall prevail upon me to relate that Part of it , which you are a Stranger to  and tho ' I ought to blush at this Transformation , I am sure you will forgive me , when you know it proceeds from Love .


After our Ill-fortune had separated us , a Gentleman of a great Estate , related to Clerimont , renew'd his fulsome Addresses to me , and tho ' of a different Religion , my Father  gave his cruel Consent , and the Day was fixt for our Nuptials : By the Advice of a Female Acquaintance , I drank a Sleeping .
Draught , which depriv'd me , seemingly , of all the Faculties of Life .
When the intended Bridegroom came , he was very easy under his Disappointment , and said to one of his Servants ( loud enough to be heard by my Father ) Pox o n't !
this had been lucky enough , Dick , if she had staid till the Day after our Wedding .
Very true , reply'd the Servant , the Wedding-Sheets and the Shroud , are the best Linnen can be put on a Woman .
And the sooner she changes , return'd the Master , the better .
Then , with a Horse-Laugh , without taking any Leave , they rid away .


My Father was very much incens'd at his brutal Behaviour , and , as I found afterwards , repented his Usage of me .
He prepared a magnificent Funeral , but I spar'd him the Trouble , in coming to Life again  and , I must own , never receiv'd any Testimony of his Tenderness before : He caress'd me with all the Love expected from a Parent , vowing never more to force my Inclination  and spoke several favourable things of my dear Clerimont .
But , alas !
the Funeral he had taken such Pains to furnish out for me , prov'd  in some fort for himself  for , two Days after my Revival , leaning over a Balcony , to give some Directions to the Workmen in the Garden , it gave way , and he fell , never to rise again in this World .


The fatal Accident ( notwithstanding I was a free Woman , and Mistress of a plentiful Fortune ) gave me unspeakable Discontent  for by his Behaviour to me , I began to revive the Love and Duty which his former Severity had almost kill'd .
After I had perform'd the Funeral Rites , I began to think of my dear Clerimont  and being inform'd by his good Uncle , he had wrote him an Account of my supposed Death , took a Resolution of undeceiving him myself  therefore embark'd for Barcelona in a Ship of my own ( since my Father 's Death ) as a Passenger , unknown to any one , after settling my Affairs at home .
I soon found you out , and had the Pleasure of seeing the deep Melancholy growing in the Face of my Lover .
I embark'd with you for Genoa , without discovering myself , or ever appearing before him , but in the Night , to observe his Sighs .
Going to the Post-House here , I found that fatal Packet directed for you , and took that Opportunity to wait on you  tho ' had I understood the Contents  of it , I should not so readily have brought it .
Last Night I reveal'd myself to Clerimont , for I cou'd no longer bear his Sorrows  and to-day he has brought me to pay you the Thanks suitable to your Goodness  but , as I have not Words sufficient , I beg you would take even my Silence for the Force of Eloquence working in my Mind .
That shou'd be my Task , reply'd my Governor  but I am as uncapable as you  for I find the Torrent of Joy pour'd so unexpectedly in upon me , has made such a Revolution in my Soul , that my Body is not able to bear the Transport : Therefore , dear Sir , think your self , what a grateful Heart wou'd say , and imagine my Thanks .


The good Fortune of these happy Lovers , was the Balm to the extreme Sorrow I felt .
I was resolv'd to return for England with my Governor and his Mistress , in the first Vessel of our Country that was ready  but at last , it was agreed to travel by Land , for the better Conveniency of Eliza .


While we were providing for our Journey , a Galley of Genoa arriv'd , with a Corsair of Barbary she had taken , after a bloody Resistance .
There were six and Thirty Slaves redeem'd from a wretched Captivity they had  undergone on Board the Corsair .
Hearing there was one Englishman among 'em , I resolv'd to relieve him , and carry him home along with me , after his hard Sufferings .
My Governor went , according to my Desire , and brought him to me .
At first Sight , I was struck with a Tenderness I cou'd not give any Account for  but after a little Conference , I found it was my Brother Jonathan , who had been absent above Eight Years .
I never consider'd , I had met with one that wou'd take some part of my Fortune from me  but the Joy I receiv'd in relieving an only Brother from Misery , gave me the utmost Satisfaction .
He gave me his History in the following manner .


'  THE HISTORY OF Mr. JONATHAN VAUGHAN .


YOU were so young , my dear Brother , when I left my Father 's House , in order to make a Campaign in Flanders , that I believe you can hardly remember it .
My Brother Richard , and I , were both Cadets at the Siege of Namur  and tho ' we behav'd our selves , perhaps , with Courage enough , we gain'd nothing more than several dangerous Wounds , that confin'd us to our Quarters longer than we desir'd  for our glorious Monarch , King William , took that Place , held before as impregnable , while we had the Mortification of being under the Surgeon 's Hands .


When we had Strength enough to go to the Field , the Campaign was ended  and our  Money falling short , we cou'd not provide Necessaries to embark for England with the King , without making Figures below our Birth  we wrote to our Father , laying before him our Necessities , and had 50 l. paid us by a Banker of Amsterdam .
With this small Pittance , we had the disagreeable News of by Father 's Second Marriage  and a scurvy Hint , that Money wou'd not be so ready for the future .
This put us almost out of our Senses , for 50 l. would not go far , with a couple of young Fellows just coming into the World , that were oblig'd to live like Gentlemen .
However , to make the best o n't , we discharg'd our Servants , sold our Horses , with some part of our unnecessary Equipage , and rais'd our Bank to a Hundred Pistoles  With this small Stock we embark'd for Ireland , where we were inform'd our King intended to be at the Head of his Troops , early the following Spring  for it was strongly reported , the Rebels had gather'd together a formidable Army there .
But meeting an English Vessel in the Channel , this News was contradicted .
They gave us an Account of the Assassination-Plot , and that every thing was quiet in Ireland .
This put an end to all our Hopes of getting Employment  therefore we  intended to Land in England , and steer our Course homeward  but Providence intended otherwise .


The fifth Day after we put to Sea , we discover'd the Lizard , and a French Privateer at the same time .
We had but ten Men , besides seven Passengers , and four Guns  therefore made all the Sail we cou'd to avoid 'em , but to no purpose  we fought 'em briskly for half an Hour  but losing three of our Sailors , and two of our Passengers , among whom our poor Brother Richard lost his Life ( whose Death had almost ended mine ) we surrendred , and were carried Prisoners to St. Malo 's * .
By good Fortune , I had conceal'd the best part of our Money in the Waistband of my Breeches  and the Captain seeing my Grief for the Loss of my dear Brother , prevented my being search'd , restoring me all our little Equipage , and us'd me with a tender Friendship .
When we landed ,  I was not imprison'd with the rest of our unfortunate Men , but was almost compell'd to live with the Captain .
I freely own'd to him the Money I conceal'd , but he would not touch a Penny .


I wrote several Letters to my Father , wherein I acquainted him with my hard Fortune , and the Death of my poor Brother  begging him to relieve me from my Misfortunes , by paying my Ransom , which I had agreed with my Captain for Three Hundred Crowns : I cou'd have satisfy'd him with what little Money I had , but he refus'd it , telling me , he wou'd stay till it was sent me by my Friends , that he might have more of my Company .
I receiv'd but one Letter to the many I sent , and that gave me Hopes I shou'd have the Money I wrote for , by the first Opportunity  but I waited in painful Expectation near a Twelvemonth , to no purpose and my little Stock was almost spent  besides , my Cloaths were pretty well wore out , and I began to fear I shou'd want common Necessaries .


My Captain continu'd very kind to me , notwithstanding the Reason he had to the contrary  nay , offer'd me my Freedom on my bare Word , but my Heart wou'd not let  me accept it .
At last , he press'd me to go to Sea with him  but I told him , Whatever Obligations I had to him , I hop'd he wou'd excuse me , if I refus'd to fight against my own King and Country .
I might have enter'd into the Service of a Nobleman , but my Spirit wou'd not permit me .
I must own , I had a Longing Desire to signalize myself by the Sword , and an Opportunity happen'd some time after , that seem'd to favour my Design .


The French fitted out a Fleet of Ships to bombard Tunis * , under the Command of the Chevalier Fourbin , a Gentleman well experienc'd in Maritime Affairs .
I was recommended to the Captain of the Superbe by my Friend , who receiv'd me very cordially .


When we arriv'd at Tunis , we bombarded it for six Days , and almost reduc'd it to Ashes .
There were several Merchant-Ships  within the Bar , that the Corsairs had taken from several Nations  one , we were inform'd was richly laden .
With our Captain 's Consent , I took fifteen Men , well arm'd  and in the middle of the Night we row'd into the Harbour , under the Mouths of their Cannon , cut her Cable , and brought her off .
But the Ship 's Sails being taken off the Yards , we were oblig'd to tow her away with our Long-Boat  the whole Bulwarks thunder'd upon us incessantly , and at last an unlucky Shot tore to pieces our Long-Boat .
What became of the rest of the Men , I know not , for never having learnt to swim , I soon lost my Senses .


By the Beams of the Morning-Sun , I began to open my Eyes , and perceiv'd I was cast upon a Ridge of Sand , that the Tide of Ebb had left uncover'd , under a Rock at the Back of the Town , yet out of Sight , either of the Ships or Harbour , tho ' I cou'd hear the Moors Voices above me .
I was very faint , and found it difficult to rise  but I recover'd some Strength , when I had disgorg'd the vast Quantity of Sea-Water I had swallow'd .
By good Fortune , I had a small Brandy-Bottle in my Pocket , that was of great Service in reviving my Spirits .


 I began to walk , but , to my great Grief , found I had above two Miles to go , upon the Sand , before I cou'd come to an Opening of the Country  and , to add to my Misfortune , the Tide was flowing very fast , so that if I did not make haste , it wou'd overtake me before I cou'd get away .
Judge then , my Distress  if I staid where I was , I must have inevitably been drown'd  and if I went on , I had no Hopes but of being a miserable Slave .


I walk'd as fast as I cou'd , tho ' Heaven knows , with a heavy Heart : Yet , sometimes , I thought as I was an Englishman , it might be of some Advantage to me  and therefore form'd a Story in my Mind , that I hop'd wou'd prevent my falling into Slavery .


When I had got off the Sand , I perceiv'd the Country about me was chiefly Gardens  but being fatigu'd thro ' Heat , and Weakness , I was oblig'd to sit down under a high Wall of Reeds , design'd for a Fence to a Garden behind me .
Under this Shade , my Sorrows and Reflexions brought Sleep upon me , whether I wou'd or no , for I strove to resist it  but was soon ( I believe ) awak'd by Dirt and Weeds that were thrown upon me out of the  Garden behind .
The Surprize made me cry out , upon the Instant I heard People call out to me , as I suppos'd , in the Moorish Language , tho ' I cou'd not understand 'em .
I got up , and walk'd on , and immediately was met by four Moorish Gardeners , as I imagin'd by their Implements .
I went submissively up to 'em , tho ' I perceiv'd they were in some Consternation , by their Faces .
We talk'd together , tho ' we could not understand one another .
At last , one of 'em went from the rest , and return'd in a few Minutes with two more  one of 'em seem'd to be their Master , by his Habit  and the other was a Spanish Slave .
I understood enough of that Language , by the help of my Latin , to let him into the Knowledge of my being an Englishman .
When their Master found that , an English Youth , about thirteen or fourteen Years of Age , was sent for .
This Boy , as I was inform'd afterwards , was taken in an English Vessel when he was about nine Years of Age , going to Maryland with his Parents , who both dy'd with Grief at their Misfortune , and the Lad was prevail'd upon to turn Mahometan .
I told him I was an Englishman , taken Prisoner by the French , and made my Escape from 'em in the Night , in one of their Boats , alone   but being unacquainted with the Coast , was thrown upon the Sand-Bank .
The Moor order'd me to be ask'd , if I understood the Mathematicks , or Navigation  or whether I had any Friends at Tunis ?
I reply'd , as to the Mathematicks , I had no Knowledge of them , as being design'd for the Land-Service .
But I hop'd every Englishman wou'd be a Friend to their wretched Countryman , in Distress .
I added , I did intend to apply to the Consul at Tunis .
But the Moor inform'd me , the English Consul , and most of their Merchants , had abandon'd the City , on account of its being bombarded by the French .


In short , I found by all his Discourse , he intended me for one of his Slaves .
It wou'd avail me nothing to reason with him , therefore I was forc'd , through a fatal Necessity , to accept of my Chains as chearfully as I could .
I was taken into the House through the Garden , with some seeming Civility , and had a comfortable Supper , if my Sorrows had not spoil'd my Stomach  tho ' I eat and slept alone , upon a Bed made of Rice Straw .
But alas !
Reflexion brought ten thousand Daggers to my Heart , and Rest was almost a Stranger for many Days .


 My Master never troubled himself about the Siege .
Yet I had the Curiosity to inquire of the English Lad , how things went , and had some Pleasure to hear , that the Ship we got out of the Mole , was safe in the French Fleet .


My chief Business , at first , was to look after three Arabian Horses , that belong'd to my Master  and I happen'd to do my Business so well , that he gave me some Encouragement  and his Son ( about Seventeen ) would be never out of my Company .


In three Months Time , I made a very good Progress in the Moorish Tongue , I could make shift to talk with my Master in his own Language .
I begg'd the Favour of him to let me see the City of Tunis , but he would not let me stir out of his House .
The French Fleet did not stay long after my unfortunate Accident  but I learnt by the Boy , they had reduc'd the City almost to Ruins .
The Reason of my Master 's not permitting me to go into Tunis , was ( as I suppos'd ) for fear I should meet with some Merchants that might procure me my Freedom .


Understanding I could play a little on the Flute , he procur'd me several very good ones , with which I had the Misfortune to please him  more than I desired .
But alas !
What is Musick to a Wretch that every Moment long'd for Liberty ?
or with what Fancy could I touch the Instrument , when my Thoughts were ever fixt upon my hard Fate ?
However , I was the more esteem'd by him  and I must confess , if all their Slaves were us'd as I was , they could have nothing to trouble them , but their want of Liberty .
But Liberty 's the Salt of Life , and nothing can relish without it , or supply its Place .


My Master liv'd a luxurious , idle Life , as all the Moors do , that have not Employments .
All his Time was spent in Eating , Drinking , Praying , Sleeping , performing the Ablution * , or visiting his Wives : They were five in Number  but I ca n't describe their Beauty , never having an Opportunity to see their Faces  but their Shape and Air seem'd very inviting .
I often saw some of 'em at a distance , in the Garden , with their Faces veil'd , for none of the Slaves are allow'd to speak to  them  or even to come near enough to do it , would be an unpardonable Crime .


I began now to think , all Hopes of seeing my own Country were over with me  for I cou'd not find the Means of sending a Letter to my Father in England .
All the Consolation I had in my Misery , was , that my Master never importun'd me on the Account of my Religion .
I spent four Years in my terrible Servitude , for I always thought it so , notwithstanding my favourable Usage .
In the beginning of the fifth Year of my wretched Slavery , my Master dy'd , and his Son took Possession of his Father 's Fortune .
I began now to feel the Hopes of Freedom revive in my Soul again , for the young Moor seem'd to have some Friendship for me .
But alas !
I found , to my terrible Consternation , he was possess'd with the most hateful Passion Man can be guilty of .
He soon alter'd his Usage of me , when I let him know , I would rather suffer Death , than comply with his infamous Desires .
I can hardly mention it without Blushing .
His ill Treatment , upon that Account , plung'd me into Despair  for , to be reveng'd on me , he not only put me upon the most servile Offices , but I often suffer'd the  Bastinado * .
I believe , if I could have procur'd any Weapons , I should have cut him in pieces , and put an end to my own Anguish by a voluntary Death .


The young English Mahometan often gave me some Consolation , by mingling Tears with me  but alas !
that Tenderness was all he could give me , and that very secretly .
My Miseries increas'd upon me , and I begg'd the Youth to procure me a Dose of Opium , that I might sink into an eternal Sleep , and lose my Life and Misery together  but I could not prevail upon him .


My new Beast of a Master , about a Month after the Death of his Father , was oblig'd to take a Journey to look after the Estate that was left him .
I knew not how far he was to go , but I was inform'd , his Affairs would keep him in the Country Forty Days at least  so I resolv'd , in that Time , to make some Attempts to escape , tho ' I lost my Life .


 When he was gone , I had little Business to do , and was well us'd  for even the Moorish Servants were concern'd for my barbarous Treatment .
When they had an Opportunity , they would come to hear me play on the Flute , and always bring something to make merry with .


One Evening an old Woman came to me , before the rest of the Servants , and gave me a Letter , which I open'd , and , to my Surprize , found the following Words in English :


SIR ,


THO ' I write to you in English , I am a Moor by Birth , and Daughter to the illustrious Fontimama ( that was the Name of my old Patron . )
While he was alive , I was contented with my Condition  but since the Angel of Death has taken him from me , my Brother grows most insupportably tyrannous .
In short , I have heard your Story , and pity'd you , before I was capable of Love  but now I have seen you , tho ' in Disguise , last Night , unknown to you , or any one but the Bearer of this , I must confess myself absolutely yours , if we can join our Hands in the holy Bands of Wedlock .


 I know you 'll be surpriz'd , when I tell you , tho ' all my Friends are Followers of Mahomet , yet I am a sincere Christian in my Heart , without Baptism  and my manner of being one , I shall let you know .
Mustapha , the Name of the English Youth that lives in our House , taught me to speak your Language before I was seven Years old , by the Command of my late Father  as also to write your way * .
When I had learnt all that Mustapha cou'd teach me , my Father procur'd me many Books in the English Tongue : I read the mall  some I translated into Morisco , to divert my Father  among them were several Books of your Holy Law ( though unknown to any one ) which I perus'd at first out of Curiosity only , but found so much sound Truth , and pure Divinity , that I began to abhor the Absurdities of the Alcoran , and by degrees , I hope I am come to a State of Salvation , thro ' the Blood of your Prophet , that suffer'd on the Cross to save his Followers , that truly believe in him .
The sensual Paradise I abhor , painted by Mahomet only to beguile his voluptuous Adherents .


 I have found several Stories in your Books of the Forwardness of Moorish Women  but , believe me , dear Englishman , I hope I shall never carry any thing but virtuous Inclinations in my Heart , which ever shall be yours .


P. S. I will take an Opportunity , in the Absence of my Brother , to converse with you , for I would willingly have you owe your Sense of the Obligation to something else than bare Hopes of your Freedom , which we will concert when I see you  and , let your Condition be what it will , I hope to bring a Dowry ( I mean a worldly one ) that is lawfully my own , to keep us above Want .
Think favourably , and


Adieu , my Soul .


Imagine , dear Brother , the Pleasure that fill'd my Mind at the Reading of this Letter  but I must own they proceeded from the Hopes of my Liberty , for Love had never yet laid hold of my Heart .


In the Evening , when the Servants came about me as usual , they were amaz'd to find me so merry .
I sung several Moorish Love-Songs , that I had learnt among 'em , for their Language is very Poetical  and several English  ones , that touch'd upon my own Circumstances , which very much delighted 'em .
In short , we spent the Evening in Pleasure and Mirth .


I went to rest with a Mind far more at Ease than usual  but had not slept long , before I was awak'd with a gentle Rapping at my Cell Door .
When I open'd it , I perceiv'd the old Matron that brought me the Letter .
Come , said she ( in the Moorish Language , very softly ) put on your Cloaths , and follow me from Mahomet 's Hell , into Paradise  I 'll be your Conductor , tho ' a Christian , as well as yourself .
I dress'd myself , with a Confusion of Thought I had never felt before .
I follow'd my Conductress , without well knowing what I was about  and entred into a lower Room of a Summer-House , at the bottom of the Garden , in the Dark , where I heard the sweetest Voice I ever heard in my Life ( the Sound went quite thro ' my Soul , and set my Body in a Tremble ) bid the She-Slave make fast the Door , said the Lady , and light up Tapers .
She instantly obey'd , and shew'd me the most amiable young Creature , my Eyes ever beheld .
I stood like one chang'd into a Statue with Admiration , and I was not able to utter a Word for some time .
I kneel'd down  before her , and kiss'd her Sleeve * .
But she gently rais'd me up , with the most obliging Smile imaginable .
What , Sir , said she , must I , against the Custom of your Country , declare my Passion for you , and not have a single Word in return ?
I reply'd , the Sight of such an unexpected Angel , might well take all my Faculties away .
Come , said she , sit down , and partake of a small Repast I have prepar'd for you , and chear your Spirits with a Cup of Wine  tho ' I drink none myself ( not out of any Respect to the Prophet Mahomet , but that I never was accustom'd to it ) I know you English Gentlemen make it your common Drink .
I begg'd to be excus'd from either , neither could I indeed , for the Sight of her , fill'd my Soul with a Profusion of Delight .
[ And , dear Brother , you must love , like me , before you can guess at the soft thrilling Pleasure that ran thro ' my Blood . ]
I wo n't detain you with the tender things we said to each other .
But sure , Novels and Romances ca n't produce you a Heroe that ever was so much struck at the first Sight of his  adorable Mistress  't was then I wore the double Chains , of Love and Bondage .
In short , we exchang'd our Hearts , and gave one another Assurances of eternal Fidelity , that can never be shaken on my Part , or I believe on hers .


I must beg Leave to recover myself from this Tenderness , not altogether becoming a Man , before I can pursue the Thread of my uncomfortable Story .


Several Evenings were past thus delightfully , during the Absence of her Brother .
We had many Schemes to set us at Liberty  and at last agreed , I should have a Sufficiency from her to pay my Ransom , tho ' it shou'd amount to ten thousand Crowns  and when I had got my Liberty , she wou'd find Means to make her Escape to me .
I must own , tho ' it was a Proof of the Sincerity of her Love , I made many Scruples of receiving Money from her  but she assur'd me , she wou'd make use of none but her own .
She had prevail'd on her Father to settle a sufficient Fortune upon her , tho ' very uncustomary , that she might ever live a single Life  tho ' her only Reason was , she never wou'd join in Marriage with one contrary to her own Religion  and her Father being infinitely fond of her ( not knowing  her true Motive ) gave into her Possession secretly , the Value of Twenty Thousand Pounds , English Money , besides several rich Jewels .
The Thoughts of so much unexpected Happiness , gave another Turn to my Looks , which I could not hide  but I made the Servants and Slaves believe , the Absence of my Master occasion'd the Alteration .


A Jew was pitch'd upon to transact the Affair , who are a sort of People in that Country , us'd to all manner of Business , and of the utmost Secrecy , when Money ties up their Tongues .
This Jew was to bargain with my Master for my Freedom , as cheap as he cou'd , and to have two hundred and fifty Crowns , when the Affair was compleated ?
He knew nothing of Fatima ( that is the Name of my divine Mistress ) for the Bargain was made by the old Woman .


One Day , when I was pleasing myself with the Thoughts of my coming Happiness , my Master arriv'd , even twenty Days before he was expected .
The Moment he came in , I was order'd before him .
Here , said he , in the Arabian Tongue ( to a Moor that was with him ) is the surly Slave I told you of , he 's yours now , use him like a Dog , as he deserves !
and take him from my Sight this Moment .
 Upon the Instant , I was loaden with Chains , and by several Slaves , forc'd to follow my new Master .
I was in such a Surprise , that I had not open'd my Mouth , till we had got a good distance from the House .
I then desir'd submissively , to speak to him .
I inform'd him there was Money come from my Friends , and now in the Hands of Ben Addi the Jew , to pay for my Ransom .
He told me , he would talk with me about it when he came back from his Voyage .
I was thunderstruck at his Answer , and endeavour'd to soften him , but in vain , for we never stopt till we came on Board a Galley that lay in the Road of Tunis , and in two Hours afterwards put to Sea .


As soon as I came on Board , I was chain'd to an Oar , and if I did not do as I shou'd do , I was taught with many unmerciful Blows .
I endeavour'd to put an end to my miserable Life , with my Irons , but was prevented with another Chastisement .
The Thoughts of my dear Fatima , made me more outragious , and I was resolv'd to starve myself to Death .
I exclaim'd against Fortune , my old Master , and my new one , in the Moorish Language , in hope it might provoke the latter to put an end to my Life .
But instead of that , he came  to me , desiring I wou'd have Patience  telling me , I 'll treat with you for your Ransom now  and I swear by Mahomet , when I come back , and you pay me what I agree with you for , you shall that Moment have your Liberty .
This Promise compos'd me a little , for the Moors never falsify their Words , when they swear by their Prophet .
I begg'd his Pardon for the Rudeness of my Tongue , and promis'd to do my Duty quietly for the future .
We agreed for Five Hundred Crowns , and I proffer'd him Fifty more if he wou'd release me from my hard Labour .
He told me he cou'd not do that , because he should want one to supply my Place : He farther added , if I cou'd strike up a Bargain with any of the Sailors , and do what I could in the Room of the Person that wou'd undertake it , he wou'd freely give his Consent  but not one of the Moors would listen to the Proposal  at last , the Gunner 's Mate agreed with me for Twenty Crowns , provided I wou'd reassume my Oar when we came to any Engagement .
The Bargain being struck , my Chains were taken off , and I agreed with the Captain , my Master ( who was a Sicilian Renagado ) to eat at his Table for the other Thirty Crowns .
This wou'd not have been comply'd with , had  he been a natural Moor , for they never eat with the Christians  but Renegadoes are not so scrupulous .


We were out two Months , before we met with any Ship of Europe  but near the Coast of Alicant , we encounter'd an English Merchant-Ship , that prov'd too hard for us , disabling our Galley , and killing and wounding above Fifty of our Men  so that at last , our Captain thought fit to give over the Attempt .
He resolv'd to go back to Tunis , to refit .
But the next Day , a violent Storm took us , which , lasting eight Days , we were drove out of our Course  and when it abated , we found our selves near the Island of Corsica .
Several Renegadoes advis'd the Captain to make a Descent , and seize some of the Inhabitants , in order to better their Voyage , which he comply'd with  tho ' much to my Sorrow , to be so long absent from Tunis .


Turning a Point of Land , we discover'd a Galley of Genoa , preparing , in a great Hurry , to attack us  we endeavour'd to get away , but to no Purpose , for they came up with us , and after a desperate Engagement , took us , tho ' with great Loss on both Sides  neither do I believe we had submitted , if our Captain had not been kill'd  for , I think , I never saw a  Man behave himself with more Courage and Conduct , when he found there was no avoiding the Engagement .


' Thus , my dear Brother , I have gain'd my Freedom from the Chains of Bondage .
And sure , never any Prisoner rejoic'd less at his Liberty , than I do  and if I had not met with you , that gives me all the Joy I am capable of feeling , without my dear Fatima , I believe my Sorrows wou'd have made an end of my miserable Life .
Nay , as it is , I can never be happy without her .
We condol'd with my Brother some time , at his melancholy Relation  and I must confess , I felt so much , that my Heart prompted me to think of attempting to bring off the Object of his Desires .
When I communicated my Thoughts to my Brother , he was transported .
We were several Days , before we cou'd light upon a Project that seem'd reasonable .
At last , we determin'd to hire a Tartane , and engage about a Dozen resolute Men , who shou'd be all disguis'd in Moorish Habits .
We got a broad flat-bottom'd Boat built on purpose , something like our Ferry-Boats in England , only with higher Sides , and not so heavy .
With these , we intended to sail for Tunis , anchor  as near as we cou'd to the long Sand-Bank behind the Rocks , my Brother mention'd , where he was thrown out of the Long-Boat  then with our flat-bottom Boat , land as near the House of Fatima 's Brother , as we cou'd , and bring her away by Force .


My Brother and Governor lik'd the Design very well , and wou'd make one in it , even with the Consent of the fair Eliza , who was resolv'd her dear Clerimont shou'd partake of whatever Fortune befell us  nay , it was hardly in our Power to prevent her going along with us .
We hir'd a Vessel , and got our Boat ready , but we had much Difficulty to get Men  some of the Slaves were solicited ( I mean , those that were set at Liberty with my Brother ) but none wou'd venture near the Barbary Coast again , willingly .
At last , by great Rewards , I pickt out Seven Englishmen , and Four Genoese , that promis'd to sacrifice their Lives for us .


We embark'd with a favourable Wind , and arriv'd in the Latitude of Tunis in twelve Days  but we did not think it proper to come too near till it was dark .
When Night appear'd , we made for the Shore , and anchor'd within half a Mile of the Sand  then getting our flat-bottom'd Boat out , my Brother , my  Governor , myself , and Nine of our Men , got into it , every one arm'd with two Brace of Pistols , a Cutlass , and a short Dagger  but we were not got above half a Mile from the Ship , ere we struck on the Sands  tho ' we suffer'd no Damage , because the Sea was very calm .
But the Tide flowing , our Boat floated again in half an Hour .
When we came near the Shore , we left off Rowing , and set her forward with Poles got for that Purpose , that we might not be discover'd by the Noise of our Oars .
We soon landed at the Place my Brother purpos'd  two of our Men we left to secure the Boat , and keep her even with the Water , as the Tide ebb'd away .
We then set forward , led by my Brother .
When we came near the Place , a great Mastiff Dog open'd so loud , that he might be heard even to the City of Tunis .
But my Brother being foremost , and knowing him , call'd him by his Name  but the poor Creature 's Joy to see him , was almost as loud as his Barking .


In short , the House was alarm'd , for we cou'd see Torches waving too and fro in the Garden .
However , we encourag'd one another , and went boldly on to the Gate .
Just as we came to it , it flew open , and a young Moor flew from us like Lightning .
We did  not care to lose time in pursuing him , but press'd in , still following my Brother , who led us into the very Court-yard .
The first he met seem'd to be a Person of Distinction , by the Richness of his Dress .
He was follow'd by seven or eight Servants .
When he came up to my Brother , he made a Stop , and some Words passing between 'em , in the Moorish Tongue , the Moor immediately fir'd a Pistol at him .
We thought we had no Time to lose , but fell upon 'em like so many Furies , kill'd two or three of 'em , and immediately dispers'd the rest .
But as we were following my Brother into the House , we perceiv'd him faint , and fall Speechless upon the Ground .
While we were examining his Wound , a lovely young Creature came running to us , all in Disorder , crying in English , If you are Christians , protect me .
I did not doubt but this was the fair Fatima , by her extraordinary Beauty , and speaking English  therefore order'd my Brother , who was shot quite thro ' the Thigh , to be put in a Wheel-barrow , and immediately carry'd to the Boat .
We had put our Handkerchiefs into the Wound , and stopt the Bleeding , but he had not recover'd his Senses .
We immediately follow'd , with the amiable Christian Moor , but were  forc'd to turn about to defend ourselves against the Person that fir'd at my Brother , and his Slaves that he had once more rally'd .
He call'd to us in a prodigious Fury , but we understood him not .
He made a Stroke at my Head with his Scimitar , that wou'd have infallibly ended my Days , if I had not receiv'd it on the Hilt of my Sabre  but I ended his Fury , by shooting him dead at my Feet .


The Slaves , seeing their Master fall , ran yelling back again into the Garden .
I took up his Scimitar , and made the best of my way after our People ?
When we came to our Boat , we push'd away , as fast as ever we cou'd , for there was no Time to be lost  we cou'd easily perceive the City was alarm'd , by the firing of several Guns , and the Lights that gleam'd over the Points of the Rocks .
We imagin'd the young Turk that rush'd out of the Garden , when we were going in , had given Notice to the City , which we suppos'd to be the young English Mahometan , my Brother mention'd in his Relation .


One of the Two , we left to look after the Boat , was a Genoese Surgeon , who immediately dress'd my Brother 's Wound , as well as he cou'd in the Dark , but he cou'd not assure me , whether there was any Danger or no ,  till he came to have Light enough to examine it more circumspectly .


The Confusion we were all in , did not permit us to take Notice of a young Moor that was in the Boat with us .
I ask'd the Surgeon , and the other Genoese , that were left to look after the Boat , how the Youth came there ?
He told me , not long after we landed , he walk'd after us , to listen if he cou'd hear any thing , and perceiving this young Spark coming towards him , with a great deal of Precipitation , he thought it was his best way to secure him , for fear he might alarm the Country .
I was loth , continu'd the Surgeon , to fire upon him , not knowing but there might be People near us , therefore resolv'd to engage him with my Cutlass  but as I was going to assault him , he fell upon his Knees , and spoke in such a beseeching Accent ( tho ' I did not understand a Word of his Discourse ) that I cou'd not have the Heart to hurt him  therefore secur'd him in the Boat , and in the Hurly-burly quite forgot him  for , I think , his seeming Innocency , and his Tears , which have never ceas'd since he has been with us , wou'd have prevail'd upon me to have set him at Liberty .


 I spoke to him in Lingua Franca * , and Italian , all the Tongues I am Master of , but he did not understand me .


All this time my Brother lay Senseless , and his Condition almost brought me to Despair  but the Surgeon comforted me , by telling us , as soon as we came on Board , he had Cordials that wou'd restore him , for he assur'd me he was not dead .
I comforted the Fair Fatima ( as I thought her to be ) as well as I could  but judge my Surprize , when she gave me such Answers , that assur'd me she was not her we had ventur'd our Lives for : The Knowledge of this , almost made me lose my Senses .
I rav'd , and tore my Hair , and wou'd have thrown myself into the Sea , in order to swim back to the Shore , and recover her , or lose my Life : But it cou'd not be  for just as we got on Board our Vessel , we perceiv'd a Moorish Galley coming out of the Port  we cut our Anchor , and made all the Sail we cou'd to get from 'em  and , as if Heaven took our Parts , a brisk Gale arose ,  that was fair for our Purpose , so that when the Morning dawn'd , we lost Sight of her .


In the mean time , my Brother came to his Senses  but when he learn'd that we had fail'd of our Purpose , he swoon'd again , and every body thought he wou'd have expir'd  it was a full Hour before he open'd his Eyes , but then utter'd such Complaints , as melted us into Pity , that understood him .
The Surgeon , my Governor , and I , were all standing about him , persuading him to be dress'd  but he utterly refus'd it : No , said he , since my dear Fatima is lost for ever , 't is in vain to think of persuading me to live .
Immediately after this , we were surpris'd to see the young Moor rush into the Cabbin , and looking stedfastly on my Brother , give a great Shriek , and fall senseless at my Feet .
My Brother , turning his heavy Eyes that way , cry'd out , Oh Heavens !
what do I see ?
Why wou'd you use me thus cruelly ?
We soon understood , by his Transports , that the disguis'd Youth was his lovely Fatima .


Our Joys were now as extravagant as our Sorrows were before .
She soon came to herself , and running to the Bed where my Brother lay , fainted away again .
No Words , I am sure , cou'd have the Force to discover so  sincere a Passion  and we all wept for Joy , to see such Tenderness .
It was some time before their Transports had Leisure to mind those about 'em  and it wou'd have continu'd longer , if the Surgeon had not let us know , it might endanger my Brother 's Life .
Therefore I prevail'd upon her to withdraw , while his Wound was dress'd .
I then went to make my Compliments to the other Lady , who was still upon Deck in the utmost Confusion  for I must own , the Disappointment we suppos'd she had occasion'd , made me entirely neglect her .
I soon made her easy , and let her into some Part of our Story  and began to inquire , what strange Fortune had brought her to those Circumstances we found her in .
She related to us her short Story , as follows :


Gentlemen , I am Daughter to an English Merchant , that has resided upwards of Ten Years at Leghorn .
My Father had contracted me to one of his Countrymen that liv'd at Naples : He came to Leghorn to see me , we lik'd each other , and were marry'd .
My Husband being oblig'd to go to Venice by Land , I was embark'd in a Felucca for Naples  but a Storm came upon us , that drove us from  our Course .
We were taken by a Corsair of Tunis , where I was sold to a young Moor , who intended me for his Seraglio .
But I was resolv'd sooner to suffer Death , than yield to his Embraces .
Last Night , he was resolv'd to force me , if I wou'd not comply willingly to his base Desires , and was going to execute his horrible Purpose , the Moment you enter'd the Garden  but the Cries of his Slaves alarming him , he ran to his Arms , and left me .
I hearing the English Tongue spoke among you , hop'd you might be Christians disguis'd ( as it prov'd ) therefore resolv'd to put myself in your Hands , not knowing any thing of the Mistake , which Heaven has , I hope , brought to a joyful End .
I shall ever acknowledge the Blessing I have receiv'd from you  and I am assur'd , both my Father and Husband will return you suitable Thanks for redeeming me from Infamy and Slavery  and if you think fit to put my Ransom at Ten Thousand Crowns , I 'll engage it shall be paid , either at Leghorn , or Naples .


I let her know we were Gentlemen , above such mercenary Ends  and I shou'd think the Obligation sufficiently paid , by sending her to her Father , or Husband , which she thought  fit , when we arriv'd at Genoa .
I might have known indeed , reply'd the Lady , by your Countenances and Actions , you are not of the vulgar Strain  however , I hope you 'll be so good to acquaint me who are my Preservers , that I may ever remember you in my Prayers , and wish you eternal Felicity in this World , and the next .
I let her know , I wou'd take an Opportunity to satisfy her , when my Brother was out of Danger .
His Hurt mended every Hour , and before we arriv'd at Genoa , he cou'd , with the help of a Cane , walk upon Deck in calm Weather .
As we set out secretly from thence , we took care to be as secret in our returning back .


I rewarded our Men above their Expectation , tho ' not more than I thought they deserv'd  for it must be own'd , our Undertaking was very hazardous , and the Success was far beyond , even my Hopes , neither had we any one that receiv'd the least Hurt , but my Brother .
When I shew'd him the Scimitar of the Moor I had slain , he soon knew it to be that of his barbarous Master 's , as he call'd him  and the fair Fatima cou'd not hear the Death of her cruel Brother ( tho ' born of different Mothers ) without shedding Tears , which only shew'd the Excellency of her Nature   for sure , she had Reason enough to wish his Death .


She told us , when she heard he had sold my Brother to the Captain of the Corsair , it gave her an infinite Satisfaction , for she knew those sort of Persons understood the Value of Money so well , they wou'd be easily prevail'd upon to part with any thing , for that shining Dross .
I sent that very Night ( said Fatima , relating her Story ) to the Jew , an Account of what had befell the Slave he was to redeem , with a strict Charge to finish the Affair the next Day .
The next Morning , as I was sitting alone , with all my Thoughts employ'd about my Love , and casting about my Escape , for I was assur'd of my dear Vaughan 's Freedom , my old Slave interrupted my Meditations , with the fatal News of his being carry'd away the Night before .
The Terrors I felt , took away my Senses , and I continu'd several Hours in a Swoon .
When I reviv'd , my Tears flow'd incessantly , and my faithful Slave , with all her Good-nature , cou'd not give me any Consolation .
It was two Days before I cou'd be prevail'd upon to take any Nourishment .
But the Jew inform'd my old Slave , that the Corsair did not intend to make more than a Four Months Voyage  therefore  having some faint Hopes of seeing my Love again , I resolv'd to live till the Time was expir'd .


During that tedious Time , my Life was made more uneasy , by the barbarous Treatment of my Brother , who was resolv'd to wed me to one of his Acquaintance , that , as he often said , he might get rid of one he hated .
He brought him to see me , though against the Custom of the Moors , and I had the Ill-fortune to please him too well .
I need not tell you , that Brothers , among the Turks and Moors , have an absolute Command over their Sisters , and the Wives of their deceas'd Father .
Therefore the Day was fix'd for our Nuptials , which was to have been three Days after I had made my Escape .
After that barbarous Decree , my Brother gave me more Liberty than usual  therefore I had an Opportunity of conveying a Turkish Habit into the little Summer-House , where I had often convers'd with the Charmer of my Soul , the Key of which I had kept ever since the Death of my Father .
By degrees , I carry'd all my Gold and Jewels there  and that very Night you came to relieve me , was the Night I had fix'd upon for my Escape , ( first giving my old faithful Slave her Liberty , with a Sum  of Money , to make her meanly happy for the rest of her Life , even with my Brother 's Consent . )
I had but just dress'd myself , and secur'd my little Fortune , when I was alarm'd with a confus'd Noise of People in the Garden , and imagining they were coming to seize me , rush'd out of the Gate , and flew , as fast as my weak Limbs wou'd permit me  yet , in the Terrors of my Apprehensions , I knew not where I was going .
I must own , I was very much frighted at meeting a Stranger , yet I thought it was better than falling into the Hands of any of the People of Tunis .
I soon knew you were upon some clandestine Design  tho ' every Body speaking Italian , I cou'd not understand what was spoke  and the Thoughts of what Fortune might attend me , gave me many terrible and uneasy Apprehensions .


The Appearance of a wounded Person , and the Sight of a Moorish Lady ( as I took her to be , you brought along with you ) soon convinc'd me you had succeeded in your Design .
I did intend to discover myself to her , hoping she wou'd give me her Protection .
I spoke to her in the Arabian Language , but was surpriz'd to find I was not understood .
And immediately after , perceiving the Discontent  that spread itself over all your Faces , I cou'd not help endeavouring to find it out  imagining I heard English spoke among you , doubled my Curiosity .
I need not tell you my Surprize , when I heard the Voice of my dear Vaughan repeat my Name , whose lov'd Accents were ever in my Ears .
You saw the violent Working of my Soul , and brought me from Death to Life , a Life of Joy and Transport .


The unlook'd - for Happiness of these four Lovers , made me once more think of my own uncertain Fate , and of my dear Isabella , who was never from my Thoughts .


My Uncle 's Intention , at first , was , that I shou'd make the whole Tour of Italy  but the unfortunate End of my dear Father , was the Cause of his desiring my immediate Return , as he mention'd in my last Letter  and I ca n't but own , maugre my Curiosity , which was very prevalent , I was pleas'd to think I shou'd see my dear Isabella , before the tedious Time prefix'd for my Return .


Finding no Vessel ready to carry us to Marseilles , where we had agreed to go by Sea , we embark'd for Leghorn , and the rather , that we might return the Lady we had brought  from Tunis , safe among her Friends .
We embark'd on Board a Felucca , but had the Mortification to find the young Nobleman in the Vessel , bound for Leghorn ( the Relation of my Governor 's , mention'd before . )
Our Uneasiness was the more on the Account of the Fair Eliza , who never durst appear upon Deck , notwithstanding her Disguise , for fear of being known by him  neither wou'd my Governor once come in his Sight .
And , to add to my Misfortune , I was oblig'd to share Cabbins with him , or lie upon Deck .


During our short Voyage , he seem'd good-natur'd , to a Degree  but was so officiously Talkative and Troublesome , he was hardly to be bore , ever plaguing me with Stories of his successful Amours .


I was ( said he ) desperately in Love with a Lady at Genoa , who , suspecting I had a Passion for another Woman , whom , I must own , I had an Affair with when first I arriv'd , wou'd not let me alone before I had wrote her a Letter , to convince her of my Coolness .
But not understanding the Italian Language well enough to write my self , I was oblig'd to employ a Countryman of ours to write it for me , which I transcrib'd  and by the Consequence that follow'd ( for I  shou'd have been murder'd , if I had staid any longer at Genoa ) I believe I had not fair Play from my Friend , in the Translation .
I know you are a Master of that Language , and I shou'd take it for a singular Favour , if you wou'd once more render it into English , that I may be a better Judge of my Countryman 's Sincerity .
I must own , I took it from him to translate , that I might be rid of his Company for some time .
The Contents of this fine Letter were as follows :


MADAM ,


I OWN I have receiv'd Proofs of your Passion  but what then ?
Do you think a young English Traveller can he confin'd to one Woman ?
No , no more than he can he satisfy'd with viewing one Country .
I find myself like the Bee , willing to taste the Sweets of every Flower .
And as I intend to visit the most celebrated Cities of Europe , I design to have a Mistress at every Place I come to , if it he only to learn the Difference of the various Race of Females .
I own , I lik'd you the best of any Woman I ever saw , till I found one that pleas'd my Fancy better  and now I despise you , as much as ever I lov'd you .
Make yourself happy with the first Lover that addresses you , and  never think of One that has forgot you long ago , till the Writing of this Letter .
Time hung heavy upon my Hands  and another Reason was , I have so much Compassion for you , that I wou'd not have you think I 'll ever wear your Chains again  therefore the troublesome Fetters may serve some other Fool  for none but Fools wou'd always sacrifice their Incense to one Idol , where there are so many amiable Divinities , to draw our Devotions one from another .
Farewell !
and he happy , if you can , without me  for I certainly am , and will he happy , without ever being


Yours , c..


The Sense of this Letter , gave me a more despicable Opinion of the Fool that wrote it  and I must own , the Trouble I was forc'd to endure , in having his impertinent Company , gave me very much Uneasiness  for , during our Voyage , I was oblig'd to appear as a Stranger to my Brother , my Governor , and the Ladies , for fear he shou'd come to know 'em .
But our Arrival at Leghorn , after a Voyage of Five Days , gave me some Repose  for as soon as he landed , he took a Post-Chaise for Florence , and rid us of his most troublesome Company : Tho ' he return'd  in a Week , and went back in the same Vessel for Genoa again .
I must own , Foreigners may justly have a Contempt for our Nation , when too many that travel , have the same Sentiments with this young Impertinent .


As soon as we landed , we conducted the Lady to her Father 's House , where we found the whole Family in Mourning .
We did not immediately discover her to him , but pretended our Business with him , was only to recommend us to a House , where we might reside , during our Stay in Leghorn .
He told us , if we cou'd be contented with a melancholy Family , we might make use of his House , as if it were our own .
We thank'd him for the Favour , and , by degrees , got out of him the Reason of his Mourning .
My Brother , being a Man of some Mirth , told him , he believ'd , by the Art of Divination , he cou'd , in less than Five Minutes , inform him whether he shou'd ever see his Daughter again , and the Day and the Hour of their Meeting : But the Merchant express'd some Uneasiness , as imagining my Brother made a Jest of his Sorrows : Nay , Sir ( said my Governor ) do n't look grave at what the Gentleman proposes to you , for I can assure you he  has an admirable Knowledge that way .
What my Governor said , seem'd only to add to his Confusion .
Pray , Sir , said I , tell me one Thing , is your Son-in-law here , or at Naples ?
Gentlemen ( return'd our kind Host ) I must own , you look like such , pray do n't laugh at the Misfortunes of a mourning Family , whose Distress is never to be forgot  my unfortunate Son-in-law is now in the House with me , but such a Picture of Unhappiness , that can not be look'd on without Compassion  and I fear his Death , in a very short time , will add to our Mourning .
I began to think , the unexpected Sight of the Lady might be as prejudicial as their Sorrow  therefore told him , in a few Words , by degrees , the Adventure of the Lady , and fetch'd her out of a Room where she was conceal'd , and had heard all , to throw herself at his Feet .
When she appear'd , he stood fix'd in Astonishment for some time  but when he was convinc'd it was his Daughter that knelt before him , the Tears of Joy gush'd out so fast , that stopt the Utterance of his Tongue .
When his extravagant Transport was a little abated , he went up to his Son-in-law , and after staying some time , brought him down with him  he appear'd the very Shadow of a Human  Form  and notwithstanding he had been prepar'd for the tender Interview , as soon as he enter'd the Room , he sunk , speechless , into his Father-in-law 's Arms .
We thought it proper to retire into another Apartment , during this dumb Scene .
It was some time before they came to us , but the Redundancy of their Gratitude had almost overwhelm'd us .
We intended to stay but three or four Days at Leghorn *  but we were press'd so  obligingly , that a whole Month pass'd away before they wou'd hear of our moving  and then with the utmost Reluctance .


We visited Florence * , and saw all the Rarities of the Great Duke 's Repository , which  is certainly one of the noblest Entertainments in the World , at least it appear'd so to me , and my Company .


When we came back to Leghorn , in order to prepare for our Journey , a violent Fever attack'd me , that confin'd me to my Apartment for near two Months , which I can attribute to nothing more , than the Anxiety of my Mind  and as most Fevers are attended with Deliriums , I was for ever crying out of the Infidelity of my dear Isabella  even when my Illness was gone , the Lowness of my Spirits gave Force to my Imagination , and those uneasy Thoughts retarded my Strength .


One Day , taking the Air upon the Water , the Master of the Felucca that brought us from Genoa , passing by in a Boat , told me , he believ'd I had left a Packet of Letters in my Cabbin , which he wou'd bring me , if I wou'd give him a Direction .
I did not remember I had lost any thing  however , I  desired he would send 'em where I lodg'd the next Day .
When he brought 'em , they were seal'd up .
Sir , said the Italian , I found they were in a Language I did not understand , and , not knowing the Consequence , I seal'd 'em up , and left 'em at my Lodgings , directed for you , or the young Gentleman that shar'd my Cabbin with you , imagining one of you wou'd search after 'em , before I return'd from Genoa , where I have been twice since I brought you to Leghorn  and if I had not met you accidentally Yesterday , I shou'd have committed them to the Flames , before I went back to Genoa .
I thank'd him for his Civility  and opening the Packet , found they were directed for my English Companion , I had in the Felucca , against my Will .
I laid 'em among my other Papers , not having any Curiosity to peruse 'em , with an Intention to give 'em the right Owner , if ever I should have the Misfortune to see him again .
But when I told my Governor and Brother , at Dinner , of my Packet , they seem'd willing to know the Contents , that they might have a farther Occasion to despise the Gentleman , or at least to make themselves merry with his fine Epistles .
After Dinner , we went to my Apartment , and  taking out the Packet , I gave it my Brother to read .
The first was as follows :


DEAR SIR ,


IT is with infinite Joy I am inform'd of your Health  and , to communicate some of that Pleasure to you , I must acquaint you , my Father is gone to visit the Residence of his Ancestors  that is , in plain English , I have bury'd him sumptuously .
His Death , you know , has made me Master of 12000 l. a Year , and the Liberty of pursuing my Pleasures without Restraint .
But I think it 's a great Pity the Japan Law , concerning Children , is not of Force in England * .
The old Put of a Pere , forsooth !
in his Life-time , talk'd to me of Virtue , Morality   and I know not what Stuff .
Dinning ever in my Ears , that Nobility , without Virtue , was like an eminent barren Mountain , seen , and slighted .


I have , once more , made my Addresses to Isabella , with all the glaring Equipage of Nobility and Fortune , but she 's as cold as a Cucumber .
But I have found out the Reason of that Coldness .
It seems she 's damnably in Love with that young learned Blockhead , Vaughan .
I 'll tell you how I came by that Knowledge .
In one of my Visits at her Mother 's House , I was told the young Lady had been some time in the Garden  I made no Scruple of following her .
But , you must think , I was something surpriz'd to find her asleep in a retir'd Arbor , with a Letter in her Hand , from that wretched Coxcomb you and I have so often laugh'd at , who shou'd have been well whip'd by me for his Impudence , before he went from England , but that I thought it was beneath me to chastise a School-Boy .


I took away the Letter , without any manner of Ceremony , and shew'd it to her Mother and Aunt  but was very much surpriz'd , to find they had no Resentment against Vaughan , nor the Girl , for such a Discovery  tho ' I found it was new to them .
They both coolty told me ,  Isabella 's Inclinations shou'd never be forc'd  yet if I cou'd gain her Consent , theirs would soon follow .
In short , there 's nothing to be done with the young Girl  and I own , I think I [ ... ] ou'd like her , even for a Year or two .
Now I have learnt , by Piecemeal , that Vaughan in [ ... ] ends to travel the Way you design .
If you meet with him , which is very likely , ca n't you recommend him to some Italian Man of Business ?
Or rather , find some Method , by Letter , to make Isabella believe , he has got him a Mistress in his Travels .
Ay , that will do , in my Opinion , better .
Then her Resentment may bring her to my Arms  for , upon second Thoughts , [ ... ] t is not quite generous to take away his Life , since , now I remember , he once was in some Danger in saving mine .
Besides , if I could accomplish my Affair with Isabella , I do n't know but he might be Fool enough , to hang himself , and then my Revenge will be compleat .
If you can think of some Way , you will very much oblige me .
I shall find no Difficulty in deceiving Isabella .
However , the sooner the better , for , [ ... ] n short , if I ca n't find some Method speedily , I must ev ` en ravish her , I think , and make an End of the Business that way .
Our Friend , Dick , is dead of the Surgeon  but it is his own Fault  I told him the Danger he was in ,  if he convers'd longer with the Lady you wot of in German-Street , without consulting a Surgeon  but he slighted my Advice , and therefore he has answer'd that Folly with his Life .
My dear Friend , I wish you sounder Mistresses than Dick 's , and hope you will remember


Yours , for ever .


The Reading of this Letter , gave me the most horrid Apprehensions my Soul ever knew .
I call'd to mind the Letter I translated from the Italian , at the Desire of that Wretch , not doubting , in the least , but that was the Engine , made to destroy all my Peace .
In the first Transports of my Fury , I said , and did the most extravagant things imaginable , to the Surprize of all the Company .


The first Letter was directed to Paris , and the second to Genoa .
My Brother casting his Eyes cursorily over the second , I perceiv'd his Colour change , seeming very unwilling to read it .
I snatch'd it out of his Hands , and , to my Surprize and Terror , found I was utterly destroy'd .


 My dear Friend ,


I Receiv'd your last Packet with more Transports , than I ever felt from the sweet consenting Embraces of a Mistress .
I think your Policy in over-reaching that contemptible Coxcomb , Vaughan , exceeds even Machiavel , for Cunning  and I do n't doubt but breathing the same Air , and being in the same Climate where that Prince of Politicians was born , inspir'd you .
But I must tell you , how Fortune assisted me in carrying on the Deceit .


You know the Letter Vaughan translated , by your Instigation , was not seal'd .
I , by good Fortune , was at Isabella 's Mother 's , where I met the Uncle of Vaughan : I took an Occasion to borrow his Seal , and with it seal'd that Letter intended for Isabella  their Arms being the same , you may be assur'd , it help'd my Design .


Two Days after this , I got trusty Roger , my cunning Dog of a Footman , to put on a Sailor 's Dress , and deliver the Letter to Isabella , when I was present .
I had order'd him to tell her , he receiv'd that Letter , with many others , from some English Gentlemen at Genoa .
The young Lady blush'd , and trembled , when she receiv'd it , viewing the Seal very circumspectly  but the Hand of the Direction  not being the same that was expected from the Seal , she seem'd to be in the utmost Consternation : However , there was no one to make Observations upon her Looks , but myself , her Mother and Aunt being gone , some Moments before Roger came with the Letter , to dress themselves , in order to make a Visit , and Isabella was to go along with them .
The young Lady went into the Garden , in order to read the dear Epistle with more Freedom , and staid so long there , that the Mother , with the Aunt , came down drest , order'd the Coach to the Door , and inquir'd after her .
I told 'em , a Sailor had brought the young Lady a Letter from Genoa , from one , I suppos'd , she was very glad to hear from , for she chang'd Countenance several times , then went to the Garden to enjoy the Contents alone .
The Mother and Aunt seem'd very much disturb'd at my short Story , and follow'd Isabella into the Garden , without giving me one Word in return .
Some Moments after , I was a little surpriz'd , I own , to see the Aunt return in great Haste , calling to the Servants for Water .
The House was all in an Uproar , and I soon understood Isabella was in a fainting Fit .
This gave me some little Uneasiness , to think she lov'd another so well  yet I bury'd it soon , knowing violent Passions never last long .


 Isabella was brought in by the Servants , to [ ... ] Appearance , void of Life , with the Mother and Aunt weeping over her .
They put her to Bed  but as fast as she recover'd out of one fainting Fit , she fell into another .
In short , the Family was in so much Distraction , for several Hours , that I thought it proper to retire without Ceremony , feeding on the Hopes this Disturbance would produce .


I sent , the next Morning , to inquire of Isabella 's Health , and was inform'd , she was in a violent Fever .
The Messenger brought me a Note from the Aunt , that told me , her Niece was often troubled with a bad Digestion , and those fainting Fits were too common with her , yet that was the worst she ever had , c. I own , my dear Ned , I cou'd not help smiling at the Note  but however , I found by it , they intended the true Reason should be a Secret , and , you know , it was my Interest , not to divulge it .


In about ten Days after this Affair , I ventur'd to make 'em another Visit , where I found Isabella so much alter'd , that , in reality , I pity'd her .
She look'd as if she was going to her Grave  but , notwithstanding her Paleness , her Charms were as powerful as ever  and I own , I love her more and more , every time I see her .
 One thing gave me infinite Pleasure at this Visit  I observ'd her Looks were not so full of Scorn , when she cast her Eyes upon me .
I did not mention my Passion for several Days  but the Respect I treated her with , and the Tenderness I express'd for her melancholy Indisposition , seem'd grateful to all the Family .


When I once more mention'd my Love , Isabella only sigh'd , and shed Tears , but did not rally me , as she was wont to do .
In short , I follow'd my Business so close , that the whole Family gave me their Consent , and Isabella now treats me as her future Husband .
She has freely declar'd to me , the Passion she once had for Vaughan  and only begs our Nuptials may be delay'd , till she can wholly give me that Heart , the other so little deserv'd .
This Declaration is no Secret , tho ' the Cause is not known out of the Family .
Vaughan 's Uncle has been very much busy'd about some Concerns of his Brother 's Family , who is lately dead , together with his Wife , and a Son of hers .
And it is whisper'd in the Neighbourhood , as if some poisoning Work had been done in the Family by the Wife , tho ' she has suffer'd herself .
I only wish the Knowledge of it , when it reaches your raw Traveller , may prove a Mittimus to convey him into another World , for fear our Plot  should be discover'd .
However , when I have wedded Isabella , I shall take care to put Bounds to her Liberty , I mean , if my Love should continue after Wedlock , which I begin to think no impossible thing .


Vaughan 's Uncle , this Morning , came to pay his Respects to the Family , as usual  but the Mother , the Aunt , and Isabella , order'd the Servants to say they were abroad .
The old Gentleman return'd home , something chagrin'd .
I suppose his Visits there , for the future , will be thought only a Trouble to the Family .
My dear Ned , I sha n't write to you any more , till our Nuptials are over , which I hope will be in two Months at the farthest .
However , let me know where you intend to be , that I may be sure where my Epistle may find you .
And I wish thee as happy with thy Italian Dames , as I hope to be in two Months in the Embraces of the charming Isabella : And , next to her , be assur'd to share the Heart of


Your obliged Friend and Servant , c. c. c..


At the Reading of this villainous Letter , all my Fortitude , Resolution , and Philosophy left me  my disorder'd Soul whisper'd  my Heart to put an end to my wretched Being , which I had certainly done , if the Thoughts of Revenge had not bid me live .
I immediately gave Orders for my Journey to England , but my impatient Fancy outrun all Expedition  Yet the Tumult of my Spirits , threw me into another violent Fever  and tho ' every one thought it would be certain Death , to remove from the Place where I was , yet I order'd a Litter  and the next Morning pursu'd my Journey , attended with my Governor , Eliza , my Brother , the fair Fatima , and Servants .


Eliza , in our first Day 's Journey , was taken with a sudden Indisposition , that prevented our going any further that Day .
We were far from any Town , and it was with great Difficulty we found Accommodation at a little Village , a Mile from the main Road .
I was agitated with so much impatient Passion , that my Friends found it a hard Task to persuade me from leaving them behind , and pursuing my Journey with my two Servants .
The next Morning , Eliza was much better  but , to my great Mortification , I was so weak , that I had not Strength enough to rise without Help  yet , notwithstanding my Condition , I order'd my Litter to be got  ready , but was inform'd , the Men went away with it back to Leghorn , early in the Morning .
I lost all Patience at the Disappointment , and fell out with my Friends  not doubting ( tho ' they deny'd it ) but it was their Contrivance , to prevent my Journey during my Weakness .
In short , my Illness redoubled its Attacks , and took such strong Possession of the Outworks , that it was the Opinion of every one about me , my Life could not hold out much longer .
My Senses left me , and a strong Distraction seiz'd my Soul .
But even in those Fits of Madness , Revenge was uppermost  for they inform'd me , when I came out of those Possessions , all my Ravings were upon Isabella and my Rival , threatning Death to Both .


The Place where we were , had but little Accommodation for us , even in Health , and much less for a Person in my Condition  therefore my Brother , unknown to me , apply'd himself to a neighbouring Gentleman , who freely granted us the Use of his House .
I was remov'd there  and having the Advice of the best Physicians from Florence , my Distemper , by degrees , left me  but I still continu'd in such a weak Condition , it was impossible for me to remove , so soon as my  Impatience wou'd have me .
I was well assur'd , the Time affix'd for the fatal Nuptials was elaps'd , therefore my Heart began to feel some Ease in the Resolution I had taken in the Revenging the Loss of my Love , by the Death of my hated Rival , or falling a Victim to my Misfortunes .
This Hope gave me room to gather some Strength , which in a few Days increas'd so much , that I cou'd walk in the Garden , which was one of those noble ones in Italy , that surpass even many Princes in other Countries .
But what was my Surprize !
when , in a neighbouring Arbor , I heard the Voice of that Wretch , singing an Italian Air , who by his damnable Wiles , had prevail'd upon me to translate that Letter , which was the sole Cause of all my Misfortunes .
My Fury gave me Strength enough to fly to the Place from whence I heard his detested Voice .
As soon as I came near him , I could not help crying out , with the utmost Transport of Fury , Villain !
thy last Moment is approaching !
I never once consider'd I had no other Weapon than a Cane , to assist me in walking , which I thrust against his Breast with such Violence , that he fell backwards in a mighty Fright .
However , finding it was no offensive Weapon I  had in my Hand , he drew his Sword , and made several Thrusts at me , which I parry'd with my Cane for some time  and at last , with much Difficulty , disarm'd him .
But the Violence of the Exercise being too strong for my weak Condition , I fell to the Ground almost Senseless .
The Wretch seeing that , recover'd his Sword , and , with all his Strength , stabb'd me thro ' the Shoulder  the Sword enter'd so far into the Earth , that he made several fruitless Attempts to pull it out again .
I had just Sense enough to know what he was doing , without any Power to prevent him .
But my Brother Jonathan coming upon the Instant , put an end to his vain Efforts , by laying him breathless at my Feet , with a Blow of his Sword .
He then came to my Assistance , leaving the Wretch weltring in his Blood .
The Family , and my Friends , were soon alarm'd  tho ` no one cou'd come to the true Knowledge of this Quarrel for the present  but the Appearances seem'd strong against the other , because I had no Sword .
However , the Gentleman of the House took care of him , as having some small Acquaintance with him .
He inform'd us , that the villainous Wretch waited for a Servant that he had sent to Leghorn for a  Packet of Letters , which I too well knew were those the Captain deliver'd to me .
When my Wound was drest , I inform'd the Gentleman of all that befell me .
When he heard his barbarous Policy to undo my Peace , he exclaim'd against his Conduct , vowing never to give him any Countenance for the future .


My Wound was not dangerous , tho ' the Loss of Blood contributed to my Weakness  but the Wretch that gave it me , seem'd in a very dangerous Condition  for the Blow my Brother gave him , had fractur'd his Skull , and the Violence of the Pain often took away his Senses .
Yet , in his Intervals , he talk'd of nothing but Revenge , declaring to every one that came to visit him , my Brother 's Blood should make Atonement for the Torment he suffer'd .
As for myself , he had sufficiently punish'd me , in being the Instrument of robbing me of all that cou'd make me happy in this World .
I must own , I was in some Fear for my Brother  therefore was for leaving the Place as soon as possible .
But the Italian Gentleman , in whose House we were , advis'd us not to pursue our Journey by Land .
He laid before me the many Difficulties we shou'd meet with , and convinc'd me we  shou'd make our Voyage sooner , by imbarking for Marseilles , and travelling thro France by Land .
The Alps , at this Time of the Year , he assur'd us , were cover'd with Snow , and many had perish'd by mistaking the Road .
The Consideration of the two Ladies , prevail'd upon me more than any Danger I fear'd  therefore we were determin'd , as soon as possible , to return to Leghorn , and procure a Vessel to carry us to Marseilles .


My Wound was so well heal'd in six Days after I receiv'd it , that the seventh , I resolv'd with my Companions to venture on Horseback , in order to return to Leghorn .
But when the Time came , my Brother was not to be found .
We made all the Enquiry imaginable to no purpose  but what gave me some small Satisfaction , was , that Fatima assur'd me he was gone to Leghorn , to provide a Vessel for our Voyage .
I own , I much wonder'd he had not inform'd us of his Design  but as the fair Fatima seem'd very easy , I thought I had no Reason to be otherwise .


We took Leave of our friendly Italian  tho ' , I must own , I parted with some Regret from that infamous Wretch , who was the Cause of all my Sorrows , without giving him the Punishment due to his Crimes .
However ,  I did not doubt but the Justiee of Heaven would overtake him  and I found some Consolation in overcoming my just Resentment .


We pursu'd our Journey for Leghorn , where we arriv'd the next Day , without any Accident  but , upon Enquiry after my Brother , we cou'd learn no News of him .
I began then to be very uneasy  and observ'd a Gloom on Fatima 's Countenance , notwithstanding all her Endeavours to conceal it .
Several Days past in this Uncertainty , till Fatima 's Fears began to be too powerful for her Prudence  yet all my Persuasions cou'd not get the Reason of my Brother 's Absence from her , tho ' she confess'd to me , she knew it .
My Governor , Eliza , and I , had many Conjectures , but none could give us any Consolation , especially since we observ'd Fatima began to be inconsolable , and confess'd , his Stay was beyond the Time prefix'd .
We press'd her on all sides , to declare to us the Reason of his unexpected Absence , with this Persuasion , that it was possible the Knowledge of it might be of Service to him  but all our Intreaties prov'd ineffectual : Yet she declar'd , if we had no Tidings of him in two Day , she wou'd confess to us the Secret .


 We went to Bed , full of Terrors , and for my own Part , Sleep was a Stranger to me .
But , in the middle of the Night , I was alarm'd with a violent Knocking at the Gate  the Servants of the House not rising at the second Alarm , I slipt on my Gown , and with my Sword in my Hand , went down into the Court-Yard  but guess my Surprize , when , asking , Who was there ?
I heard my Brother 's Voice .
I open'd the Gate , and my Surprize was doubled , when I found my Brother on Horseback , at the Head of a Litter , with a sick Man in it , attended by four Servants : But , when I found the Person within it , was the Wretch that had wounded me in the Garden of the Italian Gentleman , my Wonder ty'd up my Tongue , and my Company ( who by this time were come to us ) stood like so many Statues struck with the Sight of Medusa 's Head .
At last , observing my Brother 's Diligence in helping him out of the Litter , in a seeming Trance , we all , involuntarily , gave him our Assistance , without knowing what we were doing .
We put him into Bed , and then follow'd my Brother out of the Room ( leaving his Servants and a Surgeon with him , that came in their Company )  without speaking a Word , so full of Wonder , that our Tongues seem'd of no Use to us .


When we came down into the Hall , my Brother tenderly embrac'd us all  tho ' his dear Fatima could not speak , yet the Tears of Joy that fell from her fair Eyes , convinc'd us all of the tender Love she bore him .
When we were seated some time , gazing silently at one another , my Brother began his Story as follows .


My dear Brother , I must first beg your Pardon for concealing from you what I am going to relate  but my Reason for it was , that you wou'd not have given your Consent to what I design'd to do .
Two Days before we intended to leave our friendly Italian , I receiv'd that Letter , ( which he gave me to read , )


To JONATHAN VAUGHAN , Esq


YOU may , perhaps , imagine , I shall forget the Injury I suffer'd from you .
But be assur'd , the Moment I have Strength enough to draw a Sword , I shall expect Satisfaction for your cowardly Treatment .
In a Day or two  more , I shall be able to punish you for the Wound you gave me , if that Person can have Courage enough to look a Man in the Face , who would stab him behind his Back .
The Gentleman of the House , my Friend , being impos'd upon by your false Legend , has withdrawn his Kindness from me  but I hope , by your Punishment , to let him see how you have slander'd basely , one that can not forget the Injury , without washing off your Crime with your Blood .
All I fear is , that this Notice will make you fly from my just Resentment  but no Place on Earth shall hide you from my Chastisement .
My Rage shou'd correct your Brother for his Ill-manners , in reading those Letters , you were all well assur'd belong'd to me .
But I know his Curiosity carry'd his Punishment along with it .
Yet when I have , with my Sword , let out your Treachery and Baseness , I may think it worth my while to scourge him for that Folly , that can have no other Excuse than the childish Curiosity of a Boy , who left his School before he had been well whipp'd for his Impertinence .


P. S .
The third Morning after receiving this , between the Hours of Five and Eight , I shall expect to see you alone , with a single Sword ,  in the Meadow by the River * Arno , a Furlong from the House .


This Letter was given me ( continu'd my Brother ) by a Servant , who told me he was order'd by his Master , to wait the next Morning in the same Place , for an Answer .
The Letter , I own , gave me much Concern .
I advis'd with my dear Fatima , and with much Difficulty , got her Consent to send an Answer , in which I promis'd to meet him at the Time and Place appointed .
I assur'd Fatima I would be with you in eight Days , at the farthest  and for that time , she gave me her Word to keep the Affair a Secret from every one .
The Morning I parted from her , was with the utmost Sorrow .
She took her Leave of me , as if she was never to see me more .
I retir'd , with my Servant , full of Grief , to the little Cottage upon the Skirts of the Mead ,  where I gave myself up to examine my Conscience , and endeavour'd to make my Peace with Heaven  tho ' I own to you , I thought I was going to do a Deed , not in the least acceptable to God .
As soon as the appointed Morning came , I arose , giving my Servant Orders to observe the Combat  and if it was my Fate to fall , he shou'd immediately repair to you ( after laying me in the Earth ) and give you an Account of my End .


About Six o ' Clock , I perceiv'd my Antagonist , coming slow and pensive along the Skirts of the Meadow .
When he came nearer to me , I observ'd he had been weeping .
Tears , said I , can make but poor Atonement for the many Injuries thou hast heap'd upon my poor Brother and Me  therefore , betake thee to thy Sword , that I may chastise thy Perfidy .
He made me no Answer , but drawing his Sword , I made a full Pass at him , which he , opening his Arms , receiv'd into his Breast , and fell towards me , upon his Face , with the Point of my Sword out at his Back .
I was very much surpriz'd at his manner of Proceeding  and calling my Servant , who waited at some Distance , we both rais'd him up .
Forbear , said he , and think not of giving Assistance to a Wretch , that rather deserves  Death from your Hands , and who came on purpose to be punish'd for all those Crimes , the Heat of Youth , and want of Thought , have made me commit .
I had no other way to recompense all those Ills I have done your worthy Brother , but to receive Death from your Hands .
The Wound you formerly gave me , prob'd me to the Soul  my Illness gave me Leisure to think , and Thought was my Monitor .
I knew what I had done , instigated by One , whose Nobility is a Stain to Virtue , was the basest Act I could have committed .
I had no other Method to meet with the Death I desired , but by writing that Letter to you .
I had not the Assurance to look your injur'd Brother in the Face .
But I beg , by Honour , Virtue , and all the amiable Train of Goodness , to plead for me to your noble Brother , whose Virtues rank him above Nobility .
I consider'd my Crime no more than a little Artifice , which would be approv'd by all the laughing Part of the World .
But when I weigh'd it fully in my Illness , I found it the basest , blackest , and most inhuman Policy , that ever was committed by mortal Man .
I often us'd to whisper to myself , What Anxiety have I felt , even for a Disappointment of a Day !
But  what must these two poor , virtuous , innocent , abus'd Souls suffer , even to the Separation of their Mortality !
My Wound was never so dangerous as reported .
But the Torments of my troubled Conscience , persuaded even the Surgeon , that I was often delirious , when alas !
all my Madness was in my Mind , and not in the Brain .
I purposely , when I was calm , threaten'd Revenge upon you  but it was only that you might be inform'd of my false Resentment against you , I well knowing , your Spirit would find some Means to seek me out , and punish me for my Crime as I deserv'd .
Even the Letter I wrote to you , went to my Soul , because what I wrote was against my Conscience .
All I desire of you , is , to bury me obscurely , and let my Faults be forgotten in the Grave .
He endeavour'd to say more , but his Tongue falter'd , his Eyes clos'd , and , grafping me faintly by the Hand , he sunk to the Earth , in all Appearance never to rise again .
We took him in our Arms , and , with the Sword in his Breast , carry'd him to the Cottage , and then sent my Servant for the Surgeon , that attended you both in your Illness .
While he was gone , there seem'd no sign of Life in him .
I must confess , his unhappy Condition had wip'd away  all Resentment in me , and I felt for him all the Tenderness of a Brother and Friend , washing his Face with my repentant Tears , often cursing myself for the rash Act .


When the Surgeon came , he drew the Sword out of his Body , upon which he open'd his Eyes , fetching a deep Sigh , but clos'd 'em immediately again .
However , the Surgeon prob'd his Wound , and gave me some Hopes it might not prove mortal .
We undress'd him , and put him to Bed  but the Surgeon desir'd we might leave the Room , till the Evening he came again  for he confidently assur'd us , by that Time , he would either be past Cure , or out of Danger .
I own I cou'd not obey his Orders , but sat by his Bedside till the Evening the Surgeon return'd  and all that time , I cou'd not perceive him to breathe  therefore , I was assur'd in myself , the Soul had taken her Flight for ever .
The Surgeon , by his Countenance , seem'd to think as I did  but when he took off his Plaisters from his Wounds , he cry'd , Courage !
Sir  we have Hopes , and great ones too .
I own , those Words very much chear'd my drooping Spirits .
When he had once more dress'd him , he forc'd open his Mouth , and pour'd in some Cordial , which upon the Instant caus'd him  to groan , and some Moments after he open'd his Eyes , faintly looking upon us , but did not seem to know us .
In short , it was four Days ere he came to his Senses  and then the Surgeon declar'd he was out of Danger , since in that time he had escap'd a Fever .


I was so much concern'd for his Welfare , that I had even forgot the Time I propos'd to meet you at Leghorn , was elaps'd  therefore I sent my Servant to acquaint you with the Reason of my Delay , intending to follow the next Day .
But we were very much surpriz'd last Night , to find the poor Fellow ty'd to a Tree in the Road , having been robb'd of his Horse , his Cloaths and Money , as also severely beaten into the Bargain .


Tho ' the Gentleman 's Wounds were almost heal'd , yet he continu'd so weak , that he could not get out of his Bed without Assistance  yet , knowing the Necessity of my being with you , he would accompany me in the Litter that carry'd you a Day 's Journey into the Country ( that I had order'd to be conceal'd in the Village , to prevent , my dear Brother , your pursuing a rash Design , that must have ended with your Life , considering the Weakness of your Condition . )
I 'll wait on you , said he , to your worthy Brother , to  obtain his Pardon , or die at his Feet .
When he was inform'd we were near the House where you resided , the Thoughts of seeing the Face of the Person he had so heinously injur'd , took away his Senses , and he fainted away .
But the Surgeon assur'd us , a little Rest and Quietness would soon restore him  therefore desired he might not be disturb'd for some Hours .


When my Brother had ended his Relation , Revenge , Hate , Fury , with all the Train of violent Passions , left my Breast  and in their room , soft Compassion , Tenderness , with Friendship , took their Place .
Tho ' I was undone thro ' his Means , yet a gloomy Contentment took Possession of my Soul , so that I could freely pardon the Man who was the Cause of all my Misfortunes .
I was overcome with an ardent Longing to embrace him .
All the Company felt the same Sentiments with me  neither cou'd we prevent the Tears gushing from our Eyes , at my Brother 's short Story .


We all return'd to Rest  and I must own , I had not felt the balmy Effects of Slumber so sweet , for many Days .
Tho ' the latter Part of it was disturb'd with a Dream of my dear Isabella  I thought she appear'd before  me with those piercing Rays of Beauty , with which she first wounded my Soul .
Canst thou then forsake me ( she cry'd ) ungrateful Wretch ?
What have I done to merit such barbarous Usage ?
Are these the Vows and Promises thou madest me at our cruel Separation ?
Why didst thou betray my easy Heart , to feel the Torture of Despair for ever ?
But know , thou Wretch !
tho ' Death will soon overtake me , yet I will die another 's , to punish thee .
When she had ( as I thought ) pronounc'd these fatal Words , she flew from me in a violent Rage , and the Agony I felt in my Dream , awak'd me in a cold Sweat , all o'er my Limbs .
Tho ' this was but a Dream , yet my Mind felt all the Tortures imaginable , at the Thoughts of my miserable Fortune .


The next Morning , my Brother inform'd us the Gentleman was better , and express'd a great Desire to see me .
After Breakfast , we all went up together .
At Sight of me , the Tears ran down his Cheeks , which choak'd the Passage of his Words for some time .
For Heaven 's sake , Sir , said I , do not add to my Sorrows , by making me bear yours .
I know your Penitence , and it is with the utmost Candour I now declare , I heartily forgive what is past , and beg to be rank'd in the  Number of your virtuous Friends .
This Goodness , he faintly reply'd , had overwhelm'd his Soul with so much Confusion , that it was more than his feeble Spirits cou'd stand under  and , upon saying that , his Speech fail'd him , and a deadly Paleness overspread his Face .
It was a full Hour before we cou'd bring him to Life again , and I began to taste all the Bitterness of Grief for his Condition .
When he cou'd use his Tongue , he said so many humane tender things , as plung'd all the Hearers in Floods of Sorrow , insomuch , that the Surgeon turn'd us all out of the Chamber , declaring he would , upon the Instant , leave him , if we offer'd to see him again , till he thought fit .


Just as we left him , a Packet was given me from England , which I knew to be my Uncle 's Hand .
I had not wrote him any Letter for near four Months , having indeed almost forgot ( thro ' my Brother 's Affairs , my Sickness , and my own unhappy Love ) I had any such Person in the World  and when I did call him to mind , the Intention of my Journey to England , made it of no Signification to write .
I sound , by the Date of the Letter , it was full ten Weeks since it was wrote .


 My dear Child ,


THE Torments I endure for thy Silence , are not to be describ'd .
It never can enter into my Mind , that thou should ` st forget me  therefore , what can I suppose ?
Is it unnatural to think thee out of this World , and that I am now writing to an Angel in Heaven ?
Good God !
what Terrors does the very Thought invade me with !
My dear Boy , should this Letter come to thy Hands , consider me as one , in this small Time thou hast been absent , full twenty Years older than when thou sawest me last .
Grief has shook her Malevolence upon my Head , and I am become , from a facetious middle-ag'd Man of Fifty , an old decrepid Wretch of Fourscore .
Thy worthy Father 's Loss , thy Absence , and my Fears for thee , have added to my Grey Hairs , which , I own , are multiply'd by the Mother and Aunt to Isabella .
Would ` st thou think it , my Boy ?
They are as strange to me , as Humility to a Priest  have broke off our Correspondence  and , to compleat all ( O , my Child !
arm thyself with Patience , if my Conjectures prove true ) are speedily going to wed Isabella to that upstart Nobleman you formerly had some Words with : And all this , without assigning any Reason to me , for their Proceedings .
 'T is true , they have a Right to do as they think fit  but it is very strange !
And I own , my Patience and Fortitude , thro ' all these concurring Misfortunes , can but poorly bear up against them alone .
Come then , my dear Child !
and , by thy Assistance , I shall be able to hold out against all the Assaults of Fortune , and , in thy Company , forget the ill Treatment of the World .
But if I neither see , nor hear from thee , very speedily , my Gray Hairs will soon be brought with Sorrow to the Grave .
Poor Betty 's Fears for thy Welfare , almost equal mine , I have taken care of ihy unhappy Father 's Affairs  come , and take Possession of that , and all that is mine : But be expeditious , my dear Child , or thou wilt come too late to close the Eyes of


Thy dear and loving Uncle , W. VAUGHAN .


All my Sorrows were renew'd , at the reading this melancholy Epistle  and I began to curse my Stars , for my unthinking Backwardness in Writing  and to write now , seem'd to me to be of no Use , because I intended to embark for England the next Morning .
However , all my Friends advis'd me to send my  Uncle a Letter , for fear some Accident might retard our Voyage .
I took their Advice , and sent him one , giving him a succinct Account of every thing that had befell my Brother and me , since my last  and of that fatal Letter , which had caus'd the Coldness of Isabella 's Family , and my inevitable Ruin  with a Promise to be in England with the utmost Expedition .


The wounded Gentleman , hearing we were to imbark for Marseilles the next Morning , was resolv'd to go with us , notwithstanding his weak Condition , and all our Persuasions to the contrary , cou'd not avail .
The Surgeon inform'd us the Sea would rather do him Good , than Harm , and he was resolv'd to attend him to Marseilles .
Therefore , the next Day , we left Leghorn with a prosperous Gale , and in eight Days we arriv'd safely at Marseilles , without meeting with any Accident by the Way .
The hurt Gentleman mended every Day , and when we disembark'd , he was able to walk without Assistance .
He had reconcil'd himself to my Governor , and Eliza .
The Presents he made them were worthy the Gift of a Prince  and , unknown to me , he and my Brother , had settled my Father 's Estate upon me , and had given my Brother an  Equivalent out of his own Fortune .
When I complain'd to him of his profuse Generosity  For Heaven 's sake , Sir , said he , accept this small Favour , in Recompence for all the Misfortunes I have heap'd upon you .
And would to God , the rest of my Estate and Life cou'd but restore what I have robb'd you of , I would freely surrender both .
Yet , who knows but Fate has still reserv'd the amiable Isabella to bless your Arms !
I am strongly possess'd with that Hope .
I have some Reason to believe you the Care of Providence : And such Wretches , as that perfidious Man and I , must surely be punish'd , in the Loss of all our unlawful Desires wou'd wish for .
All my Days to come , shall be spent in begging Forgiveness from Heaven and you .
Sure there must be the Seeds of some Goodness , even in the most profligate Heart , and repentant Tears may make them flourish , and kill those Weeds of Baseness , that shadow'd o'er our vicious Inclinations .
I wou'd not be the Wretch I was some few Days ago , for all the gaudy Titles of State and Grandeur .


In short , there was such a virtuous Alteration wrought upon him , I cou'd not help esteeming him equal to my Brother .
His Friendship was , in some sort , a Cordial for  my disappointed Love  for I had made a firm Resolve , after the Loss of my dear Isabella , to forget all the fatal Charms of the Sex , which , at best , enervate the Soul of Man , unbend his Mind , and render him unfit for noble Actions .
I intended to dedicate my future Life to my King and Country : My new Friend strengthen'd me in that Resolution .
Our Design was , as soon as we arriv'd in England , to buy us Posts in the Army , and make , for the future , War our Mistress .
These Thoughts almost engross'd my whole Soul  but the Idea of the charming Isabella , wou'd too often intrude , and fill my Heart with a Medley of Love and Arms .


We set out from Marseilles in Post-Chaises , for Paris , where we all safely arriv'd , healthful in Body  tho ' , for my own Part , with a Mind full of cruel Disturbances .
We were oblig'd to stay some time here , to dispose of a Casket of valuable Jewels that Fatima brought from Tunis , and procure Bills of Exchange for our Money , for fear of Accidents .
But as soon as we arriv'd there , I dispatch'd one of my Servants for England , to acquaint my Uncle of my coming .
Here my Fever attack'd me again  but I was so impatient to  come to my Journey 's End , that as soon as our Affairs were ended , we hir'd Post-Chaises for Bulloigne , where we safely arriv'd , tho ' late at Night , but found the Gates shut against us .
But having Recommendations to Mr. Gordon , a Wine-Merchant , a Gentleman just settled at Bulloigne , he prevail'd upon the Captain of the Guard to give us Entrance  and , thro ' his accustom'd Good-nature , he wou'd accommodate us at his own House , where we were nobly entertain'd .
He prest us so oblingly to stay some time , that we appear'd almost guilty of Ill-manners  but Despair , and Love , seldom regard Forms .


He , finding our Affairs prest us to be gone , procur'd us a Vessel to carry us to Dover , and we embark'd the next Morning , at break of Day  but before the Sun was two Hours old , a general Darkness o'erspread the Hemisphere , follow'd by a most violent Tempest , mix'd with Thunder and Lightning , that the Captain of the Vessel declar'd , he had never seen the like .
The Helm was of no Use , therefore we were oblig'd , under a reef'd Foresail , to run before the Wind , trusting to the Mercy of Providence for three Nights and Days .
Upon the fourth , the Storm retir'd , and gave us Leave to make an Observation  we  were greatly surpriz'd to find we had pass'd the Lizard .
Upon this , we consulted what Course we should steer  but finding the Wind favourable for Milford Haven , the Captain was prevail'd upon , for a Sum of Money , to steer for that Harbour .
The Night approaching , the Tempest ( as if it abated only to fetch Breath ) came on more violently than before , and all the Hopes we had of Life , was , to steer our Course for the open Sea .
Our Vessel bore up against the Storm very well , for two Days  but on the third , the Master came into the Cabbin , with Looks that told us our Misfortune  he inform'd us , the Vessel had sprung a Leak , and , should the Storm continue a Day longer , we must inevitably sink to the Bottom .


The Tears of my Friends , I must own , shock'd me very much  yet , for my own Part , I sat in expectation of the last Moment , with the utmost Tranquillity .
But in a few Hours , the Storm very much abated  yet , with all our Assistance , the Water gain'd upon us , and no Land appearing , we had no Hope of saving our Lives .


The Vessel was , once more , left to the Mercy of the Waves , whose frightful Swell , tho ' the Wind was laid , ran Mountains high .
 The Master order'd the Long-boat out , that we might endeavour all we cou'd to save our Lives : But the Mariners , as soon as it was in the Water , crowded so fast upon one another , that the Rope which held it to the Ship 's Side , broke , and in a Moment after , the Boat was swallow'd by the Billows : Three out of thirteen of the Sailors , that were in it , sunk to the Bottom , never to be seen more alive .
It was with the utmost Difficulty the rest were sav'd .
The Sailors finding no Hope of escaping that way , began to throw overboard their Guns , Water-Casks , and Provision , and , by the Divine Providence , found out one of the Leaks , which they , with much Difficulty , stopt  and by continual plying the Pump , clear'd her of some Water : But the incessant Labour fatigu'd us all so much , that we began to despair again .
Yet Life being sweet , every Person in the Vessel put forth their utmost Strength , and labour'd hard all Night .
In the Break of the Morning , we discover'd Land , to the inexpressible Joy of the Sailors , and what Wind we had , pointed fair for the Place .
But our Joy had like to have been more fatal than the Storm  for upon the first Notice of discovering Land , every Person ran upon Deck , like Madmen , to be confirm'd  in the pleasing News , never regarding the Pumps , till we found the Vessel almost sinking under us : Yet the Hope of Life , inspir'd us with new Strength .
We work'd as hard , as if the Sight of Shore had been a Day 's Rest from Labour .
We had no Boat to land with , therefore the Captain made a Signal of Distress , and in less than an Hour , we saw several Boats rowing towards us .
The Captain wisely consider'd , if these Boats should come on Board , every one would be for getting into them , and leave the Vessel to sink for want of Working  therefore he order'd Tow-Ropes out , that the approaching Boats might lend their Assistance that way .
Accordingly , he acquainted the Sailors with his Intention , and they , with the Passengers , approv'd of it .
The Boats , when they came near us , obey'd the Captain 's Order , and in two Hours we arriv'd safe in St. Aubin 's Bay , a Harbour in the Island of Jersey * The  noble Lord Jermin , the then Governor , came to the Harbour , and invited me and my Company on Shore , where we were entertain'd and accomodated as well , as if we had been in England .
I shall decline mentioning those fine Qualities , so well known in his Native  Country , and only say , he is ador'd in his Government  the Inhabitants expressing the utmost Sorrow , when it occurs to their Memory , the Time must come for him to leave them .


 We were oblig'd to stay in this Place many Days , against our Inclinations , tho ' the abovemention'd Nobleman did all in his Power to make the Time pass away as pleasantly as he could .


When our Captain had taken out his Lading and Ballast , to search for the Leaks , he inform'd us , 'twould be full Twenty Days before his Vessel would be in a Condition to put to Sea again .
This Notice made us all very uneasy  but , for my own Part , I appear'd so very much dejected , that the noble Governor , out of his good Nature , seem'd to sympathize with me in Sorrow .
I must own , tho ' Life was a Burden to me , yet the Thoughts that my dear Uncle would imagine me no longer in this World , and with Sorrow break his Heart , added Pain to Pain , and Grief to Grief .
The Consolations of my Friends were to no purpose , tho ' their friendly Sighs were mingled with mine .


 My Lord Governor perceiving the Uneasiness we express'd , at our Stay in the Island , sent to Guernsey a small Vessel , to inquire whether there was any Ship preparing to sail for England .
She return'd the next Day , and inform'd us , a Ship from the East-Indies had put in there , the late Storm , and intended to set sail for England in two Days .


This News reviv'd all my Company  therefore we took Leave of the Governor , with Thanks for his kind Usage , imbark'd in the same Vessel that brought us the News , tho ' it was almost Evening , and about Midnight arriv'd safely in St. Peter 's Harbour , in the Island of Guernsey * .


 Inquiring for the Captain of the Ship in the Harbour , we found him at a Tavern  but I was agreeably surpriz'd to find it Mr. Brooks , and his Ship the Elizabeth , which he worthily sav'd for his Cousin , Mr. Bridgford , that marry'd the Widow by a Wile .
He hardly knew me at first  but when I came to his Remembrance , he seem'd as much transported , as if I had been his own Son .
He was confounded to find me with such Company , in a Place so little expected  but I soon let him into as much of my Story , as I thought proper .
I must own , said he , when I receiv'd a Letter from the Governor yesterday , desiring it as a Favour , to give Passage to England to some Gentlemen , Ladies , and their Servants , I did not intend to comply with it , through the Inconveniency  it would put me to  therefore gave Orders to set Sail early in the Morning , knowing there was another Vessel now in the Harbour , that sails for England in a few Days : Neither could the Governor take it ill , as he only directed his Letter to any Captain that shou'd chance to be in the Bay .
But if I had known my Passengers , I wou'd have staid a Fort-night , to oblige them , and myself too .
I return'd him Thanks for his Civility , and begg'd him to set Sail with the soonest .
Why then , this Moment , if you please , answer'd the Captain .


Upon the Instant , he took Leave of his Company at the Tavern , and ( tho ' we were all very much fatigu'd ) went on Board his Ship , where he gave immediate Orders for weighing Anchor  and we were under Sail before Break of Day .
The Captain resign'd the great Cabbin to the two Ladies , and accommodated every Body as well as he cou'd .


I retir'd to mine , hoping I shou'd meet with a little Repose , being something calmer in my Mind , knowing a few Days wou'd put a Period to my Misfortunes , by Death  for I had made a firm Resolution to punish the Perfidy of Isabella 's Husband , or fall by his  Hand  or if I surviv'd , to find a way to die beneath her Feet .


These Thoughts lull'd me to taste the Pleasures of refreshing Sleep .
But my Senses were hardly lock'd up , before I was awak'd with the Groans of a Person , not far off , in one of the Cabbins .
I arose up in my Bed , and listen'd  when I heard a Man cry , For Heaven 's sake !
take off my Irons , that I may die at Liberty !
Another answer'd , You know I dare not do it , without the Captain 's Order , and he is now gone to sleep  as soon as he is up , I 'll go and acquaint him .
Dear Tom , reply'd the other , take Pity on the Miseries I feel , and step to him now  I know he does not want Humanity , or Good-nature  and tho ' I deserve not the least Favour from him , yet , when I am going to give an Account to Heaven for all my Crimes , I am assur'd he will release me from these heavy Irons , that even a Man in Health can hardly bear .


I own , I was touch'd with the Person 's deep Sighs , therefore call'd for my Servant , put on my Gown , and went to enquire into the melancholy Affair .
When I came to the Cabbin where the Wretch lay , I was shock'd  to see a Man stretch'd at his Length , upon a poor Flock-Bed on the Ground , without any Covering , meagre and pale , with at least a hundred Pounds Weight of Irons about his Body  to me , he seem'd as if his last Moments were approaching .
Compassion took Possession of my Soul , tho ' I was convinc'd , by his own Discourse , he deserv'd but little .


A Sailor that was walking upon Deck , came up to me , and judging , by my Countenance , that I seem'd to pity the unfortunate Wretch , cry'd out , What , is he going ?
let him go , and be d - n'd !
Friend ( said I ) let this poor Creature 's Crimes be what they will , I must own , I think his Condition deserves Compassion  therefore , I shall be very much oblig'd to you , if you will free him from his Irons , that his Soul may take its Flight with the more Tranquillity .
Sir ( reply'd the Sailor ) if you were acquainted with that Rogue 's wicked Heart , you would believe no Punishment in this , or the next World , could be bad enough for him .
O Sir !
cry'd the unfortunate Wretch , I deserve every thing that Man says  but I have heartily repented of all the ill Actions I have committed , and only beg to die without this Load upon my Body .
Some of these Irons have eat my Flesh from  the Bones  and , as I wear the Form of a Man , do n't let me be treated in my Dying Moments , worse than a mad Beast ty'd to the Stake .


I us'd so many Persuasions , with the Rhetorick of a Guinea , to the Person that seem'd to have the Guard of him , that he was going to awake the Captain , and acquaint him with the poor Wretch 's Condition , and my Request to have him releas'd from his Fetters  but the Captain that Moment came out of his Cabbin , being disturb'd with our Conversation , and , at my Intreaty , order'd his Irons to be taken off .
As soon as he was freed from them , he gave me Thanks for the Service I had done him , and rising slowly from his Bed whereon he lay , seiz'd upon some of the Irons he was releas'd from , and struck the Sailor ( that was talking to me before the Captain came out of his Cabbin ) with such Violence , that we all believ'd he was kill'd  then made a Blow at the Captain , which he happily avoided , by starting aside  but perceiving the Sailors running from all Parts of the Ship to seize him , he threw himself overboard maugre all they could do to prevent him , crying , he had in some measure satisfy'd his Revenge , and was never seen more .


 All this was done so suddenly , that I stood quite confounded , imagining I was in a Dream .
But when we began to recollect ourselves , we went to see if the Sailor was alive or dead .
We took him up , and I must own , I was very well pleas'd to find he was only stunn'd with the Blow .
In a little time he came to his Senses  and the first Words he spoke were , G - d D - n him , for a Son of a B - h !
who wou'd have thought he had so much Strength left ?
But I 'll prevent him giving another Blow !
Upon saying this , he ran up and down the Deck , with his Cutlass drawn ( he being one of the Centries at the great Cabbin Door ) to seek for him , to make an end of him , but when he was inform'd of his rash Catastrophe , he seem'd to be uneasy that he had not the killing of him with his own Hand .


By this time , my Brother , Clerimont , and the Ladies , were alarm'd , and came about us , to know the Cause of the Disturbance .
I told 'em , 't was the first time I ever found Compassion a dangerous Virtue .
We begg'd of the Captain to let us into the Affair .
He told us , at Dinner it shou'd be our Desert , instead of Fruit .
While this Combustion happen'd , the Man at the Helm had disregarded  the Steerage , so that the Sails clap'd to the Masts , and the Ship staid some time  but even this seem'd the Providence of Heaven , for , had we continu'd our Course , it being a very hazy Morning , we shou'd have run upon the Shallows of the Great Sark * .


Thank Heaven !
said the Captain , this Wretch , after endeavouring to frustrate our Voyage by the most wicked Designs could ever enter the Mind of Man , seems intended by Providence to be the Means of saving us , and , like Jonah in the Ship of Joppa , now he has abandon'd our Vessel , we shall have all Dangers cease .


When the Ship had her true Way again , the Captain order'd the Wretches Bedding and Cloaths to be examin'd , and thrown overboard : In searching the Pockets of an old pair of Breeches , they found a written Paper , with a Pencil , which he read to the Company , as follows :


 IF Heaven forsakes me , Hell will receive me with open Arms .
I have endeavour'd to repent , but still find my Mind bent on Revenge , and I will hazard my Body and Soul to accomplish it .
If ever I can , by any cunning Method , get rid of my Irons , I will , if I have Strength , be the Death of Captain Brooks , Tom Burgess , Tom Wingfield , Dick Hammond , and Robin Norton , for using me so ill .
I write this to leave behind , that if I should die in my Confinement , those Villains may know what I intended to do .
But if I fail of my intended Purpose , it will grieve me in my State of Perdition .


This terrible Declaration , made me very much repent my Good-nature .
I could hardly think there had been such a wicked Villain in the World .


After Dinner , we begg'd Captain Brooks to relate the History of this Wretch  which he did in the following manner :


Sir , said he ( directing his Discourse to me , having some small Knowledge of him ) you know my Cousin Bridgford , the old Acquaintance of your good Uncle , made me Captain of the Elizabeth , in consideration of some  Services he was pleas'd to own I did him .
This Wretch , who is gone to the other World , to answer for his Crimes in this , through my Intreaty , was made chief Mate  and behav'd honestly as such , during our Trading-Voyage to the Indies .
In our Return , near the Latitude of St. Helena , where we were bound for some Refreshment , in the middle of a dark Night , we heard some Guns fir'd , that seem'd to us as if some Vessel was in Distress  I order'd our Ship to steer the Course from whence the Fire came  but in an Hour afterwards , we heard such a terrible Report , that we all concluded the unfortunate Vessel was blown into the Air .
However , I kept on my Course , to see if I cou'd assist any of the unfortunate Wretches , that ( no doubt ) had either got into their Boat , or had thrown themselves into the Water , to avoid the Flames , hanging out Lights about several Parts of my Ship , that they might see where to come for Succour .


In less than an Hour more , some of our Crew cou'd perceive a Boat rowing towards us , full of Men .
As soon as they came up with us , they begg'd for Heaven 's sake , to be taken on Board .
I , who had no other Intention , mov'd by Compassion , considering  it might have been our own Case , invited 'em kindly on Board .
When they were a little recover'd from their Fright , they inform'd me , they belong'd to a Ship bound for Cork in Ireland , from the Coast of Coromandel , and had , by a violent Storm , been drove out of their Course  that in the beginning of the Night , a Fire broke out in the Gun-Room , burning with such Fury , that all their Endeavours to extinguish it prov'd fruitless  therefore they hoisted out their Long-Boat , and with one Barrel of Water , and two Casks of Bisket , abandon'd their Ship  and in half an Hour after they left it , they saw it blow up , several Pieces of the Vessel falling within twenty Yards of 'em .


There were seventeen Men in the Boat , their Master being one of them , whose Name was Cox  but observing he was very much wounded in the Head , I order'd our Surgeon to dress him immediately , who inform'd me his Skull was fractur'd , and he thought it seem'd to be a Blow with a Cutlass : But the Sailors that came with him in the Boat , told us he arose up hastily , at the first Noise about the Fire , and hurrying down the Ladder that goes under Deck , fell with his Head on the Edge of a Bucket .
When he came  to his Senses ( for the Pain of Dressing had flung him into a Swoon ) he told us the same Story .
Yet still , the Surgeon insisted it cou'd be no such thing , and began to instil , I know not what Notions , into my Mind , that these Men might be Villains .
I own , he a little stagger'd my Faith at first  but when I consider'd their Condition , I thought it impossible .
However , I determin'd to leave 'em all at St. Helena , because , indeed , there were too many Mouths for me to maintain in our Voyage for England .
I gave 'em all the Refreshment my Ship cou'd afford , and they return'd me Thanks in so sincere a manner , that quite obliterated those Notions the Surgeon had of them .
The Captain I put in my own Cabbin , using him , as I thought an honest unfortunate Man , in his Condition , deserv'd , and such as I should have been pleas'd to meet with , upon the like unfortunate Accident .


In two Days after this , we arriv'd safe at St. Helena * , where I put all the unfortunate  Sailors on Shore , with this Reason , that my Ship was too deep laden to be incumber'd with so many superfluous Men .


I went to wait on the Governor on Shore , and contracted with him for what fresh Provisions I wanted , intending to set Sail in eight Days  but the Governor advis'd me to stay longer , assuring me , that several Ships would arrive before that Time , that would accompany me in our Voyage home .
On that Account , I resolv'd to take his Advice .
I sent on Board for some Necessaries , because I intended to take a Lodging in the Valley for a  Fortnight , to enjoy the Air of the Country .
But my Surgeon being inform'd of my Intention , came with my Servant in the Boat , with the Things I had sent for , importuning me so strongly not to lie out of the Ship , tha [ ... ] I return'd on Board with him , purely to make him easy  for , I must own , his Apprehensions did not give me the least Inquietude .


Homes ( the Name of the Wretch that is so lately gone to Perdition ) complain'd he was very much troubled with the Scurvy , therefore intreated the Favour of going on Shore for a few Days .
I cou'd not refuse him  neither had I any Apprehension of an ill Design from him , having ever behav'd in the Voyage , like a downright honest Man , entirely in our Owner 's Interest .
We staid twenty Days in the Harbour , without the Appearance of any Ship from the East , therefore I made a Resolution of pursuing our intended Voyage , if no Vessel arriv'd to bear us company , in four Days : Accordingly , I gave Notice to the Governor of my Intention , as usual , that the Inhabitants , if they had any Demands , might be satisfy'd before we set Sail .


I went to rest that Night with a Tremor upon my Spirits , and an unaccountable Melancholy ,  that seem'd a foreboding ill Omen .
About Midnight , the Surgeon came into my Cabbin , and awak'd me , with a very great Surprize in his Countenance .
His Looks , I own , very much alarm'd me .
What 's the matter with you , Mr. Westwood ?
said I ( that 's the Name of my Surgeon ) you seem in some Disorder !
Sir ( reply'd Mr. Westwood ) here 's a Man has swam from Shore , in the middle of a stormy Night , to give you Notice of approaching Danger  and , I must own , I have been in such a continual Lowness of Spirits , that I am well assur'd some ill Designs are hatching against our Welfare  therefore pray rise , and hear what the Person has to say , for he will not communicate it to any one but yourself .
I arose upon the Instant , and desired him to bring in the Man .
He brought him into the Cabbin , naked as he was .
As soon as I saw him , I knew him for one of the Persons that came to us in the Boat .
Sir , said he , I have something to inform you of , that requires your private Ear .
My Friend ( I reply'd ) this Gentleman is one whom I can entirely trust , therefore what you have to communicate to me , he may hear .
If so , Sir , reply'd the Man , I shall proceed .
However , Sir , said I , I beg the Favour  ( since you came naked for my Service , as I suppose ) that you will put on this Nightgown .
Sir , return'd the Man , I 'll accept of your Favour  tho ' I feel nothing of the Inclemency of the Weather , because my Concern for you has fill'd up all my Thoughts : I therefore will proceed to tell you what I know , that you may be prepar'd for the Event .
Mr. Homes , your chief Mate , has form'd the blackest Design , that cou'd ever enter into the Soul of the most Profligate .
In less than two Hours , he will seize your Ship , and put to Death You , and Mr. Westwood , with every Sailor that will not come into his black Design .
I own myself one of the Confederates , but with no other Motive , than to use my utmost Endeavours to prevent it , if Heaven will permit : Therefore acquaint your Men with the Danger approaching , arm 'em immediately , and prevent 'em , if possible  at least , sell your Lives like Men that have deserv'd a better Fate .
I was eager to enquire about this Affair  but the Man told me , I had no Time to lose  first arm your Men , said he , and when you are in Readiness to receive them , I 'll acquaint you with the Conspiracy against you .


 I then order'd the Watch to awake those that were gone to Rest  and when they were all upon Deck , with their Arms in their Hands , I call'd the Man , and desired he would communicate the Story to the whole Crew , which consisted of Fifty-four Men .
We made a Circle round him upon the Quarter-Deck , and he began as follows :


Gentlemen , you all know me ( I believe ) to be one of those Men , whom the Humanity of your Captain sav'd from imminent Death , therefore I think he has a Right to my Life and Fortune .
Every Person , beside myself , that his Compassion gave Means of Life to , have deserv'd the Halter more than once .
Their Number was much greater , their Crew consisting of 120 Men , when they set out from the Coast of Guiney  but the Day before the Night you sav'd us from the devouring Waves , we had a terrible Engagement with a Dutch Man of War , in which we lost above half our Men , Homes , the Captain , mistaking her for an Indian Trader , that we had Advice of from the Guiney Coast .
Our Ship taking Fire , by what Accident , I know not , the Dutch Man of War 's Men that had boarded us , and wou'd have certainly  taken us , left us  fearing , as we suppos'd , they might suffer by us , if we blew up  and sail'd away : The Fire was so sudden , that we had but a small time to hoist out our Long-boat .
The Captain , and sixteen of us got into it  but many other of the Wretches endeavouring to get in , were barbarously murder'd by the other Sailors .
We row'd as fast as we cou'd from the burning Ship  but the Cries of the Wretches we left behind , methinks , are still in my Ears .
It was no small Joy to us , when we perceiv'd your Lights hung out .
But the Wretch , the Captain , tho ' so dangerously wounded , declar'd , if he thought he shou'd have met with a Ship so soon , he wou'd have taken all the Men he cou'd , that he might have been able to have taken the Ship that was coming to his Rescue .
But since it is as it is , said he , we must make the best of a bad Market , and wait for some Opportunity to get another Ship .
Then we consulted how to impose on you with a false Story , and trump'd up That they told you  for the Wound the Captain has upon his Head , was given by a Dutchman in the Fight .
Pray , said the Surgeon , how came you among such a Crew of Villains ?
Why , Sir , I 'll tell you , reply'd  the Man  I belong'd to a Coast Sloop in the River of Gambo , where all my Crew were murder'd , but one , by the Negroes , who had inviegled them up into the Country .
The poor Man that made his Escape , had but just time to tell me the fatal News , ere Death overtook him , from the Wounds he had receiv'd .
I had scarce time to cut my Cable , and drive out to Sea , favour'd by the Wind and Tide of Ebb , when I perceiv'd about twenty Boats coming down the River , in order to seize my Sloop , and , no doubt , to make me partake of the same Fate with my unfortunate Men  which I certainly should have done , for they would have overtaken me in a couple of Hours , if both they and I had not perceiv'd a Ship in the Offin , which prov'd to be this Wretch and his Crew .
I made them a Signal of my Distress , which they perceiving , made up to me , and took me on Board  but the Negroes left their Pursuit , as soon as ever they discover'd the Ship .


I soon found , to my Sorrow , what Company I was got into  but it was to no Purpose to complain , for the Captain seiz'd my Vessel , took out every thing that seem'd useful , and sunk her , with this Pretence , He  fear'd his Men might take it into their Heads to leave him , and set up for themselves  tho ' , I must own , he promis'd to pay me for my Cargo , and give me my Liberty the first Opportunity  but those were but Words , and what I verily believe he never intended to perform .


I often observ'd your Mate , during the time we were sailing to this Island ( after you kindly took us in ) caballing privately with our Captain , and several of our Men  but had no Notion of their wicked Intention to seize your Ship , till Yesterday Morning , being at a Planter 's in the South Valley , where I was treated with some Palm Wine , and not being us'd to drink in a Morning , it got into my Head  finding myself inclin'd to sleep , I laid myself down under a Hedge , but before I had clos'd my Eyes , I was interrupted by the Voices of our Captain , and your Mate .
By their Discourse , I found out their black Design  and their Business to that Plantation was , to communicate the Affair to me  but I understood , if I did not come into it , it was their Intention to murder me .
I immediately arose from the Place , full of unquiet Thoughts , which brought me out of my drunken Fit .
I took care to get as far from  the Hedge as I cou'd , that they might not suspect I had overheard 'em .
It was a full Quarter of an Hour before they found me out , and in that time I had compos'd myself , as well as I cou'd .
When they came up with me , they ask'd me , if I wou'd take a Walk to the next Plantation , where two of them lodg'd .
I answer'd , very willingly , Yes .


When we came to the Bridge that was built over the River , they stop'd , and open'd the whole Affair to me .
I made no Hesitation , but enter'd into their Design with a seeming Joy  for if I had not , I do n't doubt but it was their Intention to throw me into the River .
Nay , their very Looks declar'd as much .


At Three o ' Clock this Morning , your Mate , with the rest , are to board you , arm'd every Man with a Cutlass , and two Brace of Pistols , secure the Watch , and kill every one that will not take part in their villainous Undertaking  then weigh Anchor , and sail for the Bermudas , where they will dispose of the Cargo , and then set out upon the Pirating account .


When he had finish'd his short , but terrible Relation , the Sailors cry'd out , they  wou'd have the Long-boat , and meet them with such a Reception , that shou'd make 'em repent their Undertaking : But the Surgeon and I persuaded them , it would be better , and safer , to counterwork them .
We therefore agreed to charge all our Guns with Musket-Ball , and if they offer'd to come on , when we order'd them to return , the Sailors shou'd fire upon 'em .
However , eight of my Men prevail'd upon me to have the Long-boat ready , to pursue them , and bring 'em Prisoners , in order to be punish'd for their treacherous Intention .


In short , we provided against every thing , and in half an Hour after we were prepar'd to receive 'em , we heard their Oars in the Water .
We let 'em come within three Ships Length of us , and then call'd to 'em to proceed no farther .
As they ( I believe ) did not expect to be hinder'd in their Boarding us , they lay upon their Oars , and ask'd me what I was afraid of .
Homes was the chief Speaker , who I soon gave to understand , I knew his vile Intention .
If it be so ( he cry'd out ) we have no Time to dally .
Come , my Lads , we 'll soon see who are to be Masters , they , or we .
Upon that , they row'd towards us with all their Strength , with their Cutlasses drawn ,  and Pistols in their Hands .
But before they reach'd us , we fir'd upon 'em with our Double and Round , which kill'd four of their Number , and wounded several .
Their Confusion was so great , at this unexpected Reception , that they row'd a-head of us , where our Guns cou'd not bear upon them .
While I was ordering my Men upon the Forecastle to fire upon them , I perceiv'd the Ship driving , for that Wretch , Homes , had cut my Cable .


The Tide , by good Fortune , was ebbing  for had it been Tide of Flood , we must have drove upon the Rocks , before we cou'd have cast another Anchor .
In the Confusion , the Boat row'd to board us  but my Men fir'd upon them once more , in the same manner as at first , which put 'em in much Disorder .
Our Ship still driving , I order'd 'em to cast Anchor .
However , they took so much Time in doing it , that we were a Quarter of a League from the Pirates , before the Anchor fell .
In the mean time , our Long-boat , with the eight Men , got up to the Pirates , and a desperate Engagement follow'd .
What troubled me was , that I cou'd not assist 'em , for if I had fir'd my Guns with Ball , which cou'd easily reach 'em , I might have destroy'd my Friends with my Enemies .
My Men  were swearing , cursing , and banning at this unforeseen Accident  nay , some of 'em were for stripping , with an Intention to swim naked to help 'em , never once considering the Tide of Ebb wou'd prevent 'em .
But what was the more extraordinary in this Confusion , not one of us , for some time , thought of our Yawl upon the Booms .
But as soon as I mention'd it , they got it into the Water in a Moment , threw themselves into it with so much Precipitation , that their Haste had almost overset it , and row'd away with so much Strength , that they soon got up to the Assistance of their Comrades in good time , for two of 'em were kill'd , and the other six very much wounded .
Their Firing ( we observ'd ) had ceas'd some time , having discharg'd all their Fire-Arms  and if the Yawl had not arriv'd as it did , the other six of my Men had certainly been cut to pieces  but this Reinforcement soon put an end to the Fight , by the Death of all the Pirates but two , and Homes , who were very much wounded .


When they were brought on Board , my Men were for tearing them to pieces , especially Homes  but I pacify'd them a little , by telling 'em they shou'd be reserv'd for the Punishment due to their Crimes , when we arriv'd in England .


 My Surgeon dress'd their Wounds , and , by good Fortune , all my own Men recover'd  but the two Pirates dy'd in our Voyage home .
The vile Wretch , Homes , while his Hurts were healing , us'd to utter such blasphemous Imprecations , that shock'd all the Crew .
When he was fully recover'd , I order'd him to be manacled , leaving his Legs at Liberty , with two Men to guard him .
He often attempted to throw himself overboard , and was as often prevented .


About a Month ago , as he was walking upon Deck , with his two Guards , he observ'd Mr. Mullart , ( the Person that swam on Board to give us Notice of their Design ) standing upon the Gunnel of the Ship , to look at a dead Whale that was floating near us .
He goes up to him , unobserv'd , and push'd him into the Sea .
As it fell out , the Sea was very calm , tho ' we had Wind enough to fill our Sails  otherwise , tho ' a good Swimmer , he might have perish'd .
We brought to , with all the Celerity imaginable , and not without some Difficulty , sav'd him .


One of the Sailors upbraiding him for the Cruelty of the Action , he struck him in the Face , broke his Jaw , and beat out three of his Teeth , with his Hand-Cuffs .
I seeing  this vile Proceeding , order'd him to be seiz'd and fetter'd  but it was with much Difficulty , for he laid about him with such Agility and Vigor , that a Carpenter was oblig'd to knock him down with a Hand-Spike .
When he came to himself ( for the Blow had stunn'd him for some time ) he swore he was sorry for nothing , but that Mullart was not gone to Hell by Water .


As I was giving Orders how he shou'd be us'd for the future , he grinn'd at me , gave me several hearty Curses , and spit in my Face , which , I own , provok'd me to strike him .
He was then laid in the manner you saw him this Morning .


About a Week ago , he began to think of his Crimes , and seem'd so penitent , that I order'd his Irons to be taken off , had him bath'd , shifted , and clean'd .
When his Cloaths were on again , Mr. Mullart being upon Deck , he very submissively approach'd him , telling him , he was very sorry for what he had done to him  but as soon as ever he got within his Reach , he flew upon him , got him down , and in his Fury wou'd have strangled him , if if he had not been taken away by main Force .


 We all thought it high time to make him as secure as possible , for such an infernal Wretch never more cou'd deserve Compassion .
For these last three Days , his Centries have thought him near his Death  but it was only his Artifice , to get clear once more , that he might do more Mischief in his last Moments .


When Mr. Brooks had ended his Story , we all thought it impossible Nature should furnish out such a Villain .
And yet , said the Captain , this Wretch has made more than one Voyage with me , and ever seem'd a Man of Integrity  an open and free Countenance , that discover'd no Rancour or Baseness in it .
But , as Shakespear says , There 's no Art to find the Mind 's Construction in the Face .


We sail'd on with a favourable Gale , bending our Course for the Bristol Channel , where Captain Brooks was bound .
On the fourth Day after our leaving Guernsey , we discover'd the chalky Cliffs of our Native Country , which gave a sudden Alteration to the Features of every one of the Company  all but myself , wore a pleasing Contentment on their Countenances  but , for my own part , my Mind felt so many Vicissitudes , that the wisest  Physiognomist , I believe , wou'd have been puzzled to have known my Thoughts  but no Wonder , for I knew 'em not myself .
All the Passions of Love , Duty , Hatred , Jealousy , Revenge , and Death , mix'd in such a general Tumult , that all within was wild Anarchy and Uproar .
The Thoughts of seeing my Native Country , which fill'd every one else with the utmost Transports , gave me no other Satisfaction , than the Hopes of Death , to put an end to Thought , and all my devouring Sorrows .


In two Days more , we came to an Anchor near the Landing-Place of the Island of Lundy * , where we found a small Vessel bound for Monmouth .
As that Place was but a Day 's Journey from most of our Dwellings , we took Leave of Captain Brooks , and embark'd in that Vessel for Monmouth .
The Captain parted from us with very great Regret , but with a Promise to see us in a few Days after  his Arrival at Bristol .
We weigh'd Anchor together , and kept Company , till we arriv'd at the Mouth of the Avon , that leads to Bristol , and then parted , after receiving several Guns from the Elizabeth , by way of Salute .
We arriv'd that Night at Chepstow , upon the River Wye , where all the Company desir'd to be set on Shore , for they were very much fatigu'd , particularly the Ladies .


As soon as ever we landed , I sent one of my Servants to acquaint my Uncle with my Arrival , and of my Intentions to wait on him in three Days , at the farthest  with Orders to my Servant to meet me at Monmouth the next Day , where we arriv'd by Noon .
I found my Servant waiting for me , who inform'd me , that my Uncle and Mrs. Betty had been gone to London four Days before , to wait my Arrival there .
I own , I was both griev'd , and pleas'd  griev'd , that I should not see my dear Uncle so soon as I expected  and pleas'd , to know that he had receiv'd my Letters , and had Strength and Health enough to travel .


Now Despair , with all its black Train of Horrors , fully possess'd my Soul  yet gave me Light enough to see , I shou'd never possess my dear Isabella !
All Hopes were banish'd ,  and the nearer I drew to the Residence of my adorable Fair One , the farther I drew from all Thoughts of Happiness .
What Pains , what Miseries , what Anxieties , and what inexpressible Tortures , was my broken Heart torn with !
Treading upon the same Earth , and breathing the same Air with my dear Love , for ever debarr'd my Arms , only added to my various Torments .


I went to Rest , but alas !
the Fatigues of the Sea , the Weakness of my Body , and the want of Sleep , were over-balanc'd by the Tortures of my Mind .


I arose in the Morning , without ever closing my Eyes , which had made such an Alteration in my Countenance , that I was hardly known by my Friends : They were too well acquainted with the Cause , yet , notwithstanding , endeavour'd to comfort me .
But alas !
they might as well have stopt the Fury of a Tempest , or the swiftest Current in its rapid Course , as give Advice to heal my wounded Soul .


My Friend was inconsolable , well knowing my Ruin was the Work of his unlucky forming  and maugre my ill Fate , I was compell'd to smother my Heart-breaking Sorrows , in order to comfort him , who now  was dearer to me than any thing on Earth , since I had lost all Hopes of my Divine Isabella .


The Tortures of my Mind prey'd so violently on my Body , that I was once more hurry'd to the dark Confines of Death .
A special Messenger was sent to my Uncle at London , to inform him of my unhappy State , and my new-converted dear Friend wou'd accompany him , maugre all my Intreaties to the contrary .
I was so very weak , it was dangerous to remove me to my Uncle 's , tho ' but a short Day 's Journey from Monmouth .
As I thought my last Moments approaching , I took a Resolution of writing the following Letter to Isabella .


WHAT envious Stars , divine Isabella , have wrought this Murder on my Love !
But why do I ` tax the Stars , when it was the Work of false Malice and Treachery .
You , I know , thro ' the Excellency of your Soul , will love the Man you have given your Hand to , and bury all your Vows to me in Oblivion  pray Heaven , for your Peace of Mind , you may !
This is , I firmly believe , the last Pen I shall ever take in Hand .
The Hours I have to live , I hope , will not be many , since I have lost all in  this World I wish'd to live for .
Wilt thou , when I am dead , water my Grave with one pitying Tear , and lament my unhappy Destiny ?
I have no Wish now remaining , but that , if it was possible , thou wert present to close the Eyes of the Heart-broken , unhappy


VAUGHAN .


P. S. I have sent you a few Trifles , that I hope you will accept , since they were purchas'd in my unfortunate Travels for you : It can be no Breach of Duty to your happy Husband , sure , to look upon 'em sometimes .
Oh , how happy shou'd I have been , if I had never imbark'd from my Native Country !
But 't is Heaven 's high Will it shou'd be so  and I wish I cou'd not complain  it wou'd have been too great a Happiness , to have been bless'd with thee .
I cou'd dwell for ever on this melancholy Theme , but my Weakness obliges me to leave off , and gives me just Strength enough to say ,


Farewell for ever .


My Spirits , with my Tears and Sighs , had left me , and it was some time ere I had Strength enough to fold the Letter , and direct it To the Divine Isabella .


 I order'd my Servant that had accompany'd me in my Travels , to find her out , and if it was possible , to give it into her own Hands .
Observe ( said I ) her Countenance  tell her the unhappy Condition of thy Master .
I will , if it be possible , keep Life till thy Return , that I may have the Pleasure in Dying , to hear she has dropt a Tear for all my Misfortunes .
He promis'd to execute his Commission with the utmost Diligence .


The next Day he return'd , with a dejected Countenance , and inform'd me that Isabella , her Mother , and Aunt , had been gone some Days from their House , but none of the Servants cou'd inform him whither .
He also inquir'd of the Neighbourhood , but to as little Purpose .


This struck me into the last Depth of Despair , insomuch , that I resolv'd to put a Period to my Life .
I refus'd all Physic , Nourishment , and Rest , and despis'd the Intreaties of my Brother and his Friends .
I inform'd 'em , no one upon Earth , not my dear Uncle , shou'd destroy my Resolution of Dying , if he arriv'd before I expir'd .
They press'd me with their Tears and Sighs , but all in vain : Till at last , they prevail'd upon me to hear the Prayers of a worthy Clergyman ,  who so effectually cur'd me of Despair , by laying before me the never-forgiven Sin of Self-Murder , that I submitted to all their Desires .
The Physicians prescrib'd , I took their Medicines , receiv'd what they intended for Nourishment , and address'd myself to Sleep  yet all to no purpose .
Death glar'd me full in the Face , tho ' all his Terrors cou'd not fright me .
I look'd upon him as the only Cure for a broken Heart .
The Conversation with my good Priest , had , I thank Heaven , settled my Conscience .
I expected Death 's Approach , as that of my best Friend , and hop'd to see him before my Uncle , that I might not be a living Witness to all his Heart-rending Griefs .
They gave me Medicines to make me sleep  but , alas !
the Agonies I felt , in what the Apothecaries call Composing Draughts , and that seem to lock up the Senses to soft Slumber , are hardly to be express'd .
The Mind was still awake , tho ' my Body seemingly was at rest  and Fancy represented to me my hard Fortune , with redoubled Terrors .


I was ten Days in this languishing deplorable Condition , fluctuating between Death and Life , when News was brought me of my Uncle 's Arrival .
Tho ' I wish'd to sink to the silent Grave , for the Reason I just now mention'd ,  yet my Heart felt some Gleam of Pleasure , that he was come to close my Eyes , and bless me ere I died .
When my Uncle enter'd the Room where I lay , he ran to me , tenderly embrac'd me , and wept over me .
O Heaven , said he , is this the Joy I propos'd to myself , in thy precious Conversation ?
No , my dear Boy , thou shalt not leave me .
Forget Isabella , and turn thy Eyes to another Beauty I have brought with me , that loves thee for thy Virtue and thy Merit  and , if that can have any effect upon thee , she is the very Picture of thy lost Isabella .
Since she is now another 's , turn thy Eyes upon this Lady , and let her Charms cure those Wounds the other gave .
Alas !
Sir , said I , Fate is not to be controll'd , and my Passion is as irrevocable .
Wilt thou not live ( reply'd my Uncle ) to comfort my feeble Age , who have no other Joy in Life , but thee ?
I have been industrious to provide this Match for thee  and , contrary to the Rules of the Sex , have prevail'd upon her to accompany me .
Do not let thy hopeless Passion make thee forget good Manners .
Thy Slights will break her Heart .
Never poor Wretch had such a Conflict in his Soul .
I thought it wou'd be the highest Ingratitude , not to see a poor young Lady , that had given  me her Heart , without seeing me .
After much Argument , I told my Uncle , if he pleas'd , he might bring the Lady to see what a Wretch she had plac'd her unhappy Love upon , and all the Satisfaction I cou'd give her was , to expire before her  for I told my Uncle , I found Death approaching .


He immediately went out , and return'd with my Friend , who led a Lady by the Hand .
I then call'd to mind ( weak as I was ) he had often told me of a beautiful Sister of his , that he wish'd I cou'd love , that he might make me some Recompence for the Loss he caus'd of my Isabella .
And I , out of good Manners , seldom said any thing against it .


Madam , said I , your good Brother has brought you to see a Wretch , tho ' young , old in Misfortunes  one who is flying to the Grave , to seek a Refuge from 'em  one , who - What !
interrupted the Lady , and has my dear Vaughan , in reality , forgot his Isabella ?
The Chamber having but little Light in it , I could not distinguish the Features of my Isabella  but I knew , full well , that soft Voice , whose Tone was ever in my Ears .
It had such an Effect upon me , that I cou'd only pronounce her dear Name , then sunk down speechless in my Bed .
It was a full  half Hour , ere they cou'd restore me to Sense .
But when I saw the dear Image tenderly weeping over me , that I ever carry'd in my Heart , I cou'd not help crying out , Am I awake , or do I dream of such imaginary Bliss ?
Art thou indeed my Isabella ?
Mine !
really mine !
and not wedded to that Wretch , who wou'd rob me of all my Soul can love in this World !
I am thine ( reply'd the charming Isabella ) ever will be thine , nor ever was , or ever will be any others ' .
I have my Mother 's , my Aunt 's and thy good Uncle 's Consent , to join our Hands , as well as Hearts together  and they are here to ratify what I say .
Upon this , the Mother and Aunt enter'd , who tenderly embrac'd me , calling me their dear Son , and Nephew .


These tender Transports were too strong for my weak Frame , and Joy was near doing what my Griefs wou'd soon have done .
My Speech forsook me , and every one about me thought I was gone for ever .
It was many Hours before I was brought to Life  and when I recover'd , I found my dear Isabella almost in the same Condition .
But kind Heaven , that is watchful over those that tread in the Paths of Goodness , in a few Days , recover'd us to taste the Bliss of happy , virtuous  Love in our chaste Conversation .
It was some time before I had Leisure to enquire concerning my unbounded Joy  when my Friend inform'd me of it in this manner .


When I saw you , my dear Vaughan , plung'd in Sorrow by my means , I had often Thoughts of putting an end to my wretched Life .
But reflecting it wou'd be a nobler piece of Justice to punish the Villain that was the Cause of all our Misfortunes , I was resolv'd to seek him out , to take away his Life  or give up mine , to pay for the Injustice I had done you thro ' his Wiles .
I found a fitting Pretence to leave you , when you suppos'd I was going with your Servant to London , in order to acquaint your good Uncle with our miserable State .
But I parted with the Messenger the Morning we set out , giving him Directions to call upon me in his Return with your Uncle , to receive Advice from me , if Fate had ordain'd I shou'd not fall in the Attempt  or , if they heard no News of me , to conclude I was no longer in this World .
When I came within a few Miles of the Residence of Isabella , a violent Storm arose , which made me take Shelter in a neighbouring Village .
But guess my Surprize , when I saw a Coach and  Six stop at the Church Door , which , by the Liveries , I knew belong'd to that vile Man , Sir Eustace , I formerly call'd Friend .
The Sight , at first , almost took away my Senses  but recollecting my scatter'd Reason , I set my self to observe all Passages .
The Wretch came out , dress'd like a foppish Bridegroom , leading the lovely Isabella , trembling , pale , and wan , follow'd by the Mother and Aunt .
I enquir'd of a Stander-by , if he knew that Gentleman and the Ladies ?
He answer'd , No  but that they came to be marry'd at their Town for more Privacy .
Hope then began to revive in my Soul  for I was resolv'd to put a Stop to the Wedding , or lose my Life .


I follow'd 'em into the Church , where , as soon as Sir Eustace saw me , he cry'd out , in a Transport of Joy , Fortune , I thank thee !
thou hast sent the only Friend I have in the World , to be Witness of my Joy .
Upon that , he come forward with open Arms to embrace me .
Hold , said I , pushing him from me , I abhor all Friendship with a Villain  and kind Heaven has sent me at this happy Moment , to prevent thy imposing upon this betray'd young Lady , and her Relations , thro ' thy Villainy .
and my mistaken Folly :  But know , the Hand of Heaven , by me , shall punish thee for all thy Villainies .
He stood like one aghast  while I had time to go up to the young Lady : Madam , said I , if you ever did love the unhappy Vaughan , love him still , for he is innocent , and ever was so , but betray'd by that Wretch , who is more eminent in Vice than Title .


The lovely Isabella , I thought , seem'd to listen with an eager Transport in her Eyes , at what I declar'd .
I gave her my Hand , and led her out of the Church , follow'd by the Parson , who seem'd in the utmost Amazement at this wonderful Proceeding !
But I told him his Disappointment shou'd be no Loss to him , for I wou'd pay him as well , as if he had finish'd the Marriage .
For Heaven 's sake !
Sir , reply'd the Parson , do n't imagine I am such a mercenary Wretch , to think of the Loss of what I might expect , for doing the holy Office I am ordain'd to by Heaven , and my Superiors ?
No , I am , I own , very much surpriz'd at such an Adventure , that never happen'd to me before , or any one of my holy Function , that I ever heard of .
Yet I am convinc'd there is something very extraordinary in your Proceeding  and I own , I think by your Appearance , and the Confusion of  the other Gentleman , you are in the Right .
I took a Distaste against him the first time I saw him , when he came to me about the Licence .
What a brave Trade you would have , Doctor ( said he ) if you cou'd grant a Licence to undo , what you have done this way , in your Time !
Ah , how happy should we young Fellows think ourselves , if such a Thing cou'd be brought about !
But when I reprimanded him for his ludicrous manner of speaking , he cry'd , Pr ` ythee , old Tackum , do n't be so musty  I warrant you have had many a Wench in your Time .
I own , I was so very much offended with his ridiculous Jests , that I told him , the Lady he was going to marry , I fear'd , wou'd have but an indifferent Time with him , and if I had the Happiness of her Acquaintance , I shou'd think it my Duty to inform her of the Poorness of his Imaginations .
When he found I was a little scandaliz'd with his mean Notions of Marriage , he began to excuse himself , and beg my Pardon .


I forgot to tell you , as I led Isabella out of the Church , my false Friend stood like one thunderstruck in his Amazement .
Villain !
said I , as I pass'd him , if thou think ` st I have injur'd thee , in the Discovery I shall make to  this Lady and her Relations , thou know ` st where I may be found in a few Days , where I will be ready to chastise thy Persidy to this Lady , and the Infamy thou hast thrown on me .
He gave me no manner of Answer , but let me pass on without Interruption .


When we came to the Parson 's House , I related ( not without blushing ) the base and infamous Contrivance between Sir Eustace and me , my Repentance , and the terrible Effects it had on you  also the History of your Brother and the fair Fatima , with Clerimont and his Lady , as I had learnt 'em from your own Relations .
The charming Isabella shed a Torrent of Tears at the Repetition of all your Sufferings : It was easily seen , she lov'd you with an unbounded Passion .
The Mother and Aunt seem'd as much transported with Joy , as the fair Isabella .
How shall I punish myself , ( cry'd the Fair One ) for so easily believing my dear Vaughan false !
His good Uncle too , what shall we say to him to excuse our ill Treatment .
I comforted 'em , by telling 'em , the Proofs were too artful and plain to be doubted for Truths .
In short , never were any Persons elevated from dismal Sorrow , to the extremest Pitch of Pleasure , as these Ladies and myself were rais'd to .
But that Joy  was temper'd with Fears , when I inform'd 'em of your cruel Indisposition and Sorrows .
We resolv'd to set out as soon as possible to the Place appointed , to meet your Uncle  and if we found him not there , immediately to repair to Monmouth  but upon Enquiry , we cou'd get no Coach to carry the Ladies  therefore a Servant was order'd to Isabella 's Mother 's for hers .


While we were mingling our Tears , Hopes , Sorrows , and Joys , together , the Clark came to inform me , the Gentleman beg'd the Favour of speaking one Word with me in the Churchyard .
I did not doubt , but he had muster'd up Courage enough to call for Satisfaction for his suppos'd Injury .
I therefore took my Sword , and maugre the Intreaties of Isabella , her Mother , and Aunt , went to meet him .
When I came near enough to him to be heard , I told him I was ready to repair the Injuries I had done him , with my Sword , if he had Spirit enough to require it .
No , Sir , said he , I have had time enough to recollect myself , and find I have been to blame in my Conduct  but notwithstanding , I find Love , like Fate , is not to be controll'd  therefore I conjure you , by our former Friendship , to forget what is past , and assist me honestly to gain the fair  Isabella .
I love her more than Life , and wou'd even part with it to gain her Heart , and your Forgiveness , Hearing him talk so reasonably , I began to lose some part of my Resentment , but yet laid before him the Impossibility of his ever gaining his Desires .
We argued some time , and our Discourse had insensibly led us out of the Churchyard , along a narrow Lane that led to a Gate in the Fields , which I observing , was for turning back .
Hold ( said he ) you are not to return so soon as you imagine .
Upon saying this , he whistled thro ' his Fingers , and I was upon the Instant surrounded by six of his Footmen , who immediateiy seiz'd and bound me .
Now take that Hypocrite , and do as I order'd you .
Know , thou Fool ( cry'd he , looking me full in the Face ) I have taken all the Time I had , before I sent to thee , to think how I shou'd punish thee for thy Breach of Friendship , and the Loss of Isabella .
With that , taking a Whip from one of his Servants , he gave me several severe Lashes  then spitting in my Face , order'd his Footmen to tie me to the Gate , and leave me .
Fury and Shame had ty'd up my Tongue , at this indignant Usage  therefore I cou'd not utter a Word  and if the Tears had not gush'd from my Eyes , I believe my Heart  wou'd have burst with Passion .
My Struggles to get loose were to no purpose , and my Strength fail'd me with my fruitless Efforts .
Which the Villain perceiving , repeated his Indignities .
I know you will endeavour ( cry'd he ) to seek me out , in hopes to revenge this Affront  but be assur'd , Fool , whenever thou com ` st in my way , expect to meet with the same Chastisement .
Upon this , he and his Fellows left me , almost dead with boiling Rage .
It was not long , however , that I continu'd in this Condition  for Isabella sent the Clark after me , to observe our Motions , who on the other side of the Hedge , heard how I was us'd , but durst not appear till the Villain was gone , for fear of tasting the same bitter Cup .


As soon as I was at Liberty , I ran , without speaking a Word , got upon my Horse , and flew after the Villain  but my Rage had so blinded me , I had not put the Tongue of the Buckle of the Girt , as I suppose , firm in its Place ( for I got ready my Horse myself , not having Patience to wait for any one ) so that I came , with the Saddle between my Legs , upon the Ground , over the Crupper of my Horse , tho ' without any Hurt .
But it was so late ere I cou'd catch him again , that I was  well assur'd the Wretch had reach'd his Dwelling , tho ' thirty Mile from the Village where I had left Isabella .
However , I went on with my Pursuit , not considering the poor Beast , till he was so tir'd , I cou'd hardly get him along  therefore I went into a little by Alehouse , resolving to stay till the Morning .
I never went to Bed , for my furious Passion was too violent for Rest .
My Time was spent in casting about how to be reveng'd on the injurious Villain .
At last I fix'd on this Expedient : I procur'd a Disguise , ombred my Face , and appear'd as a Gypsy .
I got , the next Day , to the Villain 's Castle , which is seated upon an Eminence that overlooks a Plain of two Miles round , and not one House but his own in that Circuit .
It was a good while ere I cou'd see any of the Family  but at last a little black Boy came out , with a Bow and Arrow , to shoot at a Mark he put up against a Tree  but as soon as he perceiv'd me , he ran back as if in a Fright .
While I was looking after him , I saw the Villain meet him , who took him by the Hand , and encourag'd him to come towards me ( first looking circumspectly about him . )
When he came to me , he cry'd , Here , you Gypsy , tell this black young Devil his Fortune .
No , Villain ,  I reply'd , I am come to tell thee thy Fortune  behold this injur'd Face , disguis'd as it is .
He knew my Voice , and was for running back , but I got between him and the House , drew my Sword that I had conceal'd under my Great-coat , and intercepted his Passage .
He seeing no Hopes of escaping , drew his , and , as Despair makes Cowards valiant , he made several violent Thrusts at me , but to no purpose , for at last I sent him breathless to the Ground , with my Sword thro ' his Body .
As soon as he fell , I flew over the Plain without being pursu'd , took off my Disguise , wrapping some Stones in it , and sunk it in a Pond on the Skirts of a Wood as I pass'd along , unperceiv'd by any one .
I got to the Alehouse in my own Person , and that Night came back to Isabella and her Relations , who spent the time of my Absence in great Inquietudes .
I have not let them yet into the whole Affair .
Neither have I consider'd with myself , whether to own the Deed or not .
Pursuit , I know , has been made after the Gypsy , but no Enquiry after me .
If I surrender myself to the Law , I do not fear a Pardon , for the flagrant Usage I receiv'd from that bad Man , will plead for me .
The Clark , nay , even his own Servants , will be sufficient Witnesses of it .
How  wou'd you advise me to proceed , my dear Vaughan ?
I told him , I thought it wou'd be time enough to ward against it , when he was call'd upon to answer  but it was my Opinion , he wou'd not have any farther Trouble about it , since he was not suspected .


We had scarce ended our Discourse , when a Servant came in , very much surpriz'd , and told us , there were several Officers of Justice , with a great Crowd of People with 'em , arm'd , enquiring for my Friend , crying , they had a Warrant to apprehend him for Murder .
I own , I was rash enough to advise the opposing 'em .
But he declar'd he wou'd surrender without Resistance , and rely upon his Innocence and Provocation .
While I was arguing the Affair with my Friend , the Officers came into the Room where we were , accompany'd by my Uncle , my Brother , and Clerimont .
My Friend surrendred , without the least Shew of Resistance .
As I was going down Stairs , to accompany him to Prison , he stop'd me , begging it as a Favour I wou'd not go with him : Consider , said he , you have not recover'd your Strength , and I know your Friendship so well , that it will but disorder you to see the Place where I am going .
My Uncle join'd with him , Come ,  come , Billy , said my Uncle , the Sick must be us'd like Old Age  you and I will stay behind , and fear nothing .
I have Interest enough in this Country to have your Friend well us'd  and I have not the least Fear he will suffer , for an Action no Man of Honour cou'd avoid .
Think of the happy Moment that is now approaching .
Isabella , my Boy , the charming Isabella , will be your own in a few Days .
My dear Uncle , I reply'd , tho ' I think every Minute an Age , till my Angelick Isabella is mine  yet , I ca n't think of that Happiness , while my dear Friend is in Misery .
Thy Friend ( reply'd my Uncle ) will be free from Trouble before the Marriage-Ceremony can be finish'd .
There are Writings to be drawn , Settlements made , and several things to be in Order , before we can enter upon that Affair .
Besides , I wou'd not come too abruptly into a Business that must last for Life .
You must approach your Happiness by degrees .


My dear Uncle , I reply'd , the Thought of my coming Bliss is so great , that was it not qualify'd by some Fear , I cou'd not bear my Transport .
I have felt the Malevolence of that blind Disposer , Chance , so often , I must own , I am still in doubt  even when I am in  full Possession of all my Joy , I shall tremble for fear of losing her .
Sickness and Death visit the Youthful , as well as those sunk in the Vale of Life  and if that grim Tyrant , who rudely thrusts even to the Beds of Monarchs , shou'd intrude with his Icy Dart to that of my divine Isabella , alas !
with what Terrors must I bear the remaining Hours of Life , since my Religion will not suffer me to put an end to it !


These imaginary Ills , reply'd my Uncle , wrong thy Understanding .
Wou'd you think of Shipwrack in the Port  or refuse refreshing Sleep for fear of melancholy Dreams ?
No , no , the World of Happiness is in thy View  the lovely Prospect stands before thee , free from the Storms of Fortune .


Whatever my good Uncle cou'd say to me on the joyful Subject , gave me but a gloomy Satisfaction .
My dear Uncle did all in his Power to settle my Thoughts in Joy , and by degrees my Heart was so full of it , that my Eyes o'erflow'd with Transports , and I appear'd all Air and Spirits .


My dear Uncle , said I , be so good to relate some Passages of the unfortunate End of my good Father , and wicked Mother-in-law , that the Sorrow may alleviate this mighty Joy .


 My Letter , reply'd my Uncle , inform'd thee of every thing concerning that never-to-be-forgotten Catastrophe .
But searching that evil Woman 's Cabinet , I found this Copy of a Letter she sent to Wigmore , with his Answer to it , which convinces me that he was not that Penitent he pretended to be .
Upon this , my Uncle took a couple of Letters out of his Pocket , and gave 'em me to read .
The first was that of my vile Mother-in-law 's , as follows :


My dear , dear Wigmore ,


I HAD counterfeited Repentance so well , for our past Loves , that I almost believ'd I cou'd forget thee : But alas !
that is not in my Power .
Why should we not love on ?
Am I the only Woman in England , false to her Husband ?
The Court , and the City  ay , every Town , Village , and Hamlet , in this wealthy Island , have sufficient Numbers to keep me in Countenance .


Nay , my Love is a Virtue , if Constancy 's a Virtue  for I can love none but thee .
You ever reign triumphant in my Heart , and ever shall .
What are these Bonds of Matrimony , that tie two People together against their Inclination , but the imaginary Line that crosses the Globe !
'T is  true , we are coupled together by Law , like two Hounds in a Slip , often tugging different ways  but their Joys are unbounded when those Couples are unbuckled that keep 'em together .
But what Law does Love obey ?


I have read somewhere , it is a Law , or Custom stronger than a Law , even in many Nations at this Day , That when a Man , even a Stranger , comes to stay all Night in a Place , the good-natur'd Husband civilly abandons his House for that Night , leaving his new Guest in full Possession of his House and Wife , as the greatest Compliment he can pay him .
Oh !
if that Custom was but in use here , I shou'd wish my Husband abroad for ever , and my dear Wigmore , my amiable Traveller , every Night in the Year in my Arms .


I need not tell thee , that the Romans were the Conquerors of the Universe , and the wisest of all Nations  and yet one of their greatest Orators lent his Wife to his Friend , and receiv'd her again to his Bosom , without any Stain to Virtue .
However , I have some Hopes my Houshold-Plague is upon his Journey to Heaven , for he has been long ling ` ring with a happy Illness .
I own , I have some Thoughts of providing him Post-Horses to carry him to his Journey 's End .
Oh , how happy shou'd I be  then , in the Possession of my belov'd Wigmore , without the Fears and Terrors that imbitter my Life of Love and Joy , in thy endearing Company .


I have , with great Difficulty , prevail'd upon the old Woman to continue our Emissary  but if I had not inform'd her my Son-in-law , William , was gone upon his foreign Travels , she wou'd never have consented .


I 'll meet you this Evening in the Summer-House , and let you in myself .
I have provided you a Key of the Back-Garden Gate , that after to-night , you may take all Opportunities of seeing me , without Danger of being discover'd : Our Gardener is turn'd away , thro ' my means , who , I thought , began to be a little too observing .
My Husband 's Illness ( Curse on that Name ! )
will prevent his coming into that Part of the Garden  and I shall take care of every body else , by locking the Door after me .


I shall think Time has no Wings , till I am happy in thy lov'd Embraces  yet , tho ' I see thee not with my corporal Eyes , thou art ever present to my Mind , and shalt ever possess the Body and Soul of


Thine entirely , J. V .


 When I had read the Letter , my Uncle cry'd , Surely , this Woman had Impudence enough to bestride the * Black Ram , without changing Colour .
Heavens !
how were we deceiv'd with this vile Woman 's false Penitence !
Whenever I think o n't , I am pierc'd to the Heart .
But come , let us , after these Letters are destroy'd , bury all Thoughts of this pernicious Woman , and all her vile Machinations .


But to the other , and then commit them both to the Flames .
Wigmore 's Answer was as follows :


 My Adorable ,


I AM prevented seeing you this Evening , by the violent Attacks of an Ague and Fever .
Your Epistle pleases me , and vexes me .
Your Continuance of Love compels my Heart to adore your Goodness  but the Thoughts of using Violence towards your Husband , raise such Indignation in my Breast , that any future Thoughts upon that Subject , will , I am assur'd , make me hate you , for I have lov'd too well to despise you : Do we not injure him enough in our criminal Conversation ?
My Soul and Conscience , those dreadful Monitors , tell me 't is criminal , tho ' my Heart , fill'd with Love , has no room to entertain the terrible Idea .


I promis'd your good Brother-in-law , and that worthy young Gentleman , that once detected us in our Crimes , to go to some other Part of the World , but was disappointed against my then Inclination .
But our fatal Loves ( pray Heaven they do not prove fatal ) hang upon me worse than my Ague , and I must submit to their all-powerful Force .
But if you wou'd have me love you long , banish all Thoughts of injuring your Husband , farther than our Loves  the very mentioning of it in your Letter , made my Body shiver , and my Blood run cold  and , I am  convinc'd , brought this Fit of the Ague upon me , which prevents my seeing you till to-morrow Evening , if I have any Intermission .
My Body is yours  but do not load my Soul with any farther Guilt  for shou'd you mention that horrid Deed again , I wou'd fly you , as I wou'd the most spreading Contagion , whatever my Heart wou'd suffer , never to see you more .
Weigh well what I here write , for 't is the Advice of a Friend , and one whom irresistible Fate has made


Your intire and affectionate Lover , WIGMORE .


P. S. Send the Key of the Garden by the Bearer of this , seal'd up , that she may not know all our Secrets .


If you have any of the Cortex by you , pray divide it into eight equal Parts , and send it me  that , I hope , will prevent the Return of my Fit .


These two Letters , said my Uncle , when I first met with 'em , gave me infinite Pain , when I consider'd , our Credulity in trusting that vile wicked Woman , had drawn this fatal Sorrow on our Heads .


 I thought it Wisdom to conceal this Tragical Story from the World  therefore gave it out , thy worthy Father dy'd a natural Death , his long Indisposition giving it Credit .
But there was no concealing the End of that miserable Woman  therefore , to screen her Ignominy , we reported she had given her Son Johnny , by mistake , Physic so strong , that had purg'd him into another World .
This , with the Loss of her Husband , we gave out , had turn'd her Brain , so that she was forc'd to be secur'd in her Closet  but in endeavouring to get out of the Window , met her Fate .
Tho ' many , I fear , judg'd the true Cause of her Death .


But now , my dear Child , turn thy Thoughts from every melancholy Subject , and look upon the lovely Isabella ( who was then entring the Chamber ) who shortly shall be thine .
I was ever his , reply'd the Charmer of my Soul  and if I had wedded that ridiculous Wretch , whose End has brought us into some Trouble , it was only out of an obstinate Revenge for your suppos'd Falshood  but that Revenge wou'd have fallen upon myself , for Death wou'd in a few Days have ended my Miseries .


 In the Letter the base Sir Eustace sent to your converted Friend , concerning the fatal Consequence of your Persidy , he told him of my being brought insensible out of the Garden : But he cou'd not describe the terrible Agonies , Heart-breaking Sighs , and dark Despair , my Soul was fill'd with .
I read the fatal Letter a thousand times over , examin'd well the Hand , and tho ' the Direction was not in the same Character , I found the Seal and the Letter were yours .


Nothing gave me greater Proof of your Infidelity , than your Silence .
I wou'd often cry , Ungrateful Man , hast thou then forsaken me !
I even study'd Means to excuse you , but cou'd not find one .
No , I cou'd not find the least Glimpse to hope the contrary .


I discover'd to my Mother and Aunt the Progress of our young Amours , whose Goodness never rebuk'd me for my Weakness , but thought as I did , that you were false .
My Mother remov'd me to a neighbouring Lady 's , of her Acquaintance , that I might not have in mind even the Place where you first utter'd your false Vows .


With much Persuasion of your Rival , and my Friends , I fix'd the Day of our Nuptials  and , to say the Truth , his Behaviour  was much mended , he seem'd to wear a more solid Air , and express'd his Love with so sincere a Freedom , that I often wish'd I cou'd give him that Heart you held so fast .


The Night before the Morning intended for my Nuptials , was spent in the utmost Grief of Heart  and when my Mother and Aunt came in the Morning , to dress me for the Solemnity , I had not Strength to rise without Help .
I was seiz'd with a violent Fever , which confin'd me to my Bed for near three Months .
The intended Bridegroom spent his whole Time at my Chamber-Door , and appear'd inconsolable .
I must own to you , I began ( from his Behaviour ) to give him some part of my Esteem  but my Heart was not in my Power to give him , tho ' I often wish'd it had .
I thought it was a most unbecoming Weakness , to lament one who paid my Sufferings with Disdain .
Therefore , once more the Day was fix'd  and if all-judging Heaven had not sent your Friend that very Moment , what but my Death must have follow'd , when I had understood that my dear Vaughan was innocent ?


O Heavens !
I reply'd , the very Thought fills me with the utmost Agony .
Well , well , reply'd my Uncle , when you are once wedded ,  you 'll begin to talk like your reasonable People  at present , your Senses are in a Hurry , and every Faculty bewilder'd in a Maze of I do n't know what .
But Time and Marriage will restore you to your Understandings .


We were interrupted by my Man 's telling me Mrs. Betty was arriv'd , and beg'd to see me .
When she came in , she look'd wistfully upon me , and burst into Tears .
What , Betty , said I , are you griev'd to see me again ?
She cou'd not utter one Word , but ran up to me , took me about the Neck , and almost drowned me with Weeping .
The poor Creature 's Love fill'd my Heart with a grateful Tenderness .
When she had found the Use of her Tongue , she cry'd , O my dear Master , the Sight of you gives me more Pleasure than ever I did feel , or can feel .
I have not known one Moment 's Joy since your Absence .
She said so many kind things , that I cou'd not refrain kissing her tenderly .


My dear Isabella , said I , you must allow Mrs. Betty some small Share in my Heart with you , whose faithful Friendship , tho ' a Servant , I shall never forget , and will make it my future Study to recompense her uncommon Fidelity .
That , Sir , reply'd my Uncle , shall be my Care  one Woman is enough  for one Man to take care of .
You are in the right , reply'd the divine Isabella .
But , now I think o n't , I have left Fatima , and Eliza , preparing to follow your Brother and Clerimont to the Prison , and I came to you , my dear Vaughan , to lay my Commands upon you to stay with your Uncle till our Return .
My Uncle , myself , and Betty , were uttering the Fulness of our Hearts , with the utmost Contentment  when a Person that belong'd to the Inn , came running up Stairs in the utmost Confusion , For Heaven 's sake , Sir , said he , run into the Garden , and lend your Assistance to a Lady that some Villains are hurrying away into a Boat , against her Will .


My Uncle and I ran down upon the Instant , with our Swords in our Hands  but , O Heavens !
what was my Terror and Surprize , when I discover'd my dear Isabella in a Boat , held by Force in the Arms of a Person , a Stranger to me , and six Men rowing down the Stream with their utmost Force .
The unexpected Sight took away my Senses , and had I not lean'd my Back against a Tree , I must have fallen to the Ground .


There was a small Boat , at the Landing-place in the Garden , which ( when I could recover my Strength ) I got into so suddenly ,  that my Uncle cou'd not prevent me .
When I had push'd it off with my Foot , I found , too late , I had neither Oar nor Pole to manage her , so that she drove down the Stream , without my being able to stop her .


My Fury and Impatience almost took away my Senses .
The Boat drove for two Hours before it stopt against a Bank , and then it was so dark , when I got out of it , I cou'd not see my way .
I thought it to no purpose to put off the Boat again  and , notwithstanding my Impatience , I was forc'd to grope about to find some Path , but all to no purpose  therefore I was wandering about till Day-light , and then had the Misfortune to find I was got upon a little Island in the River Wye .
I then endeavour'd to find the Boat again , but all to no Purpose .


I was now plung'd into the utmost Despair .
A thousand times I form'd Resolutions fatal to my Life .
I accus'd Heaven , Fortune , and unlucky Stars .
I cou'd not help saying to my self , What Sins have I committed , that my Punishment in this World must be beyond Human Nature to bear !
How happy did I think myself ( after all my Misfortunes ) but twelve Hours ago !
Cou'd mortal Man imagine , after running thro ' so many various  Scenes of unfortunate Incidents , and then to have the Cure of all my Sorrows within my reach , to have her snatch'd from me in my own native Soil , a Country fam'd for her wholsome Laws , by a Stranger ?
for I own , I cou'd not remember I had ever observ'd the Face of the villainous Ravisher .
I sometimes imagin'd it was all a Dream  but , to my cruel Grief , I was too well assur'd I was awake .


I waited till the Sun had made a full three Hours Course , upon the Island , in hope my Uncle , and my Friends , wou'd find some means of following me , but to no purpose .
I cou'd hear People talk upon the Shore , behind the Willows , but when I call'd to 'em for their Assistance , cou'd get no Answer .
My Mind was so disturb'd , that my Reason seem'd to fly me  and my Spirits were so low and faint , that I had not Strength to walk .
However , I took the Resolution of plunging into the Water , to swim to the opposite Shore  but the Weight of my Cloaths , the Rapidity of the Stream , and my Weakness , hurry'd me to the Bottom  and if I had not been assisted by two Fishermen , who were mending their Nets on the Shore , and saw me throw myself into the Water , I must have inevitably  perish'd .
They drew me into their Boat ( depriv'd of Sense for some time ) and carry'd me to their Cottage , strip'd me of my wet Cloaths , and put me to Bed .
When I came to myself , I bewail'd my Misfortunes in such a manner , that the Fishermen imagin'd I had thrown myself into the River , to put an end to 'em .
Upon that Supposition , they began to comfort me , and inquir'd into the Cause of my Sorrows .
But when I had inform'd 'em , one of 'em cry'd out to the other , As sure as can be , the Woman we heard last Night calling for Help !
was the very Person this Gentleman is in quest of .


They told me , about an Hour after Day was shut in , last Night , they heard a Lady cry violently , and a Man comforting her  but the Boatmen row'd so fast down the Stream , they were soon out of Hearing .
This Knowledge rous'd up my Spirits , and the Thoughts of Vengeance gave me new Strength .
I got my Cloaths dry'd with the utmost Expedition , and dress'd myself  but inquiring after my Hat and Sword , they reply'd , they knew nothing of them .
I did not doubt , but I had lost 'em when I was in the Water , yet was distress'd how to get more .
The Fishermen offer'd to carry me in their Boat to Chepstow ,  * , where I might accommodate myself .
I accepted of their Offer , and we got into their Boat upon the Instant .
However , I borrow'd a Hat of one of 'em , and an old Pair of Horse-Pistols , the only Arms that belong'd to them .
The Boat was a very old sluggish one , that did not answer my impatient Desire of getting to the Town , and it was with much Persuasion I did not go on Shore to walk .
They told me , about a Mile farther , there was a little Creek , where I might land , and walk to Chepstow sooner than the Boat cou'd get there .
When we came into the Creek , we perceiv'd a Boat , with a Man asleep i n't , and I strongly imagin'd it was the very Boat that the Ravisher had row'd away in , with my dear Isabella .
My Blood , at that Thought , thrill'd thro ' my Veins , and I was just ready to shoot the poor Wretch , as he lay asleep in the Boat .


 I order'd my two Fishermen to row up close to the other Boat  but the Noise of our Oars awak'd the Man , who started up to look at us .
As soon as I came near enough to lay hold of the Fellow , I seiz'd him by the Throat , and clap'd a Pistol to his Head .
The Man was so scar'd at my manner of Proceeding , that he was ready to die with Apprehension .
Villain !
said I , if thou dost not this Moment declare where thy vile Master has carry'd the young Lady he took away by Force Yesterday , this Moment is thy last .
For Heaven 's sake , reply'd the Fellow , do n't murder an innocent Man , that has done nothing but by the Command of his Master , whom he is oblig'd to obey .
As for the Lady you mention , I know no more where she is gone , than you do .
All that I do know , I 'll tell you with all my Heart .


Sir Eustace landed at this Place , late last Night , with the Lady and his Servants .
My Master , the Owner of this Boat , attended him , telling me he wou'd return by Break of Day this Morning , and ordering me to take care of the Boat in the mean time .
I own , I am very much in fear some Accident has befallen him .
I do suppose he went last Night to Chepstow , with Sir Eustace and his Lady ,  whom he seiz'd at Monmouth * .
He inform'd my Master , that the Day he marry'd her , she ran away with a young Gentleman , which I suppose to be yourself .
But , dear Sir , blame not me , I am , as I told you before , but a Servant to the Owner of the Boat .
Sir Eustace !
I cry'd , is that Villain still living ?
or do you abuse me ?
Really , reply'd the Man , I know no more than that my Master call'd him so  and if it is the same that you mean , he is lately recover'd of a dangerous Wound he receiv'd about a Month ago , by a Gentleman in Disguise .


I cou'd not help crying out , with the utmost Transport of Fury , Yes , it is the same , and Heaven has permitted the Wretch to live , that I , with my own Hand , may take sure Vengeance on such a Villain , for all the Misery he has heap'd upon my Head .
I then inform'd the Man ( in short ) of the Villainy  of that infamous Traitor , Sir Eustace .
My two Fishermen , and he , seem'd thunderstruck at the Relation .
My Fishermen were afraid to assist me any further  they did not doubt , they said , if such a base Man should hear of it , he wou'd not stick to have them murder'd  for they had often heard of his vile Actions in the Country .
But when I inform'd 'em my Uncle ( naming his Name ) had as many powerful Friends in that Country , as he had  one of the Men cry'd , What , Sir , are you the Nephew to that worthy Gentleman ?
When I answer'd in the Affirmative , he told me , he wou'd run the Hazard of his Life to serve me , upon his Account  nay , and answer for his Companion : We owe both our Lives to him .
Notwithstanding my own unhappy Condition , I cou'd not refrain asking the Man , which way my Uncle had been so serviceable to them ?


Sir , reply'd the Man , my Companion and I were taken up for a Murder and Robbery , and tho ' innocent as yourself , yet the Jury found us Guilty : Nay , we must own , the Appearances were strong against us .
I 'll give your Honour the Story in as few Words as possible .


 About three Quarters of a Year ago , as my Partner and I were fishing in this River , we perceiv'd a Hat floating down the Stream , which we took up .
We waited some Hours , imagining some Body wou'd come to claim it  but no one appearing , my Partner gave me half a Crown for my Share , being in more want of a Hat than myself .
He wore it generally Sundays and Holidays , without any one claiming it .
About the Time we found the Hat , a young Fellow frequented a by Alehouse in the Neighbourhood , for two or three Days , where my Companion and I us'd often to drink .
One Day , while we were there , he offer'd to pawn a gold Medal to the Landlord of the House  he not having Money enough to spare , came to me , and desired I wou'd lend him three Guineas upon it , the Medal weighing , at least , five Guineas : I made no Scruple , but let the young Man have the Money , with this Agreement , that if he did not redeem it in a Fortnight , I wou'd dispose of it , for I told him , I cou'd not be out of my Money for a longer Time .
He consented , and the next Evening disappear'd of a sudden .


The following Day , as we were drawing our Nets , we perceiv'd something very heavy   but we were very much surpris'd , when dragging it ashore , to find a murder'd Body in it , with several Wounds upon the Head , in a light-colour'd Suit of Cloaths , trim'd with a small Silver Edging .
We acquainted the Country with it , and the next Day it was own'd to be an old Lady 's Son , who had been missing some time .
The Corps was bury'd by the sorrowful Mother , and no Enquiry cou'd find out the Murderer .


A few Days after this , the Easter Holidays came on , and my Partner and I went to see some Friends at Monmouth  but my chief Reason of going , was to dispose of my gold Medal .
My Companion went to have his Hat done something to  while I went to a Goldsmith 's to dispose of my Medal .
When I offer'd it to the Man of the Shop , he examin'd it very narrowly , then looking me wistfully in the Face , ask'd me , how I came by it ?
When I had inform'd him , he reply'd , Very well , I 'll carry it to a Person in the Neighbourhood , that perhaps will give more than the Weight of it .
I seem'd very well satisfy'd .


The Goldsmith went out , but return'd in a Quarter of an Hour , with the Constable and several Assistants , and , in short , charg'd  me with the Murder and Robbery of the Widow 's Son .
I was instantly carry'd before a Justice , and examin'd  and before my Examination was over , my Partner was brought in by the Hatter , who swore , the Hat he brought to him , he sold to the young unfortunate Gentleman that was murder'd .
These Circumstances meeting thus together , it was agreed on all Hands , that we were guilty of the Murder  and what confirm'd People 's Opinion was , that the Landlord of the Alehouse , where I had the Medal , deny'd the Fact .


Upon this , we gave up ourselves for lost .
I having some small Share of Education , drew up our Case , to be presented to the Judges , but it did us no good , for we were condemn'd to die , for the Guilt of another Person .


Your good Uncle was at the Trial by Accident , and whether by our Countenance , or some Proceedings in our Trial , I ca n't tell , but he seem'd to think us innocent .
He examin'd us strictly about the young Man I had the Medal from , as to his Age , Shape , Size , and what Dress he wore .
When he had done that , he left us , desiring us to recommend our selves to Heaven , tho ' he own'd , he thought  we dy'd for an Act we had never committed .


We prepar'd ourselves for Death , not having the least Hopes of Life .
The Morning that was intended for our Execution , your good Uncle enter'd our Room in the Prison , first preparing , by degrees , our Spirits , to receive the unlook'd - for Change in our Condition .
He inform'd us , we were at our Liberty , and brought a Surgeon with him , whom he order'd to let us both Blood .


I was ( said your Uncle ) convinc'd of your Innocency  but what made me more assur'd of it , was , that I had seen a young Fellow taken up at Hereford , where I had some Business , for offering to sell a gold Watch , that he cou'd give but a slender Account how he came by it .
I came into the Court at Monmouth , just as your Trial came on .
After you were found Guilty , I inform'd the Judges of my Suspicions , and I thought it the Duty of every Gentleman to use his Endeavour to clear the Innocent .
I immediately return'd to Hereford ( after enquiring of you all the Circumstances of your Defence ) and dealt with the Prisoner so effectually , that he confess'd every thing .
He inform'd me , that he had been long a Companion to the Widow 's  Son , and both living a disorderly Life , he prevail'd upon him to rob his Mother of a Sum of Money , and imbark for the West-Indies  but the Devil put it into his Mind to murder him , which he did , by first stabbing him with a pointed Hanger  and after cutting him over the Head with the same Weapon , for fear his Groans might be overheard by somebody by Accident , he took from him a Purse of sixty-four Guineas , the fatal Medal , a Diamond Ring , and the gold Watch he was taken up for , in endeavouring to sell it at Hereford .
The poor Wretch was assur'd that Heaven wou'd not let Murder be hid  for , as he intended for Ireland , he might have dispos'd of both Medal and Watch with Safety there .
But he knew the Devil infatuated his Mind .


Your good Uncle ( continu'd the Fisherman ) made him sign his Confession  and he took such farther Measures with the Judges , that he procur'd our Liberty  and not only that , but made a Gathering for us among the Gentlemen of the Country , that amounted ( with his own Bounty ) to an hundred and thirty five Pounds .


Now , Sir , since you are Nephew to that noble Gentleman to whom we owe our Lives  and Fortunes , command us what you please , as far as Honesty and our Power may carry us , and we will instantly obey you .


While the Fisherman was relating this short Story , his Companion spy'd a Hat floating against the Bank of the Creek , which I knew to be my own , but both the Men were so very much startled at the Sight of it , that neither of 'em wou'd take it up .
However , I got the young Fellow in the other Boat , who was not so scrupulous , to get it for me , who , understanding the villainous Treatment I had receiv'd from the Wretch that hir'd the Boat of his Master , was resolv'd to join with the other two .


While we were consulting how to proceed , the Owner of the Boat came down to the Creek .
My Blood rose at the Man , tho ' I knew he had been impos'd upon by that base Villain , Sir Eustace .
However , I resolv'd to be silent , in hope I shou'd learn something from him .
As soon as he came near enough , his Man ask'd him , how he could leave him all Night in such a Place , without Victuals , Drink , or Rest ?
Z - ds !
reply'd the Man , you have had more Rest than I , I dare swear .
Never was poor Wretch so ill us'd , as I have been .
When I came within a Quarter of a  Mile of Chepstow , the Villain order'd his Servants to bind my Hands and Feet , and throw me into a Ditch , which , by good Fortune , prov'd a dry one .
The Reason why , my Friend ( cry'd the Brute ) I part with your good Company , is , because I wou'd not have you know where I intend to lie tonight  perhaps , in a little Time , I shall find some Method of satisfying you for the Trouble you have been at , upon my account .
And so , Friend , I wish you a good Night 's Rest !


Upon saying this , he , and his wicked Crew , walk'd away , although I begg'd to be releas'd , promising I would return to my Boat , without following them .
But he reply'd , No , no !
that is one Reason why I would have you lie there all Night .


Pray Friend , said I , in what Condition was the poor young Lady , that he forcibly carry'd away ?
Why truly , Sir , reply'd the Man , I ca n't well tell , for she had mourn'd so much in the Boat , that when we landed , she did not utter a Word , but suffer'd herself to be led by her Husband , without any Resistance .


I soon undeceiv'd him in that Particular , by acquainting him with the Truth of the  sorrowful Affair .
And is it so ?
reply'd the Master of the Boat .
If I had known that , no Recompence , or Threats , should have prevail'd upon me to have lent him any Assistance in such a base Action .


After a short Consultation , I resolv'd with the Master of the Boat , to go by Land to Chepstow , while the two Fishermen , and the other Man , carry'd the Boats there .


Accordingly , we parted : But as soon as we enter'd the Town , the first Persons I saw were , my dear Uncle , my Brother , my Friend , and Clerimont , with four Servants , all well arm'd , in search after the Ravisher and me .
They hir'd a Boat at Monmouth , with all the Expedition imaginable , thinking to overtake me at least , and , as we all suppos'd , mist me when the Boat I was in , fell in with the little Island , where I remain'd all Night .
They were going , when we met 'em , down to the Creek , to endeavour the finding the Man that was bound , and thrown into the Ditch , being inform'd of it by the very Person that had releas'd him in the Morning .


We came to a Resolution of separating : My Brother and I , with two Servants , to get Horses and go into Wales , in pursuit of  them  my Uncle , my Friend , and the other two Servants , to follow by Water  my Governor to stay at Chepstow , or Monmouth , just as he thought convenient .


My Brother and I , with two Servants , set out well arm'd for our Purpose , without taking any formal Leave of my Uncle and the rest  for I was too much concern'd , to mind Ceremony .
As we pass'd the Mountains that environ Chepstow , the Horse of one of my Uncle 's Servants fell down-right lame , which gave me some little Uneasiness .
But the Fellow being Running-Footman to the last Master he serv'd , told us , he would be at the next Town before us , and provide himself another Horse .
Accordingly he left the lame one at a Cottage in the Road , and flew away as swift as a Greyhound .
The Roads were so bad for our Horses , that he was soon out of Sight .
After riding about four Miles , we came to a small Inn , where I was surpriz'd to find him drinking with a Footman at the Door .
As soon as we came near enough for him to be heard , he call'd out to me , Sir , for a small matter , I can have a Horse of this Man , who is a Servant to Sir Eustace  and as we are to go within a Mile of his Master 's House , I am to leave  the Horse at a Place where he has appointed , his Business not being urgent , he says he will walk the rest of the Way .


The Name of that Villain , Sir Eustace , and the manner of the Servant 's speaking to me , convinc'd me there was something to be understood by it .
I therefore endeavour'd to compose myself from the Ruffle the Villain 's Name had caus'd in my Soul .
I soon observ'd the Fellow was very much gone in Liquor , therefore was in some Hope of learning which way my dear Isabella was forc'd .
He did not seem to have any Notion of us , or our Business , therefore I told him , I intended to make a Visit to his Master at my Return .
Hark ye , Sir , reply'd the Fellow , to tell you the Truth , if you do , you 'll lose your Labour , for my Master is not at home at present , neither can I tell you when he will be at home .
Nor does he much care , interrupted my Uncle 's Man , for I find his Master and he do n't set their Horses together .


I must own I did tell you so , return'd the Man , but you are to blame to let all the World know it .
There 's no Harm done , I reply'd  he knows I want a Servant  therefore , if you intend to leave Sir Eustace , and  he 'll give you a Character , I 'll take you into my Service .
A Character , Sir !
( cry'd the Man , hastily ) I am afraid his Character will be but small Encouragement for me to get another Master .
I must conceal , if possible , my ever living with him .
Sir , I must beg your Pardon , when I tell you ( as one of my Masters Acquaintance ) he is so wicked a Man , that I think no one , that is not as wicked as himself , would live with him .


In short , I soon found the Fellow was too honest in his Principles , for so impious a Master .
And yet , one wou'd think ( continu'd the Servant ) he shou'd take Warning .
It is not above six Weeks ago , when a Gentleman he had ill us'd , in Disguise , run him through the Body .
We all thought he wou'd have breath'd his last  but he recover'd in less than a Month , the Wound not being through any Mortal Part .
He order'd his Servants and the Surgeon to conceal his Recovery from the Country : But we were soon let into the Meaning of it  for he went disguis'd , two Days ago , to Monmouth , under Pretence to take up the Gentleman for his supposed Murder  but it was only to take his Opportunity of running away with a young Lady , whom he says he 's contracted  to  which he did , and is now gone to Bristol , for more Secrecy and Security , where he intends to force the Lady to marry him , or perhaps worse .


I was so much disorder'd with what the Man said to me , my Passion overcoming my Reason , that I declar'd aloud , I wou'd be the Death of him .
The poor Fellow began to suspect something  and the Apprehension of some Ill Usage threw him into such a Fit of Trembling , that he soon became sober .
He begg'd for Heaven 's sake , he might not suffer for the Evil Deeds of his Master .


No , my Friend , said I , I have some Regard for thee , for thy Honesty , because I think , by thy Discourse , thou dost not approve the wicked Designs of that base Villain .
Therefore , if thou wilt receive me for thy Master , be assur'd it is in my Nature to use every one well , that has any Dependance upon me .


Sir , reply'd the young Fellow , you seem so far different in your Behaviour from my present Master , that I shall think myself got out of Purgatory into Paradise .
We soon made an Agreement , to the Satisfaction of us both .


 He then inform'd me , his Master had dispatch'd him to his Castle in Wales , for several Necessaries for himself , and the Servants that were gone with him to Bristol , which were privately to be brought in a Waggon  for he apprehended it was not safe to bring the Lady home immediately , not doubting , in the least , but the Gentleman that wounded him before , wou'd pursue him , with the Company he had so much exasperated by his villainous Proceeding .


Upon the Knowledge of this , we return'd back to Chepstow , in order to get to Bristol with the utmost Expedition .
When we came back to Chepstow , we were inform'd , my Uncle , with his Party , had hir'd a Vessel to go for Bristol , which made us imagine he had gain'd some Knowledge of the Place where they were gone .


We only staid to give our Horses some small Refreshment , and set forward by Land for Bristol  tho ' we were two Hours ferrying over .


When we arriv'd at Bristol , my new Servant told me , his old Master was at Captain - in Radcliff Street , over-against the Church .
My Brother and I disguis'd ourselves in our Servants Cloaths , and  went to the House where we were inform'd Sir Eustace and my dear Isabella were .
The Door was shut some time  but after half an Hour 's waiting , we saw the Villain coming out with a Gentleman , that we suppos'd to be the Master of the House .
My Blood flew with such Violence thro ' my Veins , that it was with much Persuasion of my Brother , I had not shot the Villain through the Head .
But he advis'd me to use Stratagem .


Let us , said he , send for your new Servant , and by the time he comes , we 'll think of something to compass our Ends , without Bloodshed .
When the Servant came , we instructed him to go to the Lady , as from his Master , and with a Ring as a Token for his Passport , which I gave him , which was my dear Isabella 's , I did not doubt but she would know it again , and come more willingly .


My new Man did his Business dexterously .
He found the Chamber of Isabella , guarded by two of his old Fellow-Servants , who made no Scruple of letting him pass , when he acquainted them he had Orders to conduct the Lady to his Master , in order to be marry'd that Night .


 When he came into the Room , where the divine Isabella was lamenting her Condition in Tears and Sighs , upon the Floor , he , without Ceremony , gave her the Ring , telling her , the Owner of it waited for her in the Street  if she cou'd give Credit to that Passport , she might be in the Arms of her devoted Husband in a few Minutes .
She look'd upon the Ring some time , with the utmost Transport of Joy ( as the Man told us afterwards ) and at last said , Though my terrible Misfortunes make me suspect every thing , and every Person , yet , whatever Hands I fall into , I ca n't fear worse Usage than from those I have the Misfortune to be in at present .


She then gave my new Servant her Hand , who led her down Stairs , telling the two Centries at the Door , to order a handsome Supper , for their Master wou'd be back in less than an Hour .


When we perceiv'd him coming with the divine Isabella , I trembled so much , I had not Power to stand  but my Brother , fearing my Transports might discover us , led me some distance from the House .
But when my lovely Isabella came up to me , neither of us cou'd utter a Word .
My Brother  wou'd not let us stay to open our Hearts , but took hold of my dear Isabella , and hurry'd her along , while I follow'd , not knowing what I was doing .


As we were crossing the Bridge , we met my Uncle and his Party , they not expecting to meet us .
By the Light of the Shops upon the Bridge , knowing Isabella , they drew their Swords  and had not my Brother discover'd himself that Instant , some of my Friends had probably lost their Lives  for , in the Heat of my Fury , I mistook them , as they did us , and drew my Pistols  but the first flashing in the Pan , prevented my doing an Action that I should have for ever repented .


We had not time to congratulate each other , upon our unexpected meeting  but my Uncle and Friends , finding we had regain'd Isabella , led us back to the Boat they came in , and , notwithstanding the Darkness of the Night , we set out from Bristol , so eagerly , that we forgot my Uncle 's two Servants at the Inn , who were found watching about the House where Isabella was confin'd by Sir Eustace , who , by Threats , got out of them , who they belong'd to .
A Fellow that saw our Rencounter upon the Bridge , had follow'd  us to the Boat , and hearing Sir Eustace threatning my Uncle 's Servants , declar'd what he knew concerning us .


Upon this , he got his Men together , took a Boat , and follow'd us with such Imprecations , that the two Servants of my Uncle 's were so frighted for my Safety , not knowing their Master was with me , that they got a Guide to conduct them along the Waterside , to give us Notice of our approaching Danger , as they told us afterwards .


While we were in the Boat , my dear Isabella and I , mingled our Tears of Joy together .
She told me when the hated Villain first seiz'd her , she had Recourse to Tears , Sighs , and Reproaches , which drew nothing but Threats from the worthless Wretch : But at last , she thought it wou'd be more to her purpose to dissemble her Sorrows  therefore she seem'd , by degrees , to dry up her Tears , and listen more favourably to his odious Love .


This Method deceiv'd him so effectually , that he did not doubt but she wou'd give her Consent to the Marriage in a few Days .
She had prevail'd upon one of his Men to bring a Letter to me , and he was to set out on the following Morning .


 We landed at Weston , and order'd our Boat to meet us at Thornbury the next Day , where we were oblig'd to go altogether , in a Waggon , not meeting with any better Conveniency .
But having the Company of my lovely Isabella , with my Uncle and Friends , I was in as much Joy , as if we were riding in our Coach and Six .


When we came within half a Mile of Thornbury , the Fields being pleasant , we all got out to walk .
I , with my charming Isabella , led the Way , full of the delightful Hope of possessing for ever that Beauty , who was the Treasure of my Soul .


Just as we cross'd a Stile that led into the Horse Road , I observ'd four or five Men run into a Thicket , that led into the Fields , on the other Side of the Road .
This alarm'd me very much , and I made a full Stop till my Company came up .


By ill Fortune ( expecting no Danger ) we had left our Pistols in the Waggon , and the shorter Cut being over the Fields , the Waggon was a Quarter of a Mile behind us .
While we were disputing what to do , the five Men came running cross the Road , with that infamous Villain , Sir Eustace , at the Head of them .
My Friend knowing him ,  ran to oppose him , unarm'd as he was .
The Villain fir'd a Pistol at him , which brought my Friend to the Ground .
The Sight rais'd such a Rage in my Soul , that I rush'd upon him , just as he presented a Pistol to my Breast , and so opportunely , that I clapt my Hand between the Flint and the Lock , just as he drew the Trigger , and , with struggling to wrench it from him , the Flint cut the Back of my Hand very much .
I at last , with much Difficulty , wrung it from him , and shot him through the Head with his own Pistol .


As soon as he fell , his Companions in Villainy ran away , without once looking behind them  and I flew to my Friend , who , thank Heaven , was only wounded slightly on the Temple .


This was all done so suddenly , that it look'd like a Dream .
When the Confusion was over , we went to examine that impious Wretch , who , notwithstanding his Villainy , I wish'd in my Soul he had Life enough left to repent .
But alas !
he was gone for ever , with all his Sins about him .


When we came to Thornbury , our Boatmen met us , with a Croud of People , arm'd with several Weapons , coming to our Assistance .
 The unfortunate Sir Eustace overtook them in their short Voyage to Thornbury , and by Threats made them ( though unwillingly ) confess where they were to take us up .
As soon as Sir Eustace parted from them , to put his wicked Intentions in Practice , the Boatmen alarm'd the Town , which we met coming to our Assistance , tho ' too late .


I went to a neighbouring Justice , and declar'd what had happen'd , who took Bail of my Uncle for my Appearance at the Sessions : But I was never troubled about it .
His Servants were found , who took up the Body , which was interr'd privately by his younger Brother , a worthy Gentleman , that prov'd as much an Honour to the Family he sprung from , as the other strove to disgrace it .


The next Day we embark'd for Chepstow , and the same Evening arriv'd safe at Monmouth , to the Comfort of my Governor , Elvira , and the amiable Fatima .
From thence we set out for my Uncle 's .


In a few Days after , my Brother with the fair Fatima ( after receiving at the Font the Christian Name of Maria , at my Uncle 's Request ) Clerimont and his Eliza , and my dear Isabella and I , join'd those Hands , with the  Assistance of the Priest , whose Hearts were united long before .
And that we might be witness to each others Happiness , all dwelt in the same House with my Uncle .


Thus , after so many Storms of Fortune , we arriv'd safe in the Harbour of Delight , and [ tasted Joys beyond Expression .
Long may our Years continue , in all the Harmony of connubial Love !
All our Wishes are , to go Step by Step together  and when the hoary Winter of our Age approaches , to sink Hand in Hand into the Grave , and rest in Peace .


FINIS .
BOOKS lately Publish'd , and Sold by J. OSBORN , at the Golden-Ball in Pater-noster-Row .


 THE Works of Anacreon , translated into English Verse  with Notes Explanatory and Poetical .
To which are added , the Odes , Fragments , and Epigrams of Sappho .
With the Original Greek plac'd opposite to the Translation .
By Mr. Addison .


The Voyages and Adventures of Captain Robert Boyle , in several Parts of the World .
Intermix'd with the Story of Mrs. Villars an English Lady , with whom he made his surprising Escape from Barbary  the History of an Italian Captive  and the Life of Don Pedro Aquilio , c. Full of various and amazing Turns of Fortune .
To which is added , The Voyage , Shipwreck , and miraculous Preservation of Richard Castelman , Gent .
With a Description of the City of Philadelphia , and the Country of Pensylvania .
The Third Edition .


Letters of Abelard and Heloise .
To which is prefix'd a particular Account of their Lives , Amours , and Misfortunes , extracted chiefly from Monsieur Bayle .
Translated from the French , by the late John Hughes , Esq


The Works of Mr. Henry Needler  consisting of Original Poems , Translations , Essays , and Letters .
Nemo parum diu vixit , qui Virtutis perfectae perfecto functus est munere .
Cicero de contemnenda Morte .
The Third Edition .
Publish'd by Mr. Duncombe .


 A Select Collection of Novels and Histories .
In Six Volumes .
Written by the most celebrated Authors in several Languages .
Many of which never appear'd in English before .
All New Translated and Compiled from the most Authentick Originals .
The Third Edition .


The Musical Miscellany : Being a Collection of Choice Songs and Lyrick Poems .
Set to Musick by the most eminent Masters  with the Basses to each Tune , and Transpos'd for the Flute .


Memoirs of the Life of Barton Booth , Esq With his Character .
To which are added , several Poetical Pieces , written by Himself , viz .
Translations from Horace , Songs , Odes , c. To which is likewise annex'd , The Case of Mr. Booth 's last Illness , and what was observ'd ( particularly with regard to the Quick-Silver found in his Intestines ) upon Opening of his Body , in the Presence of Sir Hans Sloan , by Mr. Alexander Small , Surgeon .
Publish'd by an Intimate Acquaintance of Mr. Booth .
By Consent of his Widow .
- Quae doctus Roscius egit : Hor .


The Tragedy of Zara .
As it is acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane .
By His Majesty 's Servants .


Caesar in Aegypt .
A Tragedy .
As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane .
By His Majesty 's Servants .
Written by Mr. Cibber .


King Henry the Fifth  or , the Conquest of France , by the English .
A Tragedy .
As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury-Lane .
By His Majesty 's Servants .
Written by Aaron Hill , Esq


Notes * .
St. Malo , Maclovipolis , Aletha , Maclovia , is a Sea-Port in the Province of Bretagne in France .
It is built upon a small Island , join'd to the main Land by a large Bridge .
Tho ' the Town is not large , it is well-peopled , strong , and rich by Traffic .
From this Port , in time of War with England or Holland , many Privateers are sent to infest the English Channel .
* .
Tunis , is a City and Sea-Port upon the Coast of Barbary , govern'd by a Bey , or Dey , tho ' subservient to the Emperor of Constantinople .
It is large , strong , and very well Peopled .
Their chief Riches consist in their Corsairs , who generally take all the Vessels of what Nation soever , tho ' perhaps at Peace .
It is seated in a Plain , near the Lake Barbasueco , nine Leagues from the Ruins of the ancient Carthage .
* .
The Ablution , is a Washing which the Turks and Moors perform , after they think themselves polluted by the Conversation of Women , Sleeping , doing the Effects of Nature , touching a Christian , or a Drop of Wine spilt on their Garments  nay , some are so superstitious , never more to wear those Garments .
* .
The Bastinado , is a Number of Blows , with a thick Cudgel , on the Soles of the Feet , which sometimes makes the Sufferer incapable of walking many Days .
The Moors not only punish Slaves that way , but Mahometans also , when they are guilty of Theft , and not able to return what they stole .
* .
The Turks and Moors write from the right Hand to the left .
* .
The Sleeves of the Turks and Moors hang down very low , and by Kneeling , and Kissing them , is express'd the most profound Submission , either to Man or Woman .
* .
Lingua Franca , is a compound Speech , generally understood by the Moors on the Sea Coasts , as well as those on the Sea Coasts of Italy , France , and Spain , most Parts of the Mediterranean , the Hellespont , and adjacent Islands .
* .
Leghorn , is a Sea-Port , mention'd by Polybius , Antoninus , and the famous Roman Orator , Cicero .
It formerly belong'd to the States of Genoa  but Cosmo de Medicis , Duke of Florence , exchang'd it with their State for Serezana .
On the Key , stands that noble Statue , in Marble , of Ferdinand I. with four Turkish Slaves chain'd at each Corner of the Pedestal  they represent an old Man , and his three Sons , who were put to Death in that Place , for attempting to run away with one of the Gallies of the State , in order to regain their Liberty .


Leghorn is a noble rich Town , of great Trade , well-fortify'd  and a convenient safe Port , that freely opens its Arms to embrace the Merchandise of all Europe .
Even the Outsides of many of the noble Buildings have Paintings too good to be expos'd to the Injuries of the Weather : And the Insides are so profusely decorated with Statues , Pictures , Intaglias , c. that the Beholder wou'd imagine himself in so many Poetical Inchanted Palaces .
Their chief Trade consists of Florence Wine , Oil , and Anchoves .
Tho ' there are constantly small Vessels in the Port , laden with Wine of Sardinia , Corsica , and Languedoc , which is drank on Board , to avoid paying the Duty , so that each Vessel is a Public Tavern  and notwithstanding there are frequent Disorders committed , yet they go on with Impunity , and no Notice taken of 'em by the State .


* .
Florence , the Capital City of the Great Duke of Tuscany , was built by Sylla in the Year of Rome 675 , Seventy-Six Years before the Birth of Christ , situated upon the River Arno .
It justly carries the Epithet of Fibrenza Iu [ ... ] bella , by the Italians ( Florence the Fair . )
There is a noble Column , with the Statue of Justice on the Top , of which the meaner sort of Inhabitants say , Justice it plac'd so high , that poor People can not reach her .
By Computation , it contains 400000 Inhabitants .
Charles the Great , in the Year of Grace 902 , very much enlarg'd it , and built a new Wall , with the Addition of 150 Turrets , 100 Cubits high : But its present Strength must consist of the Inhabitants , for the Fortifications seem more Ornamental , than Useful .
A Council was held here in the Year 1439 , to the Year 1442 , to unite the Greek and Latin Churches .
Anno Domini 1494 , Jerome Savdnarola , a holy religious Man , was burnt by the Populace , for reproving the Vices of this City .
John Cimaba [ ... ] was the first eminent Painter , in the Year 1200 , that began to restore that noble Art , almost buried in the Ruins of Time , which since has spread itself almost over Europe .
The Trade of this Place is much decay'd , and seems now to center at Leghorn .
The Tuscan Dialect is esteem'd to be the most refin'd Italian : but their Guttural Pronunciation has occasion'd this Italian Proverb  La Lingua Toscana in bocca Romana : The Tuscan Tongue must have a Roman Mouth .
* .
There is a Law in the Empire of Japan , or a Custom as strong as a Law , That all Fathers of any Nobility , resign their Estates to their eldest Sons , when they have reach'd their Twentieth Year , or Five and Twenty at the farthest .
The Fathers generally retire to some Castle , and spend the Remnant of their Lives in contemplating the Vanities of this World  but are always ready to give their Sons proper Advice in their Worldly Affairs , if the Son thinks fit to ask it .
Some Fathers retire among the Bonzies ( or Priests ) and never enter into Conversation with any of the World , despising the Pomp and Sple [ ... ] of it , ending their Days in mortifying their Flesh .
* .
The River Arno , or Arnus , the chief River of Tustany in Italy , takes its Rise in the Apennine Hiils , near the Source of the River Tiber , that runs thro ' Rome .
The River Arno washes the Walls of Florence , and is Navigable from thence to Leghorn , where it empties itself into the Sea .
* .
The Island of Jersey ( in Latin , Caesarea , from Julius Caesar , who gave it his own Name . )
This Island , and Guernsey , are all that 's left to England , of their mighty French Conquests .
It appertains to Hampshire , under the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Winchester , having for its Church-Government , a Dean and Twelve Ministers of the Gospel  and for its Civil , a Bailiff , with Twelve of the chief Gentlemen of the Island , call'd Jurors , to administer Justice .
Besides these , a Governor , Deputy-Governor , and Captains , for their several Garrisons .
Yet the Complainant has still the Privilege to seek Redress from the King and Council , in most Cases of Wrong , or Difficulty .


This Island is famous for Cider and Perry : But its Staple Commodity is the famous Jersey Stockings , so well known in England .


The Air is mild , pleasant , and not unwholsome .
The Soil rich and fruitful .
The very Hedges produce Apples and Pears , without planting  and the meanest Cottage can accommodate you with a Cup of Cider or Perry .
Their French Wheat is equal to any in France  and their other Grain as good as any in England .
The Sea yields them Plenty of Fish  and Wild-Fowl innumerable .


This Island , by a strict Calculation , contains 23000 Inhabitants  and can raise in Defence of their Country ( not including their Garrisons ) upwards of 6000 Fighting Men , It is above 30 Miles round , 10 in Length , and 5 in Breadth .
The Inhabitants have , to the last , been in the Interest of the Crown of England , and more than once the Retreat of their distrest Princes .
The Earl of Richmond ( afterwards Henry the Seventh ) first took Shelter here , and from hence went over to Britany , where he rais'd Forces sufficient to gain the Crown , and punish Richard the Third for his bloody Reign .


King Charles II .
made this Place the first Stage of his Exile , during Oliver 's Usurpation .
This Island was the last Place that surrender'd to the Parliament-Forces .
Nor would the then Heroick Governor surrender Elizabeth 's Castle , till he receiv'd an Order for that Purpose from Prince Charles , then residing at the French Court  and , in consideration of their many Services , and unshaken Loyalty , it has had many Privileges and Immunities granted by the Crown of England  among the rest , a Silver Mace , sent 'em by King Charles II .
in the Year 1663 .


Thro ' their watchful Courage , they have often repuls'd the French , who have made many vain Attempts to graft this Scien to its ancient Stock .
The greatest Inconveniency is , its want of Wood for Fuel  instead of that , they make use of a Sea Weed , by the Inhabitants call'd Vra .
The chief Town of the Island is call St. Hilaria .
But the strongest Castle , perhaps , in his Majesty 's Dominion , is call'd Elizabeth , compleated in that Queen 's Reign , built upon a Rock , in the middle of the Ocean , in the Mouth of Bay St. Aubin 's .
There is no Passage from the Island on Foot , but at low Water , nor then , for above ten Men in Front .
Opposite , near the Town of St. Aubin 's , is another strong Tower , surrounded by the Sea , call'd La Tour , or , The Tower .
The Natives , in general , speak French , as well as English  and seem to be a courteous , good-natur'd , affable People , never better pleas'd than when conferring Obligations .


* .
Guernsey ( in Latin , Sarnia ) lies nearer England , a [ ... ] Seven Leagues , than Jersey .
It is very Stony and [ ... ] nous  yet there are fine Meadows and Pasture scatter'd up and down the whole Island .
It is famous for the best of Butter , with which , and Fish , they drive a considerable Trade with France .
St. Peter 's is the chief Town , very well inhabited .


Situated upon a Rock , about half a Mile in the Sea , is Cornet Castle , a Place of great Strength , commanding all Parts of the Harbour , which is generally the Residence of the Governor .


In the Reign of King Charles II .
the Magazine of Powder was fir'd by Lightning , in the Night , when the Governor ( Lord Hatton ) his Lady , Children , and family were in their Beds .
The Governor was forc'd out of the Window in his Shirt , thrown upon the Wall of the Castle , several Paces from the Chamber when he lay , and receiv'd no Hurt .
But his Lady , and several of her Maid-Servants , were kill'd by the Accident .
His Child , an Infant , was found the next Day in its Cradle , under a Beam , sleeping in Safety .


* .
The Great Sark , is a small Island about three Leagues from Guernsey .
It formerly belong'd to the French , but the English took it from them by Stratagem .
There is but one small Town , and three or four little Villages , on the whole Island .
It was given by the Crown to the Carteret Family , who are Lords of Sark .
* .
The Island of St. Helena was discover'd upon St. Helen 's Day , in the Year 1502 , by John de Nova , a Portuguese  it is now in the Possession of the English .
It is [ ... ] st surrounded with Rocks  and reckon'd the farthest Island from the Continent , of any in the known world .
It is about 15 Miles in compass  and though Mountainous , is very fruitful .
There are four very pleasant Vallies , and as many Springs of good Water  all sorts of Poultry , Sallading , Roots , and Fruits , as well as Hogs Flesh , are so cheap , that it is almost a Miracle , when we consider the many East-India Ships that touch there every Year .
It is very well inhabited , but they dwell in the Vallies  except when the Ships arrive , when they repair to the Fort with their Provisions for the Ships , every Trader having a Warehouse in the Town , where they barter with the Sailors for Necessaries , seldom any Money passing between them .
When the Ships are gone , the Planters retire to their Houses in the Vallies , that are delightfully situated , breathing a healthful Air , and subjected to few Diseases .
They are govern'd by the same Laws as in England .
* .
The Island of Lundy is an Island five Miles long , and two broad , surrounded with Rocks , in the middle of the Severn Sea , near the Coast of Cornwall , thinly inhabited  and altho ' seated in the Salt Ocean , yet there are many Springs of excellent Fresh-Water , and prodigiously stock'd with Wild-Fowl .
* .
There was a Custom in the Manor of East and West Enborn , in Berkshire , call'd Free-Bench , that is , If the Husband dies , the Widow shall have his Free Bench in all his Copyhold-Lands  but if it is prov'd she has had , during her Widowhood , criminal Conversation with any Man , she forfeits her Estate  but if she will come into the Court of Justice , riding backwards on a Black Ram , with his Tail in her Hand , repeating the following Lines , she may have her Estate again .
Here I am , Riding upon a Black Ram , Like a Whore as I am  And for my Crincum , Crancum , Have lost my Bincum , Bancum  And for my Tail 's Game , Have done this worldly Shame : Therefore , I pray you , Mr. Steward , let me have my Land again .
* .
Chepstow in Monmouthshire , a Market-Town , seated upon the River Wye , very near where that River falls into the Severn , with a large wooden Bridge over it .
There is a natural Fortification of Rocks and Mountains , tho ' it has been formerly fortify'd .
There is still the Remains of an old Castle , built by Julius Caesar , ( as the Inhabitants will have it . )
The Tide flows here fourteen Yards high .
* .
Monmouth , the Capital of Monmouthshire , seated upon the River Wye , is an old Town of great Antiquity , as appears by the Ruins of its Walls and Castle .
It is surrounded with Hills .
This Place is famous for the Birth of our Henry the Fifth , who conquer'd a great Part of France  as also for our British Historian , Geofrey of Monmouth , tho ' a Writer full of the Monkish Tales of those Times .

